0||Northern Territory 'should be test bed’ for Uluru statement proposalsThe Northern Territory should become the “test bed” for reforms proposed in the Uluru statement and establish a formal Indigenous voice to parliament, a former Labor parliamentarian and political analyst says. On Sunday, the Territory is marking 40 years of self-government. In Darwin and Alice Springs and many remote communities, locals will celebrate the same way they do every year: buying and exploding large amounts of fireworks during a day-long free-for-all. Self-government has been a rocky ride. The Territory became the first place in Australia to introduce euthanasia laws in 1996, before they were nullified by the federal parliament a year later. The 2007 federal “intervention” involved overruling Territory laws. Ken Parish, a former Labor MLA and academic at Charles Darwin University, said the system of government thrust upon the Northern Territory in 1978 had been problematic and that, while self-government should continue, the system should now be reformed with a view towards statehood. “What we got at self-government was basically a cookie cutter colonial Westminster constitution and there was no consultation about the model we got, [prime minister Malcolm] Fraser just dumped it on us. There was no thought given to whether that model was appropriate for our mix of population,” Parish said. “You already had statutory land rights with very powerful land councils. What they actually built was a model for conflict with two competing sources of power, the government and [land councils]. “It was and remains a paternalistic model and you don’t encourage people to take mature responsibility for their own lives ... by dictating to them.” For the first 23 years of self-government, the ruling Country Liberal party opposed the land rights agenda. Labor spent the next 11 years in power, but by 2012 had fallen out of favour with many of the Territory’s indigenous communities, who were fed up with “super shires” that replaced community councils, and claims of systematic underspending in the bush. The Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner, recently signed a memorandum of understanding with land councils, the first step towards signing a treaty. Almost a third of the population is Indigenous. Parish said the treaty could provide the impetus for the Territory to pilot a system of Indigenous representation similar to what was called for in the Uluru statement from the heart. “We’ve had a history not only of frontier massacres, frontier wars ... we’ve had the stolen generations, ongoing things like taking people’s rights to take peoples land away from them. There’s a lot of reconciliation and truth telling that needs to be done. “I think we should be [seeking an Indigenous voice to parliament] and it could be done now. There’s a number of models that we can adopt and none of them require us to be a state.” Polling has always shown Territorians broadly favour statehood, but the push has gone off the boil in recent years. Concerns about the proposed model were blamed for the narrow defeat of a 1998 referendum. Three years ago, the then chief minister Adam Giles received backing from state and territory leaders for the NT to become a state, with a goal date that expires on Sunday. Indigenous leaders labelled it a “distraction”. Pat Dodson, now a Labor senator, said at the time Aboriginal people should have “their rights and interests ... entrenched in some Territory formal constitution”. Gunner said he was laughed at when he attempted to revive the idea of statehood at his first Council of Australian Governments meeting. “We got taken backwards a long way by the last CLP administration with our national reputation. We’ve got a lot of building to do to get back credibility into the statehood debate.” Rolf Geritsen, an Alice Springs-based academic, told the ABC this week statehood was unachievable in its current form because of the divide between the Top End, particularly Darwin, and the rest of the Territory.
0||Tennant Creek: town scarred by a rape struggles to find a futureA dry desert breeze kicks up leaf litter and lifts the edges of tattered shade cloths tied to cyclone fences. Tires, broken play equipment, cars that may or may not work, are scattered across verges. Skip bins hold rubbish from unfinished work. On the corner of a road a mobile police CCTV camera is parked, its lens trained over a short suburban stretch. This part of the neighbourhood, known locally as “the Bronx”, is quiet now but the camera’s presence is a reminder of a horrific crime committed only four months ago. It was from here, in the desert town of Tennant Creek, that a two-year-old girl was driven the 500km south to Alice Springs for treatment for appalling injuries. She had been raped. It was a crime that caused shockwaves around Australia. They were set off again when the child’s relatives revealed they and others had repeatedly warned authorities about the danger the family was in, giving them multiple chances to intervene. An inquiry would later find the girl was at “foreseeable risk of harm”. The Northern Territory government has responded with alcohol restrictions, extra police, new child protection staff and new funding for community groups. It has pledged speedy action on promises it had already made after a royal commission highlighted systemic failings in the child protection system. The prime minister was berated for his lack of interest. Last week Malcolm Turnbull said he would send two federal ministers to the town. Indigenous organisations had their power stripped by the federal intervention policy 11 years ago but, in response to one crisis after another, they are clawing back control over care and assistance to their community. They want to stop the growing rate of child removals by supporting families before they reach crisis point. Everyone in Tennant Creek notes there have been improvements since the shocking assault but Guardian Australia has found there are still major problems. Indeed, if the CCTV camera – derided as symbolism and “too little too late” by some – was to pan around, it would see a shattered town desperately trying to address its problems with housing, health, violence, and alcohol. Looking further it would see a territory doing the same, because Tennant Creek’s 3,000 people are not alone with their problems – it’s just that a terrible crime has rendered it synonymous with the crisis. Home is a tin shed Amanda Moreton, her two-year-old daughter and 70-year-old mother spent an entire mosquito-infested wet season and part of the winter sleeping on a mattress in a grassy area outside a town camp. “It’s scary up there because it’s near the road – there are cars and drunks,” says Moreton of her campsite home. There is no house for her. The waiting list for public housing has more than 140 people on it and the wait time is four to six years. The lack of housing means that as many as 20 people can end up living in the one home. It’s a stressful situation, traditional owner Patricia Frank says, which makes it hard for people to get sleep, go to work, attend school or keep their food and possessions safe from others. “If people have their own houses, they’ll spend their money to pay the rent and get food,” Frank says. “It will reduce violence, reduce habits like smoking and drinking.” Desperate and unsafe, Moreton saw some nearby abandoned tin sheds. She sought help from Julalikari Council Aboriginal Corporation and the Aboriginal-controlled Stronger Families organisation to move in. They fixed the doors and cleared the knee-high grass. “[My daughter] is playing around now, there’s space for her,” she says. “I can lock the door.” The sheds don’t have water or electricity but Moreton was excited because they had a cement floor, not the dirt she was expecting. “When people come and ask for something like that, obviously they need it,” says Linda Turner, the chair of Julalikari and manager at Stronger Families. Turner says it was an example of community organisations and agencies working together. “It might not be the best thing in the world, but it means a lot to people,” she says. Olga Havnen, a respected former federal public servant and now chief executive of the Danila Dilba health service in Darwin, says overcrowding is the first issue that must be addressed. “You will not have child safety where you’ve got households that are severely overcrowded, and where people have no control over the drinkers and the problem behaviours that go on,” she says. “The second thing is that we need to have much more front-end support for parents – in parenting programs, parenting skills, giving people the skills and abilities to nurture and grow their children up in a safe, healthy environment. “Those are the kinds of services that we know would make a difference. That’s what all the evidence says, and yet we cannot get funding and resources to do that sort of work. The NT housing minister, Gerry McCarthy, tells Guardian Australia more than 20 houses will be available in the near future. A new program is prioritising potential kinship carers for housing upgrades, he says. The policy is not advertised, and no one has taken it up yet. “I’m ready to go, the Department of Housing and Community Development is supporting it, the minister for Territory Families is supporting it … we need kinship carers. Now I’m two years down the track and I really need to land some outcomes.” There are more than 60 private dwellings for sale in Tennant Creek – most are on the market at about $200,000 – a symptom of the rush of people “fucking off out of town”, Guardian Australia is told. With the youth patrol It is 9pm on a Thursday at the dark end of Tennant Creek’s main road, not far from a number of rowdy pubs. Connor, a youth patrol worker, points out of the window of his minibus at a group of kids. Two of them can’t be older than seven, the others are not much more than 15. A few streets on, Connor points again. There are a couple more kids of a similar age. The patrol is a widely praised, three-month-old pilot program run by Julalikari. Youth workers drive the streets at night taking children voluntarily home or, if home isn’t safe, somewhere else. They crank up the music, cruise around town for 10 minutes to “settle the kids down”, then drop them off with a sandwich and a juice. In the first five months of this year, youth patrol and its adult counterpart, night patrol, picked up more than 1,200 people, including 263 children. Eight of them were under the age of five, all picked up after midnight with older siblings. For some kids, being out is simply safer than being at home. The youth workers know most of them pretty well, especially the “regulars”, and have won a level of trust from them. At 9.30pm four boys aged between eight and 15 flag down the bus. At 10.30pm three young teenage girls climb on board. They’re laughing as they breezily describe a young man “giving them cheek”. Eventually their full account comes out. They say the young man was allegedly waving at them with a knife, following them around town and threatening to kill them. The bus takes the girls to the police to give statements. At 11pm the bus picks up an eight-year-old boy for the second time that night. The youth patrol will continue until 2am, five nights a week, for as long as it is funded to do so. Not a ‘critical issue’ The next day Guardian Australia meets the newly installed local director of Territory Families – the NT government department in charge of multiple sectors, including child protection. Barbara Kelly has been hired to coordinate the town’s services – something that was identified as a problem. Territory Families runs its own youth outreach program seven nights a week between 6pm and 9pm. Kelly says concern about little kids on the street “hasn’t come up as a critical issue” during the hours the service runs, and no one had reported a rise in numbers of children on the street. “Certainly we haven’t had any spike in notifications from police about little kids out on the street,” she says. “It hasn’t come across to us that we’ve observed, or been reported to us as an issue.” She says there is no formal information-sharing arrangement with Julalikari’s youth patrol. One of the most persistent complaints in Tennant Creek is that child protection and family support sector services are not aligned. Since February, Territory Families has collaborated with other agencies to focus on “getting better outcomes for kids”, Kelly says. “We would rather address [child protection issues] early on and prevent them from happening.” When the news broke of the rape of the two-year-old, family members angrily revealed their attempts to get help. Territory Families had received more than 50 notifications about the family, including some related to allegations of sexual abuse of the girl’s siblings. There had been 35 incidents of domestic violence and eight aggravated assault convictions involving her parents, and 150 interactions with police. “[Territory Families] had available to it an abundance of evidence relating to the substantial neglect and numerous harms suffered by all of her older siblings,” the NT children’s commissioner found. There is now a strident public discussion about cumulative harm and the apparent lack of awareness of it in the NT child protection system. The families minister, Dale Wakefield, has promised renewed focus and training amid an overhaul of the system. Gerry Georgatos, a researcher and national coordinator for the Indigenous Critical Response Service, says the family didn’t have the support they needed during their years in Tennant Creek. “The neglect of this family in its time in Tennant Creek is like a writing-on-the-wall explanation of all that’s wrong with Northern Territory governments and institutions, forever failing the vulnerable,” he says. The child and her brother have since been removed from their mother’s care, and 15 other children have been removed from Tennant Creek homes since February. They have joined the 1,050 children already in out-of-home care in the NT. This year alone there have been more than 18,400 notifications about almost 10,000 children across the territory. Some 1,500 notifications were in Tennant Creek itself. Caseworkers in the Barkly region handle an average of 33 cases each. There’s a high turnover of staff who work in an archaic administration system. The NT government plans to spend $67m over five years on a “new client information system and data brokerage service for child protection and youth justice”. It’s agreed that children should be removed if they are unsafe, but there are calls for more support for Aboriginal communities to care for their own, instead of sending them into non-Aboriginal care. “We know from all of the evidence that kids in [out-of-home care] have much poorer outcomes, in terms of education; they tend to end up in the justice system, and girls or women who go on to have kids of their own will inevitably have their own kids removed,” Olga Havnen, chief executive of the Danila Dilba health service, says. “It’s not the solution. This notion – that you remove children because of the impact and consequence of cumulative harm – takes no account of the ongoing and cumulative harm when children are removed from families, and then sibling groups are broken up.” The NT has the highest proportion of Indigenous people of any Australian jurisdiction but it is the worst at upholding the Aboriginal child placement principle – a requirement that an Indigenous child be placed with family or Indigenous foster carers wherever possible, so the child maintains connection to culture and country. In Tennant Creek children are being taken out of the Barkly region and sent to Alice Springs, more than five hours’ drive away. Eleven bottle shops Friday night on the main street is busy, and dozens of people flag down Julalikari’s night patrol. They climb in the back, gossiping, laughing and arguing on the way home. The night patrol is not the unthreatening minivan of the youth service but a ute with a caged tray – much like a police car but tinted in a friendlier yellow. The town of about 3,000 people has 11 different places to buy alcohol and only one supermarket. After the pub closes at midnight, the street is busy, loud, and hostile: there are drunken arguments and shouting. Those who get a lift with the night patrol avoid the trouble. The service is well-regarded by the community because it helps get people home safe. NT police say alcohol-related crime has dropped since the liquor commission restricted the sale of takeaway alcohol and stopped some counter service. The women’s shelter has seen fewer admissions. In March, demand for a local sobering-up shelter peaked, with 210 people coming through. Then numbers steadily dropped. Its chief executive, Pauline Reynolds, says the increase was probably because it offered a safe bed and free hot meals, and suggests the decrease is because there are fewer people in town. Some might have left because they can’t get a drink here; some might have just gone home. Guardian Australia has been told the alcohol restrictions have allowed police to focus on proactive policing and on the black market trade – which sees a bottle of cheap hard liquor go for $150. McCarthy says this secondary supply is “front and centre” for new police and public housing safety officers in Tennant Creek. “We know the people, we know the houses, we know the community rhythms,” he says. He tells Guardian Australia he was unaware of claims that at least one Tennant Creek pub has been selling alcohol to people late at night, above the limits set, and doubts them. There were already restrictions on public drinking in Tennant Creek, brought in by the 2007 intervention, which the two-year-old girl’s mother, now in Adelaide, blames for the family’s situation. “They can’t drink outside of town because it’s restricted and they have to have [an] address and have ID to help get alcohol and drink it at the house,” she told NITV. “This [rape] could have been avoided if people were allowed to drink … out of town.” ‘A general system of failure’ There are widespread concerns about coordination and staffing levels among the significant number of government and non-government health and support services in Tennant Creek. Anyinginyi Health is one of the organisations now partnering with Territory Families, because government workers were failing to connect with Aboriginal families, says its general manager, Barbara Shaw. There’s a “general system failure on behalf of government”, Shaw says. “To have an expectation of working with a family to change things around is hard stuff, so getting a lot more understanding ... is the thinking behind the department’s offer,” she says. Big gaps remain. There are four positions for drug and alcohol counsellors in the town. Three are unfilled. The lone employee recently went on leave for several weeks and was not backfilled. The Central Australia Health Service says the three positions will be filled “shortly”, with two of them vacant because of staff transfers. The service admits that the one employee did go on leave without a replacement, but says referrals were logged and actioned when she returned. Havnen says there are insufficient rehab services, with those in Darwin, more than 1,000km away, constantly full. “There’s quite a bit of evidence around which says you don’t actually have to have residential treatment programs to get off the grog but you at least need some regular and ongoing support, whether it’s group work or individual counselling and support. “Many Aboriginal people want to get off the grog but … think about the things that happen to people in their daily lives, the number of deaths. Go ask anybody in Tennant Creek the number of their immediate or extended family that’s passed away in the past 12 months.” ‘We should do something about it’ Last November Tennant Creek experienced a devastating run of suicides, murders and other deaths. There were funerals every week but no grief counsellors, and people spiralled into despair. The community was “consumed with grief”, one resident tearfully recalls. “We were buggered. We were just gone.” In late November they marched for an end to domestic and family violence, the day after one of the suicides. Community leaders sent letters to the chief minister pleading for help, and they remain angry at the lacklustre response. So they formed a cultural authority group, which now has financial backing from the NT government and the federal minister for Indigenous affairs. They want to bridge the gap between government and the Indigenous community of Tennant Creek, which has 11 different language groups. “There’s been some really hard decision making in the last couple of months,” says Linda Turner of Julalikari. Frank says: “It’s good we set it up because we can deal with those things – community violence or family violence, or give health and support if they need mediation. We started talking as a community, that we should do something about it.” There is an optimism that this group, which has the ear of the federal minister and in a town which is the focus of a nation, can make changes, but they need authority in more than name. Calls for Indigenous empowerment in communities is nothing new, particularly since the intervention, which brought in army personnel and tore up regional governance structures. Next month the two federal ministers will visit Tennant Creek to explore a potential multi-government deal to ameliorate social and economic disadvantage. Territory Families has a long way to go to rebuild trust with the community. “It’s a broken system,” Turner says. “Territory Families has a lot to answer for.” • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636. If you or someone you know is impacted by sexual assault, domestic or family violence, call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit 1800RESPECT.org.au
1||Love, loss and a lot less rap. Yet Drake’s sound still stingsOn his fifth album – named after his zodiac sign – the biggest rapper in the world has confirmed that, yes, he is the daddy. Last February, Drake, already a superstar, became ubiquitous when he released God’s Plan, the opening shot of this sprawling album. The audio broke Spotify and Apple Music records; its oft-played video witnessed the Torontonian giving away its $996,631.90 budget. A few songs into the first half of this double album, the emotive Sandra’s Rose, sums up the entertainer’s status succinctly: “Every title doing numbers like I’m Miss Adele.” More pertinent, though, is the question of paternity. The Canadian rhymer has recently been embroiled in a war of words with veteran rapper Pusha T. His diss track, The Story of Adidon, made hay of the persistent gossip that Drake had fathered a secret child with a porn actress, and that there was a plan to reveal Drake’s son as part of a future Adidas branding exercise. When it comes, Drake’s big reveal is almost conversational, a genuine shock. On Emotionless, a track which wrings maximum weepiness from a sample of Mariah Carey’s Emotions, Drake paints a bleak picture of a superficial Instagrammed world. “Look at the way we live/I wasn’t hiding my kid from the world,” he states, “I was hiding the world from my kid.” The rest of this 25-track album is dusted with references to Drake’s less-than-ideal situation, child support (I’m Upset), and single fatherhood. On 8 Out Of 10, Drake huffs: “I’ve settled into my role as the good guy.” The angry flow is at odds with a beat full of vintage sparkly sentiment on this album stand-out. On the very final track, March 14, Drake elaborates. “She’s not my lover like Billie Jean, but the kid is mine.” Drake’s main lament is far more touching, however. The rapper, who as a child divided his time between his mother in Toronto and his father in Tennessee, reflects on how he always dreamed of not repeating history, of starting a family in a loving relationship. Is There More? asks the last song on the A-side of this double album – long, even given the sheer volume of stuff the 31-year-old clearly needs to get off his chest. The track itself finds Drake pondering whether there is anything for a superstar like him beyond money and status. It ends on an affecting interpolation of Aaliyah’s More Than A Woman, sung by guest Nai Palm of the Australian band Hiatus Kaiyote, one of the obscure international artists Drake showcased on his much-admired mixtape, More Life (2016). Lasting love is always the elusive endgame for this rapper, who made his name singing in granular detail about relationships, not guns or drugs. The rest of Scorpion doesn’t lack for talking points. The menacing sub-bass on Nonstop deserves an Instagram account. Much of the aggression feels as if its directed towards Pusha T and Drake’s arch-nemesis, Kanye West; the opening track, synth-strafed Survival, hints that Drake is holding back damaging information for the good of all. It is, perhaps, a marker of Drake’s newsworthiness that the existence of an unreleased Michael Jackson vocal collaboration is not the biggest draw here. Don’t Matter To Me (feat. Michael Jackson) finds Drake trading croons about an unresolved relationship with Jackson’s treated-sounding vocal. Another significant guest is Jay-Z, who crops up on the dramatic Talk Up. Like a number of Scorpion tracks, which react to very recent events, it must have been recorded days ago. “Y’all kill X and let Zimmerman live/Streets is done,” spits Jay-Z disgustedly, highlighting the recent killing of Florida rapper XXXTentacion, then boggling at the fact that Trayvon Martin’s killer, George Zimmerman, is still free. Drake has hinted that he might release an all-R&amp;B album. Also relegated to the small print here is that the second half of Scorpion is mostly sung, not rapped: a first. It remains a tantalising mystery to whom these more introspective, smouldering tracks are addressed. In My Feelings names “Kiki” and “KB”; other candidates include past flame Rihanna and Nicki Minaj. The song ends with a skit from an episode of Atlanta, the Donald Glover TV show, which referenced Drake. Although this album lacks a world-conquering pop hit like One Dance or Hotline Bling, and your interest wanes on side two, Scorpion is the album of the summer.
2||Observer killer sudokuClick here to access print version Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
2||Observer sudokuClick here to access the print version Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
3||Azed crossword 2,403Click here for a printable version. The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. It gives one answer as an abbreviation. Prize rules: £25 in book tokens for the first three correct solutions opened. Solutions postmarked no later than Saturday to AZED No. 2,403, The Observer, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU
3||Speedy crossword No 1,187
3||Everyman crossword No 3,742
4||Synchronised brilliance from Edinson Cavani and Suárez gives Uruguay hopeOn a night of twists and turns in Sochi, Uruguay advanced to the quarter-finals of the World Cup and, in this most unpredictable of tournaments, with the holders and two best players on the planet no longer on show, nobody can say with certainty and conviction that Óscar Tabárez’s side cannot go all the way. Nowhere will they believe that more than in Salto, Uruguay’s second largest city, located a little over 300 miles north west of the capital Montevideo and where, on 24 January 1987, Luis Alberto Suárez Díaz came into this world. A mere three weeks later, on Valentine’s Day, he was joined by Edinson Roberto Cavani Gómez and three decades on they are once again doing their hometown proud. More than that, they are doing their country proud. Along with the wily and wonderful Diego Godín, Suárez and Cavani are the standout players of a team who, more than any other at this World Cup, show what can be achieved when hard work and organisation are combined with a little stardust and patriotic fervour. Uruguay ultimately may not win the tournament but they are going to die trying and, as Portugal discovered to their cost, no one in Tabárez’s ranks fights harder for the cause then the two men up top. By the end Cavani was sitting on the bench nursing a hamstring strain having scored twice while Suárez was still out there, running the ball into the channel and doing everything he could to maintain Uruguay’s 2-1 lead. Both players had done their bit, their bodies aching and covered in sweat, and, on the basis Cavani can recover in time, they will undoubtedly cause France problems in Nizhny Novgorod on Friday. There may not be two other strikers in the world like Suárez and Cavani; utterly dedicated, utterly selfless and, in their own ways, really talented. Suárez is the star, all manic energy and touches of jaw‑dropping genius, but Cavani deserves his dues, with 45 goals in 105 international appearances suggesting the 31-year-old is not the misfiring misfit as he is often portrayed. The Paris Saint-Germain man has an incredible knack for finding space and a little over an hour into Uruguay’s biggest game in eight years he showed he can combine that with finishing of the most sublime standard. Having drifted towards the right‑hand edge of Portugal’s area, Cavani collected Rodrigo Bentancur’s pass, opened up his body and sent a side-footed shot past the reach of Rui Patrício into the far corner of the net. It was instinctive and unstoppable and saw Uruguay wrestle back control of proceedings following Pepe’s equaliser on 55 minutes. It was a poor goal for Uruguay to concede given the defender was able to send a header past Fernando Muslera from an unmarked position in the centre of the area. It also cancelled out the moment that, in almost a blink of an eye, showcased Suárez’s and Cavani’s ability to combine in devastating harmony. Barely seven minutes had been played when Cavani, in a deep-right position, swept a pass out to the left flank where Suárez, having cut inside Ricardo Pereira, sent a perfectly weighted cross towards his strike partner as he moved towards the back post. Cavani’s finish was clumsy, with the ball bouncing off his face before going in, but the move was a pleasure to behold: two world-class players in synch, their understanding telepathic. Saltopathic. And so a game many predicted would be defined by “shithouse” behaviour was decided by two moments of beauty, and for Uruguay now comes the chance to, at the very least, match their feat of the 2010 World Cup, when they reached the semi-finals. Suárez’s participation in South Africa is best remembered for that handball against Ghana and, given his ruthless, win-at-all costs mentality, a similar incident cannot be ruled out in Russia. Equally, however, that would be doing Suárez a disservice. He has yet to be booked at these finals and, as had been the case by this stage of the last World Cup, yet to bite anyone, and while there were some questionable moments from the Barcelona man against Portugal, there was nothing that crossed a line or could take away from his smart, selfless and productive contribution. Uruguay got that out of Cavani too and, before the game against France, it is now a case of waiting to see if he is fit enough to yet again line up alongside Suárez. Not for the first time, the hopes of a nation rest on the shoulders of the brilliant boys from Salto.
4||Cristiano Ronaldo should play on for Portugal, coach urges after exitThe Portugal manager, Fernando Santos, said he did not want Cristiano Ronaldo to walk away from international football after Portugal were knocked out of the World Cup by a 2-1 defeat at the hands of Uruguay. The Real Madrid forward would not be drawn on his future but offered up a message of optimism as he departed the Fisht Stadium in Sochi. Ronaldo was unable to trouble Uruguay as they made it through to the quarter-final against France and, at 33, with a 154 caps to his name, this could represent a natural watershed. But the forward departs the World Cup with four goals and with his manager insisting that there is still a place for him in the Portugal side. “I am convinced that he has a lot to give in football,” said Santos, whose own future is in doubt after elimination here. “There is a tournament in September, the Uefa League of Nations, and we hope that he is with us so that he can help the young players who will need their captain’s example. We have a team with many young players in it and of course we all want him there with us.” Ronaldo, though, was not forthcoming on what lies ahead. “It’s not the time to talk about the future of the coach, the players, the squad,” he said, “but rest assured that this national team will continue to be one of the best in the world. There is a fantastic group with enormous ambition that wants to succeed and I am very confident that the national team will continue to be at the highest level.” He added: “Portugal competed well. In my opinion we were better than Uruguay. We had chances but goals make the difference. In general terms, we leave here with our heads held high. The team has fought well. As captain, I am very proud of this group. I leave here happy. Not the way I wanted, but the sensations are good. We hold our heads up high; Portugal will continue winning things.”
5||Protesters march against Trump immigration policies – as it happenedAt the end of the day, on the east coast at least, we are closing this blog. Here’s a summary of the key events in a hot day of protests against Donald Trump and his hardline immigration policy. From New York City and Washington DC to Los Angeles and San Francisco, and in hundreds of cities and towns in between, thousands of Americans protested on Saturday against Trump administration policies that separated more than 2,000 undocumented immigrant children from their families and have left the vast majority of such children still held in federal facilities. No official figures for the protests were immediately available, but organizers said they had expected more than 750 events to be held. Protesters said they were concerned about many issues, but one message – as intended by organizers – rose above all others: Families Belong Together. The protests happened despite oppressive heat. In some cities, the heat index topped 105F (40C). Celebrities also came out to rallies to voice their opposition to Trump and his policies, including the singer Alicia Keys, playwright Lin-Manuel Miranda, actress America Ferrera, singer John Legend and many more. Progressive politicians, among them some potential Democratic candidates for the 2020 presidential nomination, joined protesters and addressed the various crowds. Their main message was simple: vote. With a high-stakes November midterm election approaching – one that could tip the balance of power in Washington – many high-profile politicians gave speeches, including Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Senator Kamala Harris and Representative Maxine Waters of California, and the Georgia congressman and civil rights movement veteran John Lewis, who spoke to a protest in Atlanta. Donald Trump, meanwhile, was at his golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey. He was due to begin interviews of potential supreme court nominees. A crowd of around 200 protesters picketed a roadside nearby. We’ll be wrapping up our blog soon, so here are Associated Press reports from events thousands of miles away from the big rallies in Washington and New York: Thousands of protesters gathered in downtown Los Angeles were addressed by, among others, singer John Legend, congresswoman Maxine Waters (who called for Trump to be impeached) and Senator Kamala Harris. Attendee Robin Jackson noted the “absolute cruelty” of the administration and said she was heartbroken when her parents worked second shifts at night and could not imagine what it would be like for migrant children not to know when their parents were coming back. Another large crowd gathered in San Francisco, where drums beat and horns played as marchers held flags and signs, some saying “Deport Trump” and “I Really Care, Do You?” Barry Hooper said he attended the protest with his wife and two daughters in order to “let the president know that this is not acceptable”. His seven-year-old daughter, Liliana, clutched a sign she made saying: “Stop the separation”. Marchers arrived at City Hall shortly before noon. Across the bay, hundreds of protesters turned up at a similar rally in Berkeley. Police in both cities said the rallies appeared peaceful and reported no arrests. The Associated Press has reported some arrests at the protest in Dallas: Dallas police say five people have been arrested outside a US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) building. News station KXAS-TV reported that dozens of people were protesting outside the building. Police said the protest began peacefully before protesters began to block lanes of a service road. Police blocked off one lane for the demonstrators, who then moved into the other lanes. A police supervisor said five were arrested when they refused police orders to move. Dallas police confirmed the arrests but declined to provide details on the charges the five were facing. A final dispatch from Washington: By late afternoon, with temperatures in the mid 90s, protesters had packed up their kids and their signs and were heading home. Walking back along Pennsylvania Avenue, Megan McHugh, a 24-year-old in oversized sunglasses, was happy to discuss her politics and the message she had hand-painted on to a cardboard sign. “Dear world, we will not give up on love,” it read, with the signature “Americans”. It had been supposed to say “decent Americans”, McHugh said, but the glue had melted off in the heat. McHugh moved to Washington from Chicago just two months ago, she said, adding that while she had become “scared” about the state of national politics, what she had seen had given her hope. “There were so many different kinds of people today,” she said. “It really felt like what Americans should be.” About half a block away, near the Trump International Hotel, a mother and daughter who had come in from Virginia were leaving with similarly upbeat impressions. “There was a sense of humor but it was serious too,” said Judith Dawson. “Americans are awake in a way we haven’t been for a while.” Her daughter, Monette, said the march had made a deep impression. “My ancestors were separated from their children going back 250 years,” she said. “I wasn’t around to stand with them then so I am standing with them now, hopefully for the last time.” She held a brightly-lettered sign, written in rhyme by her own daughter, 14-year-old Zora. “It’s a SIN to separate KIN,” the sign read. On the other side: “Kids of all AGES should not be in CAGES.” Zora was named, appropriately, after Zora Neale Hurston. One of many families the Guardian spoke with on Saturday, the Dawsons were glad to see the march attract such a wide cross-section of the public, they said, and in particular a sizeable Christian presence unwilling to have its views co-opted by evangelicals who support Donald Trump. A favourite sign read: “This old Wasp is woke.” Like many protesters in the wake of Thursday’s newsroom shooting in nearby Annapolis, Maryland, the Dawsons were at pains to make themselves helpful to media. “You tell all your journalist friends to keep up the good work and don’t be intimidated,” the elder Dawson said. At a Starbucks north of Lafayette Park – unofficial headquarters for a number of reporters – protesters recovered from the heat. A mother sought to soothe her shrieking baby. In line, a particularly ill-looking marcher told a young man wearing dark eyeliner she had been out in the sun since 11am. He reeled in sympathy. “I’m a human glazed doughnut,” he replied, “and I’ve only been here for an hour.” Donald Trump returned to Twitter on Saturday afternoon, addressing immigration policy if not directly confronting the major nationwide protests against his separation and detention of undocumented migrant families. “When people come into our Country illegally,” the president wrote, from his golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey, “we must IMMEDIATELY escort them back out without going through years of legal maneuvering. Our laws are the dumbest anywhere in the world. Republicans want Strong Borders and no Crime. Dems want Open Borders and are weak on Crime!” The president also claimed he “never pushed the Republicans in the House to vote” for either of the immigration bills that recently failed there, falling between dissatisfied moderates and hardline conservatives as so many such efforts have fallen before. The Guardian’s Ben Jacobs had some instant Twitter analysis about the veracity or otherwise of the president’s tweet: Trump also refrained – initially – from answering a fiery speech at the Los Angeles rally by the congresswoman Maxine Waters, usually a favourite target. According to the White House pool report, around 200 protesters were in place near Trump’s golf club today. Signs held by the protesters, the report said, “included: I really do care you should too #begone God knows you lie My civility is locked in a cage / reunite families now accompanied by the drawing of a child behind a chain link fence Even the Trump family belongs together Stop racism now We the people say no to the Trump agenda taped over a rainbow flag. Mueller aint goin away Do you know where our children are. From Chicago to smaller cities in Wisconsin, dozens of rallies took place across the midwest. For 22-year-old Victoria Duarte, rallies were heartening, even though they started with a man yelling: “If you can’t speak English, get out of the country.” “Personally, I was out there today for so many reasons, but mainly because us young people feel a lot of anger right now, and a lot of frustration,” she said. “We want to put it into the community in action.” “Just being able to go out into Eau Claire and see people who care just as much as I do was a huge plus,” she said. She and other organizers with NextGen America successfully got 150 young people to pledge to vote. They might have gotten more, but ran out of cards. “What’s happening at the border right now is absolutely atrocious, and everybody has common ground in fighting this fight.” Here’s more from the Associated Press. Chicago, Illinois Crowds faced a heat index of as high as 110F (43C) in downtown Chicago to protest the Trump administration’s immigration policy, surrounding a stage in Daley Plaza and shouting “Sí, se puede!” (“Yes, you can!”). Margo Chavez-Easley, a 39-year-old Chicago resident who immigrated to the US from Guatemala when she was nine, carried a sign that read, “What lengths would you go for your children?” Chavez-Easley told the Chicago Tribune that as an immigrant and an American, she felt a mix of pride and shame. The Democratic US Senator Dick Durbin was in attendance, saying it was “a place I had to be”. Detroit, Michigan Hundreds of people gathered in Detroit and 22 other Michigan cities to add their voices to nationwide protests over the detention of immigrant families. Detroit police estimated more than 250 people marched through the city’s downtown before holding a rally at Hart Plaza in sweltering, 95F (35C) heat. The Detroit News reports the Democratic US representative Sander Levin told the gathering that the detention of young immigrant children and the Trump administration’s other immigration policies “are a danger to American society”. Marshalltown, Iowa A central Iowa father says he was inspired to organize a rally in support of immigrant families after seeing news on Father’s Day of children separated from their parents who had recently crossed the US border. About 125 people turned out for the rally organized by Steve Adelmund. He recalled being brought to tears when seeing the news of immigrant children being separated from parents and held in cages at the border. Adelmund, who says he identifies as a Democrat but sometimes votes Republican, said he believes the country is at a dangerous ideological turning point and that the time to speak out is now. He said, in part, his motivation was to show his 10-year-old daughter what democracy looked like and that one person could make a difference. Columbus, Ohio At least one person was arrested when protesters blocked a downtown Columbus, Ohio, street after about 2,000 people attended a two-hour rally outside the statehouse. The Columbus Dispatcher reports police tried to shepherd the protesters from the intersection. A woman was taken away by police after a scuffle. Melissa Myers, a nurse, told those gathered for the rally: “You don’t have to be a parent to be outraged. You just have to be a decent human being.” She said she’d never attended a rally before, much less organized one. We were not able to squeeze this in the blog earlier today, so here it is now. The progressive senator Elizabeth Warren called for comprehensive reform to immigration, and for “replacing Ice with something that reflects our morality”. Want to see all the best protest signs of the day? Look no further. Representative Maxine Waters, a Democrat from California, is now speaking in Los Angeles. Some of us know the history of those who have separated children ... As an African American woman I was raised on the stories of what happened on the auction block. Waters has been the subject of intense criticism and threats from Trump supporters since she said members of the Trump administration should be publicly shamed for their role separating children from families. She has had to cancel two public events in the last two days due to escalating death threats, she said earlier this week. Now we have some members of Congress who are intimidated... I have no fear. [People are] talking about shooting me, talking about hanging me... If you shoot me you better shoot straight – there’s nothing like a wounded animal.” ... “They dare me to say impeach him. Today I say, impeach 45!” From the streets of New York City, here’s another protester, explaining why she decided to brave the heat and come out. Jackie Meier “I came out today because I felt that was something that I could actually do to help the cause and show my support,” she said. “It’s so wrong. Families need to be together; small children should not be separated from their families. I have a memory from when I was five years old of being lost in a museum, and it was traumatic, and I was only separated from my parents for 10 minutes.” Her friend said: “I’m in utter despair and it just keeps getting worse ... I’m trying to find a way to resist what’s happened in the last year and a half and save our country. It’s fight or flight.” US Senator Kamala Harris just spoke in Los Angeles as well, telling a crowd, “we are better than this.” “When we know that we have those 2,000 children crying for their parents and there is no plan for reunification, we know we are better than this. When we know those children will suffer lifelong trauma and this is not reflective of a civil society because a society will be judged on how it treats its children and the least among us, we know we are better than this. And when we have failed to keep our promise to over 700,000 young people, and we call them Dreamers, we know we are better than this... So, we’re at an inflection moment. And years from now, years from now, our children our grandchildren, folks are going to look at us and they’re going to ask us years from now a question. And that question is going to be: where were you at that inflection moment? And what I know Los Angeles is that our answer is not going to be simply how we felt, but what we did... We will vote, we will act, and we will not relent. We will not tire, we will keep fighting, because we are better than this.” Here’s a video where Harris shares her impressions of a child detention facility, immediately after visiting one. John Legend, the Grammy and Oscar Award-winning singer, just performed a new song in Los Angeles, California, as protests there heat up. Legend sings: “Everyday I wake up, everything is broken / Turning off my phone just to get out of bed / Get up every evening, history’s repeating / turning off my phone because it’s hurtiung my chest.” The singer and his wife, Chrissy Teigen, have been outspoken critics of Trump’s policy of separating children. When a TMZ reporter asked the singer about Sarah Sanders on Thursday, he replied: “Ask me ‘Should we be reuniting 2,000 kids with their families?... Yes we should.” CNN reports 45 people are being treated for heat exhaustion or in cooling stations in Washington DC. Perhaps most surprising, is that there are not more: it’s 105F (40C) outside the White House, and thousands have still come out. It’s the heat of the afternoon, and it’s no exaggeration to say it is a scorcher. This map from the National Weather Service shows heat advisories and warnings extend from the Canadian border all the way down to San Antonio, Texas, on the Gulf of Mexico. Thousands of people are protesting coast-to-coast in the United States, and some on the west coast are just gearing up. Here are dispatches from America’s west, where many immigrants are still being held, from the Associated Press. McAllen, Texas Several dozen protesters gathered in front of the border patrol station in McAllen, Texas, near a detention center where migrant children were being held in cages. People held American and Texas flags and signs depicting a migrant father, mother and child as the Holy Family with haloed heads traveling through the desert. Rio Grande Valley-based attorney Jennifer Harbury said parents separated from their children are being held in “prison-like” conditions in nearby Port Isabel. She said children separated at the border should have alien registration numbers linked to their parents, but attorneys are “having terrible trouble finding these kids.” Albuquerque, New Mexico Thousands of people gathered in downtown Albuquerque, New Mexico, to protest the Trump administration’s immigration policies, calling for an end to the detention of immigrant families. Albuquerque Mayor Tim Keller, a Democrat, told the crowd about his trip to the US-Mexico border, where he and other mayors were denied a tour of a shelter at the Tornillo port of entry outside of El Paso, Texas. He elicited a roar from the crowd when he said, “We are here to push back, to resist.” Margarita Perez of Albuquerque held up a small Mexican flag as speakers addressed the crowd. Accompanied by her daughter, she said she was concerned about the children who were being detained and for those parents who did not know where their children were taken. Associated Press in Albuquerque, New Mexico Denver, Colorado More than 4,000 people gathered in downtown Denver, Colorado, where people symbolically wore foil blankets. American authorities gave similar blankets to children they separated from their parents at the US-Mexico border. The rally Saturday is one of hundreds across urging the Trump administration to reunite families. Brenda Villa of Commerce City, Colorado, says “you want to have faith” President Donald Trump’s administration will do so as promised. Protesters held signs saying, “Keep the kids, deport the racists,” and “Break walls, build families.” Joan Culwell, of Littleton, said she had never been to a protest but decided to go after first lady Melania Trump recently wore a coat that read, “I really don’t care, do u?” while traveling to visit migrant children. Culwell wore a T-shirt saying, “I care!! Do you?” El Paso, Texas Thousands gathered in the west Texas city of El Paso to condemn what speakers describe as unconstitutional overreach by the Trump administration and heavy-handed tactics by immigration agents. Many of the protesters, monitored by several law enforcement personnel, converged Saturday on the international bridge that carries traffic between El Paso and Juarez, Mexico. They carried signs with slogans like “We are all immigrants” as they chanted “Love, not hate, makes America great!” and other sayings. Americans protested coast-to-coast against US immigration policies that separate children from family members at the border. The administration formally ended the policy in June, but more than 2,000 migrant children remain in limbo, held in detention facilities and foster care centers across the US. Actress American Ferrera, singer Alicia Keys and playwright Lin-Manuel Miranda called for the Trump administration to reunite the more than 2,000 children separated at the border with their families. Progressive leaders called on American to, “Remember in November”, when Americans go to the ballot box. This year’s midterm elections are this fall, when many Democratic politicians will face reelection. One example: civil rights icon and US Rep. John Lewis had a crowd chanting, “Vote! Vote! Vote!” in Atlanta, Georgia. As protesters gather around the country, President Trump is at his luxury golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey, where he is interviewing US Supreme Court candidate, following the retirement of Justice Anthony Kennedy. Guardian reporter Ed Helmore is with the marchers in New York City, where he’s spoken with protesters across the city. Janice Erlbaum I am protesting the inhumane deportation and incarceration policies under this administration. To witness this march is hopeful, but most of the time I’m really depressed and horrified at the sight of people enjoying the cruelty of this administration. I fear for myself, my friends and my family. Rosemary Fassbinder We’ve had enough. Donald Trump needs to pay attention. This past two weeks has not gone unnoticed – the protest movement is going to gather strength. It sure seems a long way since the pussy hat protests. We’d hoped that would change this, but it’s so much worse now. So we’re going to keep marching and keep protesting and try to make sure we don’t get complacent or numb. Lori Wilkinson Last time I felt this angry was when George W Bush was planning the Iraq war. I’m upset about everything this administration does, but separating children immigrant from their parents pushed me over the edge. I’m considering going a full-time Foley Square protest, or at least I could bake for the sit-in protesters. Kelly Charris I’m very disappointed. It’s so hard to ignore what’s happening, despite the executive order. We see those kids in the cages. They’re going to be traumatized for life. It makes me very sad to see this. My dad was an immigrant. He didn’t go home for 20 years because he was affraid he wouldn’t pass the test when he tried to come back. There has to be a better way. Here’s more from Lucia Graves in Washington DC: Top-billed speakers took the stage midday, as the DC heat reached its climax, with Lin Manuel Miranda singing a lullaby for separated children — and assembled crowds were totally undeterred as temperatures climbed. You can’t pay to hear Miranda singing on Broadway anymore, after all, but if you showed up Saturday, you heard him. Miranda was singing “Dear Theodosia,” from his hit musical Hamilton, known for its celebration of America as a nation of immigrants. And he sang with words unaltered — a way, perhaps, of emphasizing its universality — as many in the audience sang along, becoming a near chorus on the refrain, “Someday, someday.” “Don’t stop. Don’t give up,” he told the audience, as he waved off stage. Next up, Alicia Keys told sweat-drenched crowds she came less as a star than as the mother of a seven-year-old son. “His name is Egypt and I couldn’t imagine not being able to find him. I couldn’t imagine being separated from him,” she said. “If it can happen to one child it can happen to any child,” she said. But perhaps the most powerful language came from actress America Ferrera, who said she came, above all, as a human. “I’m here not only as a brand new mother, as the proud child of Honduran immigrants, and not only as an American who sees it as her duty to be here defending justice. I am here as a human being with a beating heart, who understands compassion and can easily understand what it must feel like to struggle the way families are struggling right now,” she said to cheers from the audience. “It is easy to imagine and I would hope if it was my family being torn apart,” she added, “then someone would stand up for me and my family. It is that simple. This fight does not belong to one group of people, one color of people, one race of people, one gender — it belongs to all of us,” she said. Every so often, the crowd erupted in boos or exclamations of, “How dare they!” But overwhelmingly, those in attendance maintained an elevated mood. As Ferrera and Keys read testimony from people affected by Trump’s zero-tolerance immigration policy (names were changed to protect identities), they chanted “Love is love,” or hummed strains from the passing lullaby. Keys told the story of “Margarita,” a mother who’d been separated from her son “Carlos” since before Christmas. Said the mother in Keys’ testimony: “First they tell you in a few weeks you will have your child, then in a month, then in another month, but they never fulfill their promise.” Testimony read by Ferrera focused on am Oakland-based grandfather hoping to be reunited with his granddaughter Theresa — but Ferrera also encouraged people to imagine all the stories that go unread. “What makes humans remarkable is our capacity to imagine. We have an imagination let’s use it,” she said. And so, they have. With signs that read, “Don’t shoot — I’m white,” and dressed in costumes from the Handmaid’s Tale, toting their toddlers, holding hands, cursing the heat and playing tibetan singing bowls, the crowds are beginning their march down Pennsylvania Avenue, headed toward the Capitol, their final destination. Before we share another dispatch from Washington DC, where we’ve heard from Alicia Keys, America Ferrera and Lin-Manuel Miranda, let’s take a look outside the beltway. Here are 10 protest pictures from outside New York and Washington DC. Including one (below) of protesters rallying near the Trump National Golf Club, where President Trump is golfing this weekend. Louisville, Kentucky Birmingham, New York Newark, New Jersey Tampa, Florida New Orleans, Louisiana Eau Clare, Wisconsin Burlington, Vermont Atlanta, Georgia Troy, Missouri Boston, Massachusetts One message repeated over and over again today: “Remember in November.” Diane Guerrero, actress from Orange is the New Black, who was left alone at 14-years-old when her family was deported, repeated the message again to a crowd in Washington DC. Remember this in November, when we march to the polls... Remember in November that the end to these cruel policies starts with us... Te amo mama, papa hermano, te amo and I miss you every day.” Here’s a bit more about what’s happening in New York City, where thousands have gathered downtown: Protesters are chanting “Shame!” and singing “Shut detention down!” at the kickoff of a New York City march denouncing the Trump administration’s policy of separating families of people caught crossing the border illegally. Crowds gathered in sweltering 86-degree morning heat on Saturday at a Manhattan park before a march across the Brooklyn Bridge to Cadman Plaza in Brooklyn, near the federal courthouse. The crowd provided a refrain of “shame” as an organizer ran down a list of people marchers are blaming for the family separations. Among their targets: President Donald Trump, Attorney General Jeff Sessions and the agencies Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Customs and Border Protection. This speech from civil rights icon and US Representative John Lewis has a crowd chanting “Vote! Vote! Vote!” in Atlanta, Georgia. Some of you know when I was very young, had all of my hair and a few pounds lighter, there were people that said we would never get a Civil Rights Act or a Voting Rights Act, but we marched. We were arrested, we were jailed, we were beaten, but we didn’t give up. We must not give up. I will tell you one thing that we all can do, we all can do is continue to appeal to our beloved communities. We are one family. We are one family. We all live in the same house, not just the American house, but the world house. We are all brothers and sisters. It doesn’t matter if we are black or white, Asian, Latino, we are all one people. Maybe our foremothers and forefathers all came to this land in different ships, but we are all in the same boat now. There is no such thing as an illegal human being. We all are human. And we must teach people in power that we will not be satisfied with the order of things. I’m not satisfied. There are hundreds of members of Congress that are not satisfied. There are many candidates running that are not satisfied. I’ll say to each and everyone of you, when the Election Day comes around we have to go out and vote like we’ve never voted before. Alicia Keys, the 15-time Grammy Award-winning singer, just gave an impassioned speech about fighting to “save the soul” of America, something we’ve heard again and again from protesters. Our democracy is at stake, our humanity is at stake. We are out here to save the soul of our nation. We need all the children reunited to their parents. We demand to end the zero humanity policy. We need to save the Supreme Court. And we need to vote. Because when we vote we win. And so America, and I want you to join us to say we’re not backing down. The crowd, gathered in downtown New York City, chanted back, “We’re not backing down!” The speech came just after Lin-Manuel Miranda sang a lullaby for the children separated from their families. Let’s just return for one moment to the lullaby Lin-Manuel Miranda sang at the march in Washington DC. Check out this video below. Here’s a dispatch from Guardian US reporter Lucia Graves, who is on the ground in Washington DC: The lineup of DC speakers began with a mother affected by Trump’s immigration policies, who told the assembling masses after she was put in detention, she was separated from her son for nine months, during which time she was told he could be put up for adoption. “I was terrified I might never see him again,” she told crowds braving what, by shortly after 11 am, was already 90-degree heat. “Shame!” the crowd chanted. “Families belong together!” Among them were Stephen Spitz and Kristin Cabral, who’ve become what you might call regulars to the White House front lawn. “For the past year and a half, I’ve been marching practically every day,” Spitz said. Asked which protests he’s attended he quipped, “The question is which ones haven’t I attended!” Spitz was last out here as recently as Tuesday, when Supreme Court justices issued a long-awaited ruling in Trump v Hawaii, in which it upheld Trump’s travel ban restricting travel and immigration from seven countries, many of them majority-Muslim ones. “That’s part of it,” he said about why he’s out today. “This is all part of the same thing.” The tenure remained respectful and peace-oriented as speakers took the stage Saturday. Some, like Gabriel Kolmisar and Amy Troxel of DC’s Socialist Snack Squad, were out with backpacks full of water bottles and snacks to keep people fueled (full disclosure: this Guardian reporter accepted a bag of Cheetz-Its.) Others showed up as family units, no longer taking the privilege for granted. “We’re a family unit and nobody has separated us yet,” Chris Fondi, who attended the march with two adult sisters, Laura Fondi and Ann Fondi. Pushing her nephew toward the Guardian she quipped, “Though if you’d like to take him, he’s college educated.” Lin Manuel Miranda just sang Dear Theodosia, a song about children from his blockbuster play Hamilton. Here’s a sample from the chorus: You’ll come of age with our young nation We’ll bleed and fight for you We’ll make it right for you If we lay a strong enough foundation We’ll pass it on to you We’ll give the world to you and you’ll blow us all away Someday, someday Yeah, you’ll blow us all away Someday, someday I just spoke to a woman protesting in Indiana – Vice President Mike Pence’s home state – where “thousands” are standing outside the statehouse in Indianapolis. “Our country is really really close to the edge of the abyss, of just committing some serious human rights violations, and in fact we have already,” said Mahri Irvine, a 35-year-old anthropologist, as people cheered in the background. “To me, it’s upsetting if people don’t have that level of imagine to think – how would I feel if I had to flee a violent country, and I was incarcerated, and my children were taken away from me?” People have been standing outside the Indiana statehouse for hours, even though temperatures are expected to top out in the 90s today (around 35C). “It’s incredibly hot, I’ve been hiding in the shade the whole time and I am just sweating,” she said. From Dallas, Texas – the city the Texas Tribune calls one of the “blue dots in Texas’ red political sea” – we have this dispatch from the Associated Press. Hundreds of protesters in downtown Dallas are calling for a clear plan to reunify families separated under President Donald Trump’s policy of separating immigrant families. The protesters, many donning white T-shirts and clothing, carried protest signs and gathered in mass outside Dallas city hall. One protest sign read, “Compassion not cruelty” while another said simply: “Vote” Another sign said, “November is coming.” Protest organizer Michelle Wentz says opposition to the policy has seemed to cross political party lines. She called it a “barbaric and inhumane” policy. Protesters continued to stream in to the area as people registered demonstrators to vote. The hum of side conversations gave way to chants of “We care!” outside city hall. US Senator Elizabeth Warren, a progressive from Massachusetts, just spoke in Boston to an adoring crowd. We’re tracking down more of her comments now. Guardian US reporters Oliver Laughland and Tom Silverstone interviewed a family that was separated at the border and, more than a month later, reunited. Their story is uncommon – many families are still separated – but no less harrowing. The children describe sleeping in a windowless cement room. Without clocks or sunlight, it was impossible to tell whether it was day or night. They had no place to sit, only were given mylar blankets and called “donkeys” by immigration agents, they said. Crowds are gathering in Washington for the Families Belong Together march in Lafayette Square park, across from the White House. Despite the extreme heat hundreds of thousands are expected to gather to call for the reuniting of families separated under Trump’s zero-tolerance immigration policy, though it was off to a slow start in the hour before start time. The estimates come according to organizers of the day’s event, including MoveOn, the American Civil Liberties Union and dozens of other advocacy groups in charge of the days march, one of 130 sister marches around the country. It will feature star speakers Lin-Manuel Miranda and America Ferrera, and — an hour before it’s slated start time Saturday — it was off to a peaceful start. John Holland of Takoma Park, Maryland, the de facto hippie suburb of Washington, was among a group of early-assembled Buddhist-affiliated protesters who held hands singing and playing a Tibetan singing bowl in the moments before the rally, as a speaker described the “amazing effect it can have on everyone if we move slowly.” Asked why he’d come out to brave the 95-degree heat, the Takoma Park native quipped “peer pressure.” Like many of those gathering ahead of the rally, Holland also attended the Women’s March on Washington’s National Mall, which in the wake of Trump’s inauguration has turned into the site of perennial protests, including the March for Science last year, and more recently, the student-led March for Our Lives, in the wake of the Parkland shooting. The protest comes on the heels of a tumultuous week in Washington, with the resignation of Anthony Kennedy from the Supreme Court and a newsroom shooting in nearby Annapolis, Maryland. But most of those assembling outside the White House want to talk about immigration, a And the estimated 2,000 children have already been separated at the border —and they are dissatisfied with the administration’s feeble walk backs. Hoisting a “Make The Handmaid’s Tale Fiction Again” sign, Kate Earle of Maryland told the Guardian “reunification of families is a start but locking them up together is not a solution.” You might notice protesters are wearing white. Organizers explained why: The lead partners of this action are calling upon participants to wear white—as a striking visual symbol that will also connect attendees in solidarity to each-other and channel historic social justice movements unified by one color of clothing. If the “zero tolerance” family separations policy has evoked one image, it’s children “in cages”. Protesters have seized on images of children locked in detention facilities, wrapped in mylar blankets – the silver foil sort usually reserved for natural disasters. Although children who crossed the border alone were held in similar detention facilities during the Obama administration, children separated from their parents at the border have tended to be much younger. Marches are beginning to gather in Washington DC, Chapel Hill and Raleigh, North Carolina, and University Hill, Maryland. There’s even a protest at the US consulate in Toronto, Canada. Below is the protest gathering in Foley Square in New York City. Here are some of the signs people made for today’s marches. Here is a reminder of why people are marching. Beginning in May, the Trump administration announced a “zero-tolerance” immigration policy that meant every migrant caught crossing the border would be criminally prosecuted. However, because children cannot be held indefinitely in detention, the Trump administration decided in order to prosecute parents, it needed to separate them from children. Since, more than 2,300 families have been separated at the border – children from parents, and siblings from one another. There is no clear system for reuniting the children, and though the Trump administration walked back its zero tolerance policy, very few families appear to have been reunited. Watch the story of one parent’s separation below. We’re expecting marches to begin around 10am ET, but just as a reminder, these are not the first actions of the week. On Thursday, 600 women were arrested for protesting inside a US Senate office at the Department of Justice, the agency which designed and carried out the “zero-tolerance” policy that lead to family separations. Arrested along with them was actress Susan Sarandon. Listen to for the songs in this video of the protest. Good morning and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the “Families belong together” protests Organizers say they are expecting tens of thousands to march across all 50 US states on Saturday, to protest President Donald Trump’s immigration crackdown, which has seen more than 2,300 children separated from their parents in recent weeks after they crossed the Mexico border without documentation. “This is an all hands on deck, stop the madness moment. It’s not a red or blue thing,” national protest organizer Ai-jen Poo told the Guardian. More than 750 events are planned across the US today. They were primarily organised for people horrified at the news of family separations and detentions, but have also become a forum for a show of opposition against Trump’s travel ban, which targets five Muslim-majority countries and was upheld this week, and the threat of Trump nominating a hard-right conservative for the US supreme court seat that will be vacated by Justice Anthony Kennedy.
6||Rudy Giuliani calls for Iran regime change at rally linked to extreme groupDonald Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, addressed a rally staged by an extreme Iranian opposition group in Paris on Saturday, calling for regime change in Tehran. Giuliani spoke to the National Council of Resistance of Iran (NCRI), an umbrella coalition largely controlled by the Mujahedin-e-Khalq (MeK), which was once listed as a terrorist organisation in the US and Europe and is still widely viewed as a Marxist-Islamist cult built around the personality of its leader, Maryam Rajavi. “We are now realistically being able to see an end to the regime in Iran,” Giuliani told a crowd of about 4,000, many of them refugees and young eastern Europeans who had been bussed in to attend the rally in return for a weekend trip to Paris. “The mullahs must go, the ayatollah must go, and they must be replaced by a democratic government which Madam Rajavi represents,” Giuliani said. “Freedom is right around the corner … Next year I want to have this convention in Tehran!” The former New York mayor, who became a cyber security adviser in the White House before being named as Trump’s personal lawyer in April, is one of a long line of American conservative hawks to attend the NCRI annual conference. Another prominent guest on Saturday was Newt Gingrich, a former House speaker and a close Trump ally. In his speech, Giuliani said the fall of the government in Tehran would be brought about by economic isolation. “When the greatest economic power stops doing business with you, then you collapse … and the sanctions will become greater, greater and greater,” he said. In May, Trump abrogated the 2015 international nuclear deal with Iran and ordered a campaign of intense economic pressure, threatening sanctions against any foreign company doing business with Iran and calling for an end to trade in Iranian oil by November. Giuliani suggested that the current wave of protests in Iran was being orchestrated from outside. “Those protests are not happening spontaneously,” Giuliani said. “They are happening because of many of our people in Albania [which hosts an MeK compound] and many of our people here and throughout out the world.” It was unclear whether “our people” was intended to mean the US or the MeK. The guest of honour at last year’s NCRI conference was John Bolton, who has since become Trump’s third national security adviser. Bolton told the 2017 rally US policy should be to make sure the Islamic Republic “will not last until its 40th birthday” – 1 April 2019. The policy of the Trump administration is not officially to call for regime change, though top officials have often hinted at it. Outlining his approach in May, the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, said it was up to the Iranian people to relieve the pressure on the country by changing their government. Giuliani was one of 33 senior US officials and military brass at the year’s conference on Saturday. Bill Richardson, former US ambassador to the United Nations, US energy secretary and Democratic governor of New Mexico, was also in attendance. Stephen Harper, former prime minister of Canada, also delivered a speech advocating regime change in Iran. It was unclear if the speakers at the Saturday conference were paid. The NCRI and MeK have been known for paying very high fees. Most observers of Iranian politics say the MeK has minimal support in Iran and is widely hated for its use of violence and close links to Israeli intelligence. In sweltering temperatures on Saturday, about 4,000 people arrived by bus at the Parc des expositions centre. Many were draped in the MeK flag, which replaces the sign for “Allah” on the Iranian flag with a yellow lion. Others wore yellow sun hats displaying the hashtag “#Maryam Rajavi”. Around half of the attendees were Iranian. The other half consisted of an assortment of bored-looking Poles, Czechs, Slovakians, Germans and Syrians who responded to a Facebook campaign promising travel, food and accommodation to Paris for a mere €25. Hundreds of Syrian refugees settled in Germany also attended. Many snoozed under trees during speeches. “We saw the deal on Facebook and we agreed to come on a holiday,” said a young Syrian mother as she sat on the conference floor, fanning her two young children. “I have never seen Paris. I don’t know anything about the MeK.”
7||Poll of Unite union members piles pressure on CorbynJeremy Corbyn is today coming under fresh pressure to back a softer Brexit as a new poll shows an overwhelming majority of members of the Unite super-union – Labour’s biggest financial backer – believe the current Labour position in favour of leaving the single market will be bad for jobs. The survey by YouGov, released before Unite’s annual conference this week, also shows that most of the union’s members back giving the people a vote on any deal Theresa May brings back from Brussels – something Labour also opposes. The survey is released as sources within grassroots movement Momentum say senior figures at the top of the organisation are now keen to ensure a full debate on Brexit at the Labour conference in September, opening a possible way for anti- and soft-Brexit members and delegates to force a change to official policy. The pressure on Corbyn and shadow Brexit secretary Kier Starmer has also been mounting within parliament. Earlier this month, 89 Labour MPs went against instructions and voted for an amendment calling on the government to back membership of the European Economic Area, which would allow participation in the single market. The YouGov poll, commissioned by the People’s Vote Campaign, found that Unite members believed by a margin of more than three to one (57% to 18%) that leaving the single market would be bad for jobs. When asked if they believed Britain would be worse off outside the single market, 58% said it would, while 21% took the opposite view. Some 57% of the 913 Unite members questioned backed a people’s vote on the final outcome against 34% who did not, and 24% of those who voted Leave backed giving the people another say. Corbyn maintains that he is determined to pursue a “jobs-first Brexit”. But the polling suggests many in the union movement now think his policy will have the opposite effect. Labour is proposing a new relationship with the single market that it says would give the UK access but fall short of full membership. The model has been dismissed by Brussels as unrealistic as it tries to keep all the advantages without having to comply with the EU’s four freedoms, including free movement of workers. Many of the motions submitted to the Unite conference depart from Labour’s policy and express support for the single market, and some for a people’s vote. One motion, submitted by West Midlands car workers to the conference, states: “Only now have voters started to see through the initial referendum campaigns and truly understand the implications and costs of leaving the EU. The final negotiations of UK Brexit terms cannot be left for parliament alone to agree upon because the facts presented to the voting public have changed so much since the referendum vote. The British electorate must ultimately have the final say.” Last week, another group, Labour for a People’s Vote, which is led by several former Momentum figures as well as trade union leaders and has the backing of more than 60 constituency Labour parties, announced that it would try to force a vote at this year’s party conference to change Corbyn’s Brexit policy. The group will call for Labour to oppose the government’s final Brexit deal. The party has said it would do this if the deal with the EU did not meet six tests set by shadow Brexit secretary Starmer. The group will then campaign for the party to go further and campaign for a public vote on the deal with an option to stay in the EU should voters reject the deal. Baroness Margaret Prosser, a former deputy general secretary of the Transport and General Workers Union, which merged into Unite in 2007, said: “It’s becoming increasingly clear that the Tory government is hell-bent on a bad Brexit deal for British workers that will damage jobs, public services and the future of young people. We are already seeing worrying signs about the impact on Airbus, carmakers and other key sectors of the economy. In these circumstances, workers look to our union to stand up for their interests.” Len McCluskey, Unite’s general secretary, is a close ally of Corbyn, but only 3% of his members said in the survey that the union should base its policy on what’s best for the Labour party, with 84% saying it should be driven instead by what’s best for either the country or for members of Unite.
8||Kyle Edmund not ready to win a grand slam, says John McEnroeWhen Kyle Edmund blew up at the chair umpire in Eastbourne this week, rousing the gentle citizens parked in the sunshine on Centre Court, it was as if an earthquake had rippled along the south coast. This, they thought, was not meant to be. However the most polite player in tennis has, what Australians call, a bit of mongrel in him. John McEnroe, who has a PhD in attitude, applauds the rousing of the beast, occasionally. “I don’t know if he’s a nice guy,” the American said as Edmund, ranked 18th in the world but seeded 21 at Wimbledon, prepares for his first-round match at Wimbledon against the Australian Alex Bolt. “He seems like a nice guy. The times I’ve met him, he seems like a shy, nice guy. Maybe he’s a mean son of a bitch, I don’t know. “The killer instinct is extremely important. It feels that someone like [the Canadian teenager Denis] Shapovalov has that, if I had to pick one guy. He’s ready to go, he’s out there. That’s hard to come by at that age. “Edmund has done it the more traditional way. But there’s guys in the tennis books, even hall-of-famers you thought of as nice guys, like Pete [Sampras] – a guy you thought was soft, couldn’t win the big ones. Well, he ended up winning 14.” Edmund is still to win any titles [apart from the Estoril Open doubles with Cameron Norrie in May] but reached the Marrakech final this year, as well as the semi-finals of the Australian Open. There is a distinct feeling he is getting closer to his breakthrough but nobody is quite sure when that may happen. McEnroe said: “I saw him when he played a guy who was at my academy years ago in the juniors. I thought this guy is a big strong kid, nice kid, top 30 maybe. When I saw him in Australia it seemed like, OK, he was making progress, inching it up a little bit. “As I was looking over the course of four or five years, maybe it’s top 25, possibly top 20 – but not enough to do the whole thing. But then I was really surprised and impressed with the improvement. “I was watching when he had Jack Sock down 5-1 in the third in Paris [at the Masters in 2017] and then he blew that, Sock won and Edmund was like: ‘What the hell happened there?’ He lost a lot of close matches. “But battling the way he did in that heat in Melbourne showed me something about his fitness because it was brutal that first week and in a fair amount of that tournament. So I now look at him, long story short, he’s got top-10 potential.” But McEnroe would like to see even more “mongrel” from Edmund – more Eastbourne, even. “That was a tough loss [over five sets in the French Open third round against Fabio Fognini],” he said. “It’s a match he should have won. But I could see definitely how he could lose against Fabio. The guy throws everything at you, mentally and tennis-wise, and Kyle succumbed ever so slightly. So that was a tough one. To take that step where you’re actually winning majors? That would require more work.” Bolt, a left-handed six-footer with a big forehand who is finally delivering on his potential at 25, two years older than Edmund, is ranked 205 in the world, and up for the challenge. “He’s going to have the crowd all his way but it’s going to be an unbelievable experience and I’m just going to take it in,” Bolt said. “He’s dangerous on any surface but I’m sure if I play to my strengths and how I want to play I know I’m going to be able to take it to him.”
9||We must stop abuse by criminalising puntersA court in Lancashire last month jailed six men and one woman for their part in a sex trafficking ring. The group had been bringing women from Romania, and sexually exploiting them in a network of brothels around the UK. The court heard the key to this gang’s operation was the use of a classified ads website – Vivastreet – on which they advertised women to sex buyers. The group didn’t have to worry about disguising the prostitution adverts they were placing; Vivastreet openly hosts and charges for “escorts” listings. During the investigation, one of the suspects was found to have spent more than £25,000 on advertising victims on the site. Yet Detective Sergeant Stuart Peall, who led the investigation, discovered that, astonishingly, when one man placed what amounted to more than £25,000-worth of prostitution adverts – for multiple women – the web company did not respond by calling the police, or even by refusing his requests. Instead, Peall says, they gave the suspect “his own account manager”. Vivastreet is one of the “prostitution procurement websites” identified in a recent inquiry by the all-party parliamentary group on prostitution as enabling industrial-scale sexual exploitation. Along with its competitor, Adultwork, the site allows users to shop for sexual access to women’s bodies. It is free to use for the sex buyer, who can search profiles according to his location and contact the person being advertised (or the person selling them) via a mobile number listed in the profile. The profits come from fees charged to those placing the adverts. Vivastreet’s French business was interrupted on 4 June when the Paris prosecutor opened an investigation into Vivastreet France for aggravated pimping. Last week, Vivastreet France shut down its prostitution adverts. This comes in the wake of Adultwork and similar sites dropping prostitution adverts in the US after a new law holding web companies criminally and civilly liable for knowingly facilitating sex trafficking came into force in April. In Britain, prostitution advertising websites continue to operate, the UK’s patchy and inadequate laws against commercial sexual exploitation leaving sufficient leeway for them to profiteer openly. France has led the way by taking action on prostitution websites under comprehensive anti-pimping laws and, crucially, tackling the demand underpinning them – by criminalising paying for sex, and decriminalising selling sex. It is time the British government did the same and finally woke up to the sexual abuse scandal playing out in brothels across the country. Kat Banyard is the author of Pimp State: Sex, Money and the Future of Equality (Faber &amp; Faber)
9||Outlaw prostitution websites to protect enslaved and trafficked women, say MPsMinisters will come under intense pressure from a cross-party group of MPs this week to follow the US by banning so-called prostitution websites amid mounting evidence that they are enabling a huge growth in sexual exploitation and the trafficking of women to the UK for profit. Members of the all-party group on prostitution have secured a parliamentary debate during which they will demand that the Home Office acts to make websites such as Vivastreet and Adultwork accountable under law for encouraging and profiting from sexual exploitation. The websites make money by placing advertisements on behalf of gangs and individuals running networks of women, many of whom are trafficked from abroad. Vivastreet operates in 19 countries and is owned by an offshore holding company based in Jersey. Adultwork is registered in Panama. A recent inquiry by the all-party group heard evidence from the Joint Slavery and Trafficking Analysis Centre – a multi-agency intelligence unit set up by the police, the government and the National Crime Agency – which concluded that “adult services websites represent the most significant enabler of sexual exploitation in the UK”. This was because the sites are at the heart of a money-spinning online industry that allows networks of women to connect with men who want to buy sex. Investigators believe much of the profit made by those managing the women is then used to fund a wider network under which vulnerable women are sought out abroad and systematically trafficked to the UK. Amid rising outrage about the use of such websites, US President Donald Trump signed a bill earlier this year that gives federal and state prosecutors greater power to act against platforms that make money out of such advertisements. The bill also enables victims and state attorneys general to file lawsuits against the sites. The MPs say it is now crucial that the Home Office follows the US by changing the law in the UK to make such websites directly accountable under law for encouraging exploitation and trafficking. They will demand swift action from Theresa May, who made action to stamp out modern slavery a top priority during her time at the Home Office and reiterated the same commitment on entering Downing Street. Sarah Champion, MP for Rotherham and a member of the all-party group, said she would attend the debate and press whichever Home Office minister represents the government to follow America’s swift action. “UK legislation needs to be radically overhauled to keep pace with the changing face of prostitution,” Champion said. “We need to update our laws to make websites legally accountable for facilitating and profiting from sexual exploitation. The idea that commercial prostitution sites make it safer for women is not true.” Diane Martin, who was awarded a CBE for services to vulnerable women and survived trafficking and prostitution in her late teens, now supports exploited women. “As a survivor, my perspective means firsthand experience of the realities of prostitution,” she said. “My years of supporting hundreds women to exit prostitution have also only strengthened my fervent belief that we are failing some of the most vulnerable women in society unless we address the demand of the buyers and the greed of the pimps. “Currently, UK legislation is inadequate to deal with this. I want to call on MPs, and all those with the power to make positive change, to see the reality of prostitution, to be on the side of the most vulnerable and to adopt an approach under which pimps, brothel owners and third-party exploiters are not tolerated.” A spokesman for Vivastreet said: “Vivastreet is a classified advertising platform that allows users to post adverts for goods and services across a broad range of categories. We take the issue of exploitation extremely seriously, and we are working closely with the Home Office to help develop an industry-wide approach to identifying and preventing online trafficking. We would urge all sites to engage with this process. “We are committed to eradicating any potential exploitation from our platform, and we have a wide range of measures in place to detect and remove inappropriate material. We report any suspicious content to the police via our long-term partnership with National Ugly Mugs, a specialist charity that works with police forces across the country and is formally supported by the National Police Chiefs Council.”
7||What’s trickier than Brexit? Writing a TV drama about itIt is the divisive issue that will come to define our age, so it’s no surprise that the country’s leading political dramatists are keen to tell the tale of Brexit and speculate on what it will mean. A slew of Brexit-themed dramas are in production this summer, and the writers behind these rival productions face difficulties that go beyond the problem of making the subject entertaining. They have to contend with the way the facts behind the referendum result, and the roles played by the key dramatis personae, keep changing. The production with most at stake is a high-profile Channel 4 thriller, already at the filming stage, with the working title Brexit. It stars Benedict Cumberbatch as Dominic Cummings, the backroom strategist who is said to have shaped the referendum result with his use of personal online data. “I’m obviously aware that there might be a level of scepticism in certain quarters about dramatising something so polarising and momentous,” said screenwriter James Graham this weekend. Graham, already acclaimed for his political work on stage and television, including the plays This House and Labour of Love, added that he has based his account chiefly on two books: Tim Shipman’s All Out War: The Full Story of How Brexit Sank Britain’s Political Class, and Craig Oliver’s Unleashing Demons: The Inside Story of Brexit. “I take seriously the responsibility of being one of the first out of the gates to represent that campaign and its impact,” said Graham. “But I feel confident that, with the access and information we have, this film will be both fair and accurate, while asking tough questions and calling the key figures to account.” Two stage plays are also tackling the subject. One will concentrate on the Islington dinner party at which Johnson, then a backbench MP, made up his mind to back Brexit. Called The Last Temptation of Boris Johnson, it also features the current foreign secretary’s guests that night: Michael Gove, his wife, the columnist Sarah Vine, and media mogul Evgeny Lebedev. It will premiere at the Park theatre in north London next spring. The second, more overtly comic, play, again called simply Brexit, is headed for Edinburgh’s Pleasance venue this August. Starring Timothy Bentinck, best-known for playing David in Radio 4’s The Archers, plus comedians Mike McShane, Jo Caulfield and Hal Cruttenden, it focuses on a fictional future Tory leader still attempting to close a Leave deal, and hold his party together. Finally, there is a rumoured Hollywood version of Leave.EU founder Arron Banks’s diarised account of the campaign. It is claimed that his book, The Bad Boys of Brexit, is to be adapted as a six-part TV serial, told from the perspective of a US pollster advising the Leave campaign. These competing dramatisations have all been written while key issues are still undecided. Not only are the broad terms under which Britain will leave the union unclear, but the Electoral Commission is still investigating whether Leave campaigners breached legal spending limits. The C4 film, a 120-minute one-off, is due to be shown next March, as Britain leaves the EU, so must deal with the fact that a ruling on Cummings’s campaign techniques is still awaited. Last Thursday, Damian Collins MP, chairman of the digital, culture, media and sport committee, argued in the House of Commons that Cummings should be punished for “contempt” for refusing to appear before MPs. Cummings said he could not attend the committee on the dates suggested, and that there were “legal issues” because of the separate inquiry by the Electoral Commission. “The drama depicts the events leading up to the vote, rather than what has taken place since,” said Graham, who also wrote Coalition, a 2015 Channel 4 docudrama about the aftermath of the 2010 British General Election. Along with studying Cummings’ own writings, the playwright added that he has based his script on “extensive media coverage, interviews and social media”. “But we have tried to infuse some of the recent revelations, impacts and outcomes into the fabric of the script to make it feel as pertinent and resonant as possible. I’ve also spoken to many key players on either side – including the strategists working on each campaign, and politicians.” Among those interested to see how they are portrayed will be Banks, played by Outlander actor Lee Boardman, who is expected to be depicted cavorting drunkenly with Nigel Farage at his country house. And Labour Leave donor John Mills, played by Nicholas Day and thought to be shown attempting to sack Cummings. Richard Goulding is Johnson, Oliver Maltman is Gove and Paul Ryan is Farage. A spokesperson from Channel 4 said it does not expect to legal complications to emerge over this “well-researched” drama. The author also said he has not yet “come under any personal pressure”, going on to point out that he is already battle-hardened by his recent dramatisation of the controversial newspaper magnate Rupert Murdoch in his recent stage play, Ink. Jonathan Maitland, writer of The Last Temptation of Boris Johnson, is also a veteran of political theatre, with a 2015 hit play Dead Sheep about Geoffrey Howe. He takes a different approach. “I’ve written about the past (2016) and the future (2030),” said Maitland, who researched the historical segment of his drama for a year. “Some facts are indisputable: there was that dinner at Boris Johnson’s in 2016. But when it comes to filling in the blanks, my rule is: can I in good conscience publicly defend and justify what I’ve written? Is it fair to show, for instance, Boris being substantially motivated by personal ambition throughout? Or was it all based on principle and altruism? I’ve gone for the former and if I get slagged off for it, I’ll happily take it on the chin.” Maitland is also in the fortunate position of being able to alter his play as new information is unearthed. “James [Graham], talented though he is, can’t – as it will all be committed to film,” he said. “If it changes, they will have to bin it, or reshoot it.” The writers of the Edinburgh-bound play, Robert Khan and Tom Salinsky, have perhaps found the place of greatest safety by setting their entire comic drama in the future. Opening in 2020, it chronicles the impossibility of finalising an EU deal as the British government fractures. For all these writers, it seems, penning a play about Brexit in 2018 could prove almost as risky as negotiating the real thing.
4||Refreshed or disrupted, talismanic Harry Kane is England’s focal pointNo one seems to know quite what to make of England’s last performance, which is nothing new in the context of recent World Cups but an unsettling departure in this one. It is quite startling how quickly the ground shifts below one’s feet at major tournaments. When the draw was made England would have been perfectly happy to get out of Group G in any circumstances. Yet when the time to play strongly fancied Belgium came around, Harry Kane was leading the scoring charts, Japan had been identified as the prize for victory and Roberto Martínez had already blinked first by indicating he would be giving some of his best players a rest. Whether England were right to in effect choose the Colombia option will be seen on Tuesday. It is a delicate business deciding whether a supposedly easier quarter-final route is worth the risk of a slightly more difficult opponent in the last 16, and England must also hope that after rediscovering winning momentum for the first time in well over a decade it is not too seriously disrupted by losing a match that was there to be won. Yet in fairness to Gareth Southgate, who would most likely have faced just as much criticism for fielding his strongest side against Belgium reserves, keeping Kane fit and available for the knockout stage was an understandable priority. The Tottenham striker has been described as the only world-class player in the England squad, which at the same time seems a tad premature and a trifle harsh on some of the emerging talents Southgate has brought to the fore, though there can no longer be any doubts about Kane’s value to the national side. He is the captain, the goal-getter, the go-to man. Jamie Vardy can be a marvellous finisher but England would have to completely change their style to play to his strengths. Marcus Rashford is exciting but still improving, not quite the finished article. Even in three starts it is hard to imagine Danny Welbeck or anyone else making the impact Kane has made in two. The opponents faced when Kane helped himself to five early goals were not the strongest, it must be admitted, but as England know only too well and Germany have just found out, getting off to a good start in a World Cup can make a crucial difference. If England have spent the past week or so plotting routes to the semi‑finals with a confidence bordering on cockiness that seems entirely out of sync with their laboured football and defensive outlook at previous tournaments, that is Kane’s doing. Others might have performed well, particularly Jesse Lingard, Kieran Trippier and John Stones, but Kane has scored the goals. The more superstitious among all the amateur England managers out there might have been tempted to give the captain at least part of the game against Belgium, if only to allow him the chance to continue his scoring run and further his claim to the Golden Boot. When something is working so well why change the script, is a question that will have been asked in many a pub debate, especially as Kane has made no secret of his desire to finish as top scorer. The risk of upsetting such an important player will also have had a few airings but, as Southgate was careful to explain, he knows both the player and the risks very well and made his decision accordingly. Why superstitious? Because this is virtually uncharted territory for England and picking up a fair wind in the opening games to set a course for the later stages of a competition still feels like the sort of hazardous enterprise that could be wrecked by any hint of hubris. Terry Venables, the last manager to take an England team to a semi-final, has stated he would never have changed a winning team and could not see any positives in allowing momentum to be interrupted by inviting defeat. “Gareth has turned a reasonably simple exercise into something unnecessarily complicated and difficult,” said Venables, who was Southgate’s coach when the team reached the semi-finals at Euro 96. That seems unduly pessimistic, given that England have breezed out of the group and have a fit and rested first team ready to be brought back, though Venables’s caution is based on the belief that team spirit and a winning mentality are not easy qualities to instil in a side and cannot be turned off and on like a tap. Southgate evidently believes they can and we shall see who is right in a couple of days, with the current manager acknowledging he will be blamed if things go wrong against Colombia. In their first two games England looked as good as anyone else in the tournament, in their last game they looked more like their old selves, though few teams in Russia could make eight changes to their preferred lineup and still keep up the quality and bubbling confidence. That is exactly the point the worriers make: why do it? Yet as Alf Ramsey said to his players as they received massages on the pitch before extra time in 1966: “You’ve won it once. Now you’ll have to go out there and win it again.” To paraphrase that message for the Southgate era, England have already shown the world what they are capable of, they ought to be able to do it again. And who knows, with Kane back in the frontline and hungrier than ever, perhaps even again and again. 6 If Harry Kane scores against Colombia, he will become the first England player to register in six consecutive games since Tommy Lawton in 1939. 10 Kane has played only 153 minutes in Russia but only Gary Lineker (10) has scored more times for England in World Cups than the Spurs striker (five). 7 Since – and including – the 1966 World Cup final, half of England’s knockout games have gone to extra time (seven out of 14). 1 England have failed to score in only one of their 18 knockout World Cup games. That was against Portugal in 2006.
4||Luka Modric: the unassuming genius driving Croatia’s tilt at the World CupSaturday 17 November 2007 and the pitch at the National Arena in Skopje is a bog. Incessant rain has caused severe waterlogging and put Macedonia’s hosting of Croatia in a Euro 2008 qualifier under threat. The game goes ahead, and the hosts go on to win 2-0, but it is a poor contest as players on both sides struggle to control the ball, let along do anything with it. Amid the sodden muck one player does catch the eye. Croatia’s No 14, a small and wiry midfielder who, despite the conditions, looks to use possession intelligently and precisely. Sometimes he fails, sometimes he succeeds, but he continues to try, continues to trust in his technique, and what makes his display even more impressive is he is just 22. The less clued-up reporters watching on from the press box double check the player’s name on the team sheet: Luka Modric. Plays for Dinamo Zagreb. Definitely one to keep an eye on. Could be a serious talent. Which is precisely what he became. A little under 11 years on, Modric remains small and wiry but professionally he is now a giant: a four-times Champions League winner with Real Madrid and the captain of his country as they face Denmark on Sunday in their first World Cup last-16 tie in two decades. Modric has impressed in Russia and is key to Croatia’s hopes of progressing. From an individual point of view, these finals also offer the 32-year-old a chance to establish himself as the finest midfielder on the planet. It is somewhat odd that Modric is not spoken of in those terms already. He has been a key cog in the most successful European club team of the past 10 years and is a player whose ability to dictate the tempo of top-level matches with brain as well as feet cannot be beaten. There have been others of a similar ilk, most notably Xavi and Andrés Iniesta, but they have at least been fully recognised for their brilliance. Modric operates in relative darkness, passing, moving and gobbling up winner’s medals with barely a nod of approval in his direction. In part that is down to Modric’s unassuming nature. He is a subtle operator who physically gets lost among the game’s honed and toned superstars. As Barney Ronay once put it in the Guardian, Modric resembles a “small boy dressed up as a witch”, but the talent is undeniable and now, on the greatest stage of all, comes a chance to lift himself above the crowd. “We are all football lovers and we know Modric is an incredible player,” said Dejan Lovren on behalf of his Croatia teammates, all of whom leant heavily on the man with No 10 on his back as they went about topping Group D with a 100% record to head into Sunday evening’s contest in Nizhny Novgorod as favourites to progress to the quarter-finals. No Croat has completed more passes at this World Cup than Modric (143), or received more (124), highlighting the level of trust the midfielder’s colleagues have in him to do the right thing at the right moment. And it is not just with his use of the ball that Modric has made a telling contribution. He is also second for greatest distance covered (26.09km), third for most sprints completed (93) and, somewhat surprisingly, has made more tackles than anyone else in Zlatko Dalic’s ranks (seven). The captain is here, there and everywhere, having also scored twice at these finals, following up a penalty in the opening game against Nigeria with that twisting, turning howitzer in the 3-0 victory against Argentina. Modric described that goal as one of his best in 109 appearances for Croatia and, more than anything, it reflected his capacity to keep a clear head in the most pressured situations, a remarkable feat given the player travelled to Russia with a possible five-year prison sentence preying on his mind. The sanction stems from Modric’s involvement as a witness in the criminal trial of the former Dinamo Zagreb director Zdravko Mamic, following which he was charged with perjury. A trial is due to take place after the World Cup and, it would not have been a major surprise had Modric, who denies wrongdoing, performed like a troubled soul at the tournament. Instead he has flourished in the centre of Croatia’s midfield, dictating play with calmness, precision, variety and a quality he is not widely renowned for: robustness. For a man who is 5ft 6in (1.68m) and 10st 3lb (66kg), Modric is incredibly strong, using every element of his frame to hold off more imposing opponents in order to receive and use the ball. It was a trait that was fully on show during Real’s Champions League final victory over Liverpool in Kiev and something Harry Redknapp noticed on becoming Tottenham manager in October 2008, six months after Modric joined the club from Dinamo. “Luka is as brave as a lion,” said Redknapp, having overseen the flourishing of a player who had struggled to adapt to life in north London. “He can make things happen – he has that ability to open the door.” They have also seen that at Real, where Modric likewise suffered early teething problems. He was voted the worst signing of the 2012-13 La Liga season by Marca, having arrived at the Bernabéu for £30m a few weeks before the start of the campaign. He refused to crumble, however, and having moved from a No 10 role into centre midfield, became integral to Real’s success on the European stage. Now he plans to help Croatia reach grand heights, potentially emulating or even surpassing their success at France 98, when a team who included Robert Prosinecki, Zvonimir Boban and Davor Suker reached the semi-finals. Do that and Modric will well and truly stamp his mark on the global consciousness. “Because we are a small country, Luka gets less attention than he deserves,” Lovren said. “He is one of the best in the world. Maybe even a Ballon d’Or winner.”
4||Dele Alli fit to return and confident England can beat ColombiaDele Alli has declared himself fit and ready to resume his World Cup campaign, with the midfielder convinced England can force passage beyond Colombia and into the latter stages of the tournament. The Tottenham player suffered a thigh strain late in the first half of the victory over Tunisia in Volgograd at the start of the group stage but insisted on remaining on the field until 10 minutes from time. He missed the remaining two games in the section but has trained fully in Zelenogorsk since last week and will return to the starting lineup in Moscow on Tuesday, when Gareth Southgate is likely to field the side that started against Tunisia. “I was frustrated after the injury but I’ve been doing a lot of work to make sure I’m back so I can make a contribution to the team,” Alli said. “I’m glad [the manager] kept me on. I had a similar injury when we played Real Madrid and I went on and scored twice, so if I had scored against Tunisia then maybe people would think differently. I felt like I could run it off and I told the manager and the physios I was OK. “It’s been difficult watching the team play well because you always want to be out there and a part of it, helping them. So I’m looking forward to being a part of it again.” Alli was one of 21 players put through their paces at Spartak Zelenogorsk on Saturday, with Fabian Delph back in England to attend the birth of his third child and Ruben Loftus-Cheek undertaking his own work in the gym. He is not thought to be an injury doubt for the game in Moscow but is likely to start on the bench. Confidence has apparently not been affected by Thursday’s loss to Belgium, when Southgate made eight changes, with Alli’s belief unwavering that England can win the tournament. “We’ve come here with the mentality that we want to win it, and that we’re going to win it,” he said. “We’ve been playing very well, there have been a lot of positives, but there are still things to work on and we know that as players. “We have to focus on the next game, we can’t think about how well we’ve played in previous matches or how well we are doing. We have to be positive but we can’t get carried away and let our feet get off the floor. But we’re confident we can beat anyone. “I was dreaming about winning the World Cup before I was here, so it’s hard not to. But if we are looking to perform as well as we can, we can’t afford to look towards the other games and what might happen if we win [on Tuesday]. “This is a new team, new players, new manager, and we’ve come here with the mentality that we’re going to win it. That’s important. As a team we’re not scared of anyone. Whatever team you put in front of us, we’re not going to hide. We’ll go out there be confident in ourselves, play the way we want to play and hopefully win the game.” The Football Association has confirmed England are to play Switzerland – potential quarter-final opponents in Russia – in a friendly on 11 September at Leicester’s King Power Stadium. England will begin their Nations League campaign with a game against Spain at Wembley three days earlier.
4||Colombia put trust in Juan Quintero against England and fret over RodríguezThe look in José Pekerman’s baffled pinched eyes said it all. Colombia had just made history by qualifying for consecutive World Cup knockout stages for their first time, but the worry creased across the coach’s furrowed brow when asked about the extent of James Rodríguez’s latest injury was plain to see. “I’m very concerned, it’s very worrying,” the 68-year-old Argentinian confessed after Colombia’s 1-0 win over Senegal in which Rodríguez had to depart the field with a frustrated thumping of the turf just 31 minutes in. “It’s a very difficult situation for us. I don’t know where he stands right now. I can’t say any more because I just don’t know.” Arms folded and fingers twitching on the desk in front of him, Pekerman’s subtle mannerisms are usually telling. For Colombian journalists, every flicker of emotion shown by the highly hermetic coach is carefully interpreted. And this wasn’t good. “You could see it in Pekerman’s face, he fears the worst,” observed one reporter on the shuttle bus back to town. “I think we’re probably going to have to do this without him [Rodríguez].” The calf strain that had already sidelined the on-loan Bayern Munich midfielder from starting Colombia’s opening match against Japan again seems to be the issue. He did not train on Saturday but the Colombian Football Federation later said in a statement that a scan had shown swelling but no muscle tear. After Rodríguez missed training in the run-up to the tournament, at Colombia’s isolated base on the banks of the River Volga some 25 miles from Kazan, one coach commented that the player was feeling pain every time he started jogging. Not wanting to risk doing lasting damage and potentially missing the whole tournament, he had requested to take it easy. This was not the first time he had suffered a problem with the same troublesome left calf. Against Besiktas in Bayern Munich’s Champions League game in February he was clutching the calf when substituted just before half-time. He ended up missing three weeks. Pekerman claims that Rodríguez had trained normally before the Senegal match and was thus left confused by what the real issue was. Even in a best-case scenario Rodríguez will not be 100% fit for Colombia’s date with England in the last 16 in Moscow on Tuesday. For Colombia and their Argentinian coach, that is desperately concerning. Colombia have come so far since the guileful coach dropped the No 10 jersey in the lap of Rodríguez upon taking over as Los Cafeteros coach in January 2012. Back then, Rodríguez had only three caps for his country and was just 21 years old. This was an extraordinary statement and a resounding show of support in somebody so young. Pekerman had inherited a team that had spent 16 years trundling in world football’s wilderness. In the perennial search for an heir to Carlos “El Pibe” Valderrama, three World Cup qualifying campaigns had slid from view. For all its romance and mystique, many a precocious star had buckled under the weight and responsibility of the No 10. Yet with Rodríguez, Pekerman knew what he was doing. In his first managerial role in the 1990s, he led Argentina Under-20s to three world youth titles. When later promoted to the senior team, Pekerman would give an 18-year-old Lionel Messi his international debut. Rodríguez was clearly in good hands. Six years on and the coach’s faith in his prodigy has been more than justified. Already joint-third top scorer for his country and still only 26, Rodríguez’s achievements in yellow are remarkable. Of Colombia’s last 15 goals at the World Cup, the playmaker has scored six and provided four assists. In his astonishing World Cup debut four years ago he scored the best goal, won the Golden Boot and was arguably the tournament’s best player as Colombia reached the last eight for the first time. No player has been so important in Colombia’s football history. Not Valderrama, nor Faustino Asprilla, nor even Radamel Falcao. Pekerman signed a new four-year contract with Los Cafeteros in July 2014 and immediately began building a new side around his star. But qualification for Russia 2018 was a slog. Opponents routinely frustrated Colombia by sitting deep and stifling their attacking play. As a wandering No 10, Rodríguez floated between the lines seeking to influence a game starved of space. Gone was the swashbuckling and fast-transition football tied to neat geometrical patterns that Colombia served up in Brazil. Now Pekerman’s side were often dependent on some Rodríguez magic to swing games. Indeed, of 21 goals Colombia clocked up in qualifying, Rodríguez was involved in 48% of them (again six goals and four assists). That creative reliance may now pose a problem as Colombia plot victory against England without their mercurial star. Curiously, Pekerman’s long-term backup to Rodríguez had been Edwin Cardona, a bulky but technically gifted midfielder who was chopped from Colombia’s 23-man squad without formal explanation. Unofficially though, Cardona’s fate was sealed when he received a five-match ban from Fifa after making a racist gesture against a South Korea player in a November friendly, before then being implicated in a scandal at Boca Juniors that involved “girls, alcohol and knives”. Pekerman was unimpressed and instead turned to the tortured genius of Juan Quintero, who will now assume responsibility for picking apart England’s defence. Four years ago, Colombia’s World Cup plans were also dealt a crushing blow when their talisman striker Falcao suffered an anterior cruciate ligament injury. Pekerman found a way of juggling his side to thrive without a player who had finished as his country’s top scorer in qualifying. But Colombia without Rodríguez is a very different prospect. And it may prove to be Pekerman’s biggest challenge yet.
6||Thousands march against Trump and family separations policyMass protests against Donald Trump and his immigration policies were held across the US on Saturday, in cities from Los Angeles to Boston and in state capitals and smaller towns between. As large parts of the country sweltered beneath a heatwave, marchers braved the blistering sun to express fierce opposition to the president’s policy of separating undocumented immigrant families at the southern border. They also voiced concern over Trump’s forthcoming supreme court pick. The president, who was playing golf at his club in New Jersey, attacked what he called “radical left” Democrats, who he said were behind calls to disband Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice), the agency central to his hardline immigration approach. “To the great and brave men and women of Ice,” Trump tweeted early in the day, “do not worry or lose your spirit. You are doing a fantastic job of keeping us safe by eradicating the worst criminal elements. So brave! The radical left Dems want you out. Next it will be all police. Zero chance, It will never happen!” Immigration policy is a central pillar of Trump’s appeal to his supporters ahead of November’s midterm elections. It is also key to motivating opposition to the president, particularly among the surging progressive wing of the Democratic party.. In Washington on Saturday, protesters gathered in Lafayette Square, close to the White House. Organised by MoveOn, the American Civil Liberties Union and dozens of other groups, the Families Belong Together march featured star speakers Lin-Manuel Miranda, Alicia Keys and America Ferrera. Miranda sang a lullaby, Dear Theodosia, from his hit musical Hamilton. John Holland of Takoma Park, Maryland, was among a group of Buddhist-affiliated protesters who held hands, sang and played a Tibetan singing bowl as an early speaker described the “amazing effect it can have on everyone if we move slowly”. Asked why he had decided to brave the 95F (35C) heat, he quipped: “Peer pressure.” Like many present, Holland attended the Women’s March on the National Mall in January 2017. The capital has turned into a site of major protest, including the March for Science last year and more recently a student-led gun control effort, the March for Our Lives. On Saturday New York also saw a major rally, as did Los Angeles, Dallas, Denver, Chicago, Boston and other big cities. Senior Democratic figures addressed crowds; in Boston, speakers included the possible 2020 presidential candidate Senator Elizabeth Warren and the congressman Joe Kennedy III. In LA, Senator Kamala Harris, another potential 2020 pick, spoke after John Legend performed. Smaller protests were staged at federal facilities in Texas and outside Trump’s New Jersey club, where about 200 people gathered. Trump was expected to begin interviewing candidates to replace Anthony Kennedy, the supreme court justice who announced his retirement this week. The protests were also focusing on that choice, which is expected to turn the court sharply right, placing in jeopardy rulings such as Roe v Wade, the 1973 opinion which guarantees the right to abortion. This week, the court upheld Trump’s travel ban against Muslim-majority countries and dealt a heavy blow to unionised labour. “This is an all-hands-on-deck, stop-the-madness moment,” national protest organiser Ai-jen Poo told the Guardian. “It’s not a red or blue thing … what you are seeing is the downright refusal to accept this administration’s policies.” This month, Trump stopped the separations policy, after intense public outcry over images and recordings of children held in cages at federal facilities. But his order was unclear and the administration has been criticised for the lack of a plan to reunite about 2,000 children with their parents. The administration is now claiming the right to detain families indefinitely, ignoring a 1997 court settlement that limits how long children can be held. At the Washington protest on Saturday, Kate Earle of Maryland held a sign that said: “Make The Handmaid’s Tale fiction again.” She said: “Reunification of families is a start but locking them up together is not a solution.” In Indianapolis, thousands gathered outside the seat of government in the home state of Vice-President Mike Pence. As people cheered, Mahri Irvine, a 35-year-old anthropologist, spoke to the Guardian by phone. “Our country is really, really close to the edge of the abyss of just committing some serious human rights violations,” she said. “In fact, we have already. To me, it’s upsetting if people don’t have that level of imagination to think, ‘How would I feel if I had to flee a violent country, and I was incarcerated, and my children were taken away from me?’” From Eau Claire in Wisconsin, 22-year-old Victoria Duarte said the rally there had been heartening, despite starting with a man yelling: “If you can’t speak English, get out of the country.” “I was out there today for so many reasons,” she said, “but mainly because us young people feel a lot of anger and a lot of frustration. We want to put it into the community in action.” Trump’s reference to “radical left Dems” may have been inspired by the surprise victory in a New York Democratic primary this week of young activist Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The 28-year-old, who shocked party stalwart Joe Crowley, describes herself as a democratic socialist and campaigned on a platform that included the abolition of Ice. Pressure on Ice has also come from within. Nineteen senior agents sent an open letter to Kirstjen Nielsen, Trump’s homeland security secretary, saying it should be disbanded. The investigators said the immigration crackdown was interfering with the agency’s work against transnational criminal groups. At the New York march, Lorette and Tim Maxwell had brought their five-year-old daughter. “We’ve been trying to teach Penelope but it’s difficult to explain to her,” Tim said. “Like if a cop knocked on the door and took away mommy … How do you explain that to a child?” Lorette said: “Everybody thought Trump was a joke but he is not a joke.”
10||Coalition education reforms ‘fuelled inequality in schools’Sweeping education reforms appear to be fuelling inequality in the schools system, according to a major analysis that shows high-performing and improving schools are accepting fewer children from poor backgrounds. In a stark assessment of the impact of controversial measures introduced since 2010, the study warns that an original pledge to set schools free and give them more power has actually led to a system that is causing high levels of stress among teachers. It finds the system is now pushing schools and their heads to prioritise “the interests of the school over the interests of groups of, usually more vulnerable, children”. Some schools were found to be engaged in “aggressive marketing campaigns and ‘cream skimming’ aimed at recruiting particular types of students”. The findings form part of a state-of-the-nation study of England’s education system, drawn up by academics at the UCL Institute of Education over four years, which will be published on Tuesday. It includes the examination of Ofsted data over a decade, a statistical analysis of the impact of multi-academy trusts (MATs), 47 detailed school case studies and a survey of almost 700 school leaders. The reforms were largely implemented under the coalition government and championed by Michael Gove as education secretary. A plan to force all English schools to become academies was abandoned in 2016 after a backlash among Tory MPs. The study concludes that any new autonomy handed to schools had been “more than balanced” by testing and inspections that had ensured the state remains in control from a distance. The drive to turn schools into academies, the key part of reforms since 2010, is described as “uneven and often fraught”. There is also worrying evidence of schools improving or keeping their high status by shunning children who qualify for free school meals, whose parents receive state help. “Our analysis of national Ofsted data for the periods 2005-10 and 2010-15 showed a relationship between inspection grades and the changing socioeconomic composition of a school’s student body,” say the authors, Toby Greany and Rob Higham. “Schools that sustained or improved their judgment to ‘outstanding’ in the 2010-15 period saw, on average, a reduction in the percentage of students eligible for free school meals (FSM), while schools retaining or being downgraded to a ‘requires improvement’ and ‘inadequate’ judgment saw, on average, an increase in FSM eligibility.” The study admits it cannot say conclusively why better-performing and improving schools have admitted fewer poorer students. The analysis says that there are signs of challenging pupils accumulating in underachieving schools. “While higher-status schools were seen to be benefiting [from reforms since 2010] in terms of new opportunities and resources as a result of policy reform, the lower-status schools we visited faced a concentration of challenges often including under-subscription, higher mobility and disproportionate numbers of disadvantaged, migrant and hard to place children,” the study concludes. “Two-thirds (66%) of respondents [to a survey of school leaders] agreed that inequalities between schools are becoming wider as a result of current government policy.” The study amounts to a stark assessment of sweeping education reforms introduced in the past eight years, as part of an attempt to build a “self-improving school-led system (SISS)”. Key measures include forcing schools to become academies, the promotion of multi-academy trusts (MATs) and the rolling back of local authorities from education. Ministers said the reforms would “dismantle the apparatus of central control and bureaucratic compliance” by handing power to schools. However, analysis by the academics shows there is no positive impact from MAT status for pupils in either primary or secondary academies when compared to pupils in similar standalone academies. For secondary schools, there was no statistically significant benefit for students when compared to all other schools. It looked at data from 2009 to 2015, examining average performance and progress of children at primary school, including in reading, writing and maths. For secondary school pupils, it examined the proportion of students achieving at least 5 GCSEs or equivalent qualifications at A*-C including English and maths, as well as their progress in English and maths. School leaders deemed to be leading the way in the new system are being handed new opportunities and power, it finds. However, it adds that they are faced with “conflicting and unreasonable demands” from government, while being treated with suspicion by less favoured schools. The study warns of the power that the new system can hand to “charismatic, authoritarian leaders”. It warns that the system in which the involvement of councils has been stripped back, with fellow schools encouraged to help their struggling counterparts, is actually seeing the creation of a market for advice – with schools charging for their expertise on how to improve. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “Thanks to our reforms and the hard work of teachers, the vast majority of pupils are in a good or outstanding school, 1.9 million more than in 2010, and an increase from 66% to 86% over that time. “And thanks to our reforms schools that aren’t delivering for young people are being turned around, with 65 per cent of schools made into a sponsored academy seeing improvement from inadequate to good or outstanding. But there is always more to do, which is why we are investing £23bn by 2020 to create more good school places and we are targeting £72m at the areas that need it most to help improve prospects and opportunities for some of the most disadvantaged young people.”
5||Syria: southern towns surrender to Assad forces after thousands flee homesSeveral southern Syrian towns have surrendered to the forces of President Bashar al-Assad, after more than a week of fierce attacks forced tens of thousands of people to flee their homes. The United Nations says fighting has driven 160,000 people from their homes, towards borders with Jordan and the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights. Both countries say they will not allow any Syrians to cross. Rebel fighters are trying to negotiate with Assad’s backer, Russia, as the opposition-held enclave in southern Daraa province rapidly shrinks under airstrikes and ground attacks, but say conditions offered are “hard to accept”. Daraa is seen as the cradle of the Syrian uprising against Assad, which led to the seven-year civil war, so recapturing it would be both a strategic and propaganda victory for the government. Fighting, which began on 19 June, continued into Saturday, a second week of conflict that the UN’s Syria envoy has said could match the siege of Aleppo and last year’s assault on eastern Ghouta combined. The fighting in effect rips up a ceasefire agreed last year between Russia, the US and Jordan. It designated the area around Daraa as a “de-escalation zone” and Washington promised a strong response to any campaign that violated the agreement. However, US forces have not taken action to stop attacks, and opposition spokesman Ibrahim Jabawi accused them of having struck a “malicious deal” to stay silent. Jabawi said rebel civilian and military officials held meetings with Russia to discuss surrender, but were offered terms they could not accept. Russia demanded the handover of weapons and said anyone who had borne arms would face trial. Since Russia joined the civil war in 2015, it has helped turn the tide of the conflict with decisive but often brutal interventions, condemned by international agencies, aid groups and human rights monitors. Government forces and their allies have repeatedly hit civilian targets including hospitals and schools, used chemical weapons and starvation sieges, in their battles to take over opposition-held areas around the country. Rebel-held areas have been slowly recaptured, and the south-west is one of just three remaining strongholds still outside government control, along with Idlib in the north-west, alongside territory held by Kurdish forces in the north-east. Even as the rebels negotiated with Russia for some limited protection from Syrian government troops, those forces were taking other towns in the area. Large parts of the rebel enclave has already fallen, and army advances near Daraa city could cut the opposition-held territory in two. State television said at least five towns had agreed to surrender and accept government rule, and one had already raised the national flag, news agencies reported. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights says more than 100 civilians have been killed in airstrikes and shelling since the campaign around Daraa started. Tens of thousands of other civilians forced from their homes are gathered in extremely harsh conditions along the Jordanian and Israeli borders, some with tents but many sleeping in the open air. The fighting has been so intense that aid convoys across the border have been halted, Jan Egeland, a humanitarian adviser to the UN said this week, begging Jordan to reopen its border to those fleeing conflict. “I hesitate, in a way, to ask a small and poor county, who has more than a million Syrians on their soil, to take more,” he said. “But I have to do it, because these are women, children, civilians, who have no other place to flee if they are to escape the war zone.” Israel should also be asked to offer refuge, he said.
10||‘A market-led school system has put finances before the needs of pupils’The economic and regulatory incentives facing state schools in England are increasingly in tension with an inclusive, broad and balanced education for pupils. Since 2010 the government has used the language of a “self-improving school-led system” to characterise its reforms, arguing that these are “moving control to the frontline”. Our research shows that this is a partial and idealised account: while some higher-performing schools are benefiting, the system as a whole is becoming more fragmented and less equitable. Schools have been strongly encouraged (and sometimes forced) to become academies, which are independent of local government, on the premise that they will be freed from red tape. Yet schools and academies have faced greater regulation through national accountability, which has become more punitive. One bad Ofsted report and a school can be removed from its local governing body and handed to a multi-academy trust (MAT) – after which the school ceases to exist as a legal entity. Fear of such a takeover and the wider consequences of being downgraded by Ofsted has led many schools to focus relentlessly on national test outcomes, to constrain teacher judgment and to narrow their curriculum. These pressures have combined with a chaotic process of centralisation. Attempting to manage thousands of academies directly from Whitehall, the government has created new regional commissioner roles, but their work can be in tension with both Ofsted and local authorities. This has left schools with minimal support as they navigate an endless churn of new policies. Schools have also faced stronger incentives to compete for students and the funding that is linked to them. New “providers” have been encouraged to run academies and free schools on the premise they will pressure existing schools to improve. Yet school leaders can feel obliged to put the market position of their school above all else, even if this means making decisions that contradict their professional values. We found that the school system has become more socially stratified since 2010, with schools judged by Ofsted to be “outstanding” admitting fewer children eligible for free school meals, while schools judged “requires improvement” or “inadequate” have higher concentrations of these children than previously. Meanwhile, schools have been encouraged to work together in new teaching school alliances (TSAs), led by schools the government has designated as high-performing “system leaders”, but competitive and economic pressures have made this challenging. Some alliances have collaborated to share expertise and to support vulnerable schools. But the need for TSAs to generate income has encouraged a focus on selling easily commoditised “best practice” knowledge rather than on facilitating deeper collaborative learning processes that support professional growth for teachers. The economic motive is also clear in the development of MATs, which have faced encouragement to grow from government to achieve alleged economies of scale. Our research suggests that this economic push for MAT growth is in tension with an educational argument for school quality. We found no positive effect of MATs on pupil attainment and progress overall, but we did identify differences by size: while students in smaller MATs (those with two or three academies) tended to perform better than comparator schools, pupils in larger MATs (those with 16+ schools) did worse, particularly in secondary schools. The idea of a “self-improving” system in which schools collaborate on behalf of all children is appealing, but the reality is that market and accountability pressures are creating a system of winners and losers. Meanwhile, the litany of recent cases of corruption in MATs is blamed on individual maverick leaders rather than on a system that places economic incentives above equity, inclusion and professionalism. • Toby Greany is professor of leadership and innovation at the UCL Institute of Education. Rob Higham is a senior lecturer at the UCL Institute of Education. Their report, Hierarchy, Markets, and Networks: analysing the self-improving school-led system agenda in England and the implications for leadership, was funded by the Nuffield Foundation and will be published by IOE Press on 3 July
4||World Cup 2018: Uruguay 2-1 Portugal – as it happenedCristiano Ronaldo: gone. Lionel Messi: gone. But Luis Suarez is still standing. The 1930 and 1950 champions Uruguay are through to the quarter finals; they’ll face France in Nizhny Novgorod on Friday afternoon. Both teams thoroughly deserve to be there after scoring some cracking goals today. The only downside for Uruguay is the injury to the heroic Edinson Cavani; he’ll be a huge miss should he not recover in time. As for Ronaldo and his Euro 2016 winners ... well, they’ll always have Paris. Thanks for reading. Nighty night! And it’s time to give your player ratings. I hope the tech folk have tweaked this so Cavani’s go up to 11, Nigel Tufnel style. Here’s our snap match report: And that’s it! Edinson Cavani’s sensational double has deservedly won the match for Uruguay! They’ll play France in the first quarter final on Friday. Meanwhile Cristiano Ronaldo joins Lionel Messi on the road home! 90 min +6: Rui Patricio can’t get a head on the ball. Uruguay hack clear! 90 min +5: Quaresma, just inside the Uruguay box on the right, shoots towards the near post. Muslera saves, but not convincingly, spilling the ball round the post. Corner. Up comes Rui Patricio! 90 min +4: If Portugal somehow save themselves, Ronaldo won’t be playing in the quarters. That’s because he’s just picked up a yellow card for dissent. Portugal didn’t get a free kick when Quaresma went over Stuani’s leg: cue fume. 90 min +3: Some superb hold-up play by Suarez down the right. He then curls a ball into the centre for Rodriguez, who is clear and should wrap things up. But he miscontrols and it’s a goal kick. 90 min +2: Bernardo Silva whips a dangerous ball into the Uruguay area from the left. Shrieks in the stadium, but Godin is the model of calm, and clears. 90 min +1: Muslera takes a while over the goal kick, in the professional style. 90 min: Ronaldo comes in from the left and shoots from 25 yards. The ball sails 25 yards wide right. There will be four additional minutes. Four minutes for the European champions to save themselves! 89 min: Ronaldo threatens to break free down the middle, but he’s crowded out of it. Laxalt bursts down the left and earns a free kick that wastes some more precious seconds. 88 min: The busy Suarez starts a move that wastes a minute deep in Portuguese territory. The tension is palpable. The knockout stage of the World Cup, everyone! 87 min: Fernandes has another shot from distance. Nope. 86 min: This is attack versus defence now. Quaresma crosses deep from the right. Andre Silva meets it at the far post, but can’t find a team-mate. 85 min: Joao Mario is replaced by Fernandes, who is soon shooting for goal, 25 yards out on the right. Muslera claims easily. 84 min: Pereira tries to brush his way past Godin, down the inside-right channel. He goes to ground in the area, and wants a penalty, but he’s never going to get that decision. The ball apologetically trundles out for a goal kick. 83 min: Quaresma sends a lovely cross into the Uruguay box from the left. It’s inches away from Ronaldo’s head. Bernardo Silva then bustles in from the right, but his low cross is hacked clear by Torreira. “Why are the Portuguese insisting on playing these short corner routines?” wonders Prateek Chadha. “Especially when the two or three times they have actually managed to put a cross in, the Uruguayan defenders have been in all kinds of strife.” 81 min: A short corner routine comes to nothing. Ronaldo then has a dribble down a cul-de-sac on the right. Uruguay are holding firm right now. 80 min: Bernardo Silva makes his way to the byline down the left. His low centre is hacked behind for another corner by Gimenez. Before the set piece can be taken, Nandez is replaced by Sanchez. 78 min: Ronaldo shoots from the best part of 30 yards. The effort is easily blocked. The first sign of Portuguese desperation. 77 min: Quaresma wins a corner off Laxalt down the right. Ronaldo launches himself at the ball, as it flies past the near post, but doesn’t connect. Guerreiro has a whack from distance, but it’s no use. 75 min: Cavani is on the bench, grimacing, as ice packs are applied to his shin. The whole of Uruguay will have their fingers crossed, should they make it through to the quarters. 73 min: Cavani has picked up a knock, and limps out of the game. Such a shame after his stellar contribution this evening. He’s replaced by Stuani. Meanwhile Portugal make another change, swapping Guedes for Andre Silva. 72 min: Ronaldo breaks down the left, but there’s nobody in the box in support. Another Portuguese attack ends limply. 70 min: And yet they should be level again. Muslera fumbles a cross from the left. He tries to reclaim the ball as it bounces around the area, but falls to the ground. The ball breaks to Bernardo Silva, on the edge of the area. The net’s unguarded, but he sends his shot over the bar. It wasn’t a complete sitter - he had to fire through a crowded area - but it’s a bad miss from a player of his quality. 69 min: Quaresma probes down the right, but not with any great speed, and Portugal’s attack fizzles out. They look a little deflated right now. 67 min: Portugal win a corner down the right. Uruguay fail to clear their lines convincingly, and Joao Mario enters the box from the left. But he can’t get a shot or cross away. Uruguay clear with more purpose at the second opportunity. 66 min: That’s not a bad response by Uruguay to conceding their first goal of this tournament, and their first goal in 2018, eh? 65 min: ... while Adrien Silva is replaced by Quaresma. 64 min: Bentancur is replaced by Rodriguez ... It’s another Uruguayan beauty! This is such a sweet finish. And again so simple. Muslera launches long. Bentancur takes control and moves menacingly towards the Portugal box. He’s got Cavani on the left, and rolls a perfectly weighted pass towards him. Cavani opens his body and sidefoots powerfully into the right-hand side of the net. That’s a wonderful goal! 60 min: Guedes shoots to earn a corner. Adrien earns another corner. Some head tennis allows Muslera to claim. But Uruguay are finding it difficult to get upfield right now. 59 min: The equaliser has led to some uncertainty in the Uruguay defence. Joao Mario dribbles into their area down the right. His cross isn’t up to much, but a few holes are opening up now. 57 min: Laxalt tries to re-energise Uruguay with a burst down the left. He’s clattered from behind by Carvalho, who escapes serious censure. This referee doesn’t get agitated by much. The ball’s whipped in from the left. Ronaldo leaps, but the ball sails over his head. No matter, because just behind him, Pepe has ghosted into space! He rises and blasts a header past a helpless Muslera. Uruguay were uncharacteristically dozy in defence there. 54 min: Bernardo Silva fizzes down the inside right and fires into the middle. The ball ricochets to the edge of the box. Adrien Silva shoots. It’s deflected wide left. Corner. From which ... 52 min: Bernardo Silva grafts to earn a corner down the right off Laxalt. The set piece is worked out to Guerreiro, who tries to send a rising shot into the top left from distance. But the effort’s well off target. 50 min: Guedes drifts in from the left wing. For a second, it looks like he’ll have time to get a shot away, but Nandez steps in to gently relieve him of possession. Guedes fouls his opponent in frustration. It’s not worked out for the Valencia youngster tonight. Yet. 48 min: Rui Patricio plays a poor pass out towards Pepe, who nearly loses out to Suarez. Fortunately for Portugal, the ball breaks off the Uruguay striker and out for a goal kick. But that was nearly another calamitous mistake. Some nerves on display out there. 47 min: Joao Mario curls a cross in from the right, but it’s easily headed clear by Godin. 46 min: Fonte tries to usher a long ball back to his keeper, and nearly has his pocket picked by the buzzing Bentancur. For a second, that threatened to become a disastrous start to the second period for the European champions. And we’re off again! Uruguay get the second half underway. There have been no half-time changes. “I like this ref and his ‘just play on’ attitude,” opines Robin Hazlehurst. “Can someone please please now boot Pepe three miles up in the air so the ref can watch him land and just say ‘up you get son, nothing doing’. Who on the planet would not love to see that?” The rhetorical question to end all rhetorical questions, right there. Half-time reading. The winner of this match will play a quarter final against France, who saw off Argentina earlier in a seven-goal spectacular. Our man Nick Ames was at the Kazan Arena, on hand to riff, be-bop and scat on Lionel Messi’s pain. Cavani chases after a long hoof down the left, but can only shank a weak volley well wide. And that’s that for the first half. It’s not been a classic, but Uruguay’s goal was a thing of real beauty, some spectacular long-distance interplay between Suarez and Cavani. Portugal have 45 minutes to crack the Uruguay code; the sky blues haven’t been breached in six-and-a-half matches. It promises to be a thrilling second half. Go nowhere! 45 min: Suarez is revived by the magic sponge. Portugal waste their corner. There will be two additional minutes of play in this first half. 44 min: Guerreiro elbows Suarez in the back as the pair go up for a high ball. Uruguay want a free kick for the foul, but for some reason don’t get one. Portugal race up the other end with Suarez prone and loud whistling ringing around the stadium. Ronaldo wins a corner on the right. Uruguay take advantage of the break in play to engage the referee in philosophical debate. 42 min: From tight on the right touchline, Nandez hoicks a speculative shot high into the crowd behind the goal. It’d have been worth something in rugby. 41 min: Uruguay seem happy to turn this into a grind, which is what this has suddenly become. Does this count as breaking news? It doesn’t really, does it. 39 min: Another cross into the Uruguayan mixer is easily dealt with by Godin. He even brushes off an accidental clash of heads with Guedes. “The prospect of Pepe and Ronaldo imploding if it stays like this with ten minutes to go is just mouthwatering beyond belief,” salivates Andy Tuohy, looking forward to some traditional Saturday night light entertainment on ITV. 37 min: Bernardo Silva slides in on Cavani, and is fortunate not to see yellow. The referee is in an easy-going mood tonight. 35 min: Caceres dribbles in from the right and thinks about shooting from the edge of the box. But he checks back and lays off for Nandez, who crosses. Cavani, coming in from the left, tries to tee himself up for a shot, but gets too much on his chest-down and runs the ball out for a goal kick. 33 min: Uruguay haven’t done a whole lot in attack since going ahead, but when they do press forward they look dangerous. Suarez bursts in from the left and nearly breaks through the Portugal back line; Caceres and Nandez combine on the other flank and are very close to opening their opponents up. 32 min: Ronaldo blasts an uncharacteristically witless effort straight into the Uruguay wall. What a waste. 31 min: Guerreiro slips a pass forward for Guedes, who is bundled over to the left of the D by Bentancur. That’s clumsy and not so clever. A free kick in a dangerous spot, and Ronaldo’s eyes have lit up. 29 min: Portugal press and probe, and push Uruguay back into their final third. But Uruguay’s shape is solid, and there’s no route through. Eventually Caceres hassles Guerreiro into running the ball out of play. A sixty-second defensive masterclass. 28 min: Pereira drags Cavani back, and is slightly fortunate to escape a booking. A slight lull, so the crowd entertain themselves with some Icelandic thunderclaps. 26 min: Carvalho takes, hooking the free kick into the mixer. Fonte and Ronaldo both attack the ball; both miss it. Portugal have seen much more of the ball, but have yet to force Muslera into serious action. 25 min: Bernardo Silva is knocked to the ground by Godin as he tears down the right. A free kick, and a chance for Portugal to load the box. 24 min: Joao Mario curls one in from the left. Guedes attempts to trap, spin and shoot, but can only kick the ball up onto his flailing arm. A free kick that releases some pressure on Uruguay. 22 min: Suarez threads a low one under the jumping wall, towards the bottom right. Rui Patricio does extremely well to get down and stick out a strong hand to parry clear. Bentancur tries to keep the move going, latching onto the loose ball out on the right. But his delivery doesn’t find a sky-blue shirt, and eventually the attack fizzles out. 21 min: Suarez zips towards the Portugal box, and is upended by Pepe. That’s a free kick in a very dangerous position, just outside the area. Suarez gets up, and very much likes the look of it. 19 min: Bernardo Silva slips a pass down the inside-right channel for Guedes, who bursts into the Uruguay area. Guedes spins and dinks a cross into the middle. Ronaldo is winding his neck back, ready to fire one of those trademark bullet headers, but Gimenez reads it well and heads clear. 18 min: Pereira makes good down the right and reaches the byline. He then whistles a low cross towards the near post. It’s travelling, and Muslera does very well to gather without drama. Portugal have responded well to going behind; they’re enjoying the lion’s share of possession right now. 16 min: Guedes has his first sight of goal, but his shot from the edge of the box is weak, and deflects through to Muslera in dribbly fashion. It’s a nice, open match. 14 min: Cavani returns the favour to Suarez, releasing him into a little bit of space down the right. Suarez enters the box, but can’t sort his feet out to get a shot away. His eventual effort is deflected out for another corner; once again the set piece isn’t worthy of comment. 12 min: Ronaldo cuts in from the left and has a belt. The effort’s blocked pretty much at source by Torreira. Brave, because that looks a sore smack. He’ll be fine to continue, but he just needs to roll about a bit first, and make a quick adjustment in his shorts. 11 min: Portugal come back at Uruguay with purpose. From a corner on the right, Guerreiro loops a cross to the far stick, where Fonte leaps highest. His header, from the left-hand corner of the six-yard box, flashes across the face of goal. A bad miss, though it’d have been surely ruled out had it been on target, because Fonte was shoving Vecino in the back. 9 min: That was some long-distance one-two! Just a picture-perfect goal. Or maybe not quite ... Cavani might have converted that chance with his face, as opposed to his forehead. But this is a mere quibble. That was a sensational goal. This is simple, and so brilliant! Cavani, out deep on the right, launches a crossfield pass for Suarez on the left, and peels off. Suarez cuts inside, whips a high cross to the far post, where Cavani, romping infield, smashes a header into the top right! 6 min: Uruguay haven’t let in a goal for six games; can Portugal’s free-scoring talisman put an end to that run? Not yet. There’s a little space for Bernardo Silva, down the right. He turns and tees the ball up for Ronaldo, who sends a low screamer goalwards from 20 yards. It flies straight down Muslera’s throat. 4 min: Nandez and Suarez one-two down the right, the former earning the first corner of the game. Before it can be taken, Godin shoves Pepe in the chest, in the playground style; Pepe falls on his behind. Pure slapstick. The actual corner is a non-event. Here’s Charles Antaki: “Portugal’s change strip is innocuous - white, fair enough. Their real disappointment is giving up on the national-flag-colour-oxblood first-choice shirt of yore. Unique. Scores play in red; who else plays in the colour of blood?” Javier Mascherano? Terry Butcher? 2 min: Ronaldo performs a fancy shuffle down the left. It confuses Uruguay. That allows Joao Mario to scuttle towards the byline and cross deep. Bernardo Silva rises at the far post, but his header is way off target. Both sides have put a marker down already, so that’s promising! 1 min: Uruguay are on the front foot almost immediately, Suarez bothering Fonte down the right, Bentancur winning a ball in the middle of the park he’d no right to win. Nothing much comes of it, but it’s a statement of intent. And we’re off! Portugal get the party started. “Uruguay’s Laxalt sounds like something out of the medicine cabinet, and he looks a quality player from what I saw in the group stage. Fast-acting, fizzy, and doesn’t go down too easy.” Peter Oh, ladies and gentlemen. He’s here all week. Try the Imodium. The teams are out! A cracking atmosphere under the lights at the Fisht Stadium; it’s been one gloriously noisy World Cup. Pennants are exchanged, hands are clasped, patriotic songs are sung, White Stripes riffs are blasted, coins are tossed. We’ll be off very soon! And let’s hope the players remember the average number of goals per game during the knockout stage currently stands at seven, and entertain accordingly. Admittedly the sample size is only one, but the point remains. No pressure, lads! The national anthems: The full version of Uruguay’s Orientales, la Patria o la Tumba lasts for six minutes. Six minutes! It’s practically a jazz odyssey. Beware members of the band nodding out, high on mate. ♩♪ ♫ ♬ This sacred gift, of glory we’ve deserved: tyrants tremble! ♩♪ ♫ ♬ A Portuguesa has something of a grand flavour as well. It was originally written to take a pop at the British. To be fair, we are pretty annoying. ♩♪ ♫ ♬ To arms, to arms! / Over land, over sea / To arms, to arms! / For the Fatherland, fight! / Against the cannons, march on, march on! ♩♪ ♫ ♬ Speaking of Varela ... what a man. Hey, any old excuse to tell the story of Uruguay’s 1950 triumph in this competition, and the greatest game in the World Cup’s long history. Pre-match playtime. Fancy yourself as a budding Fernando Santos? Maybe you want to take a degree course in telecommunications engineering, like the man himself did while playing as a defender for Estoril in the 1970s. Or perhaps you want to pick the Portugal team. We can help you with the latter, at least. Sort of. Sadly we don’t have one of these clever gizmos for Uruguay. But it’s all moot anyway. We all dream of a team of 11 Obdulio Varelas. What’s to discuss? The inner sancta. Uruguay’s world-famous sky-blue kit matches the decor of the Fisht Stadium’s changing rooms. Portugal’s shirt complements it. It would appear they’re not playing in their lovely first-choice red, which is something of a shame. Uruguay make one change to the side that stuffed Russia 3-0 in the last game of Group A. They welcome back Atletico Madrid central defender Jose Gimenez, who replaces big Sebastian Coates, formerly of Liverpool but now of Sporting Lisbon. Portugal make three changes from the XI which scraped past Iran in the final match of Group B. In come Ricardo Pereira of Porto, Valencia striker Goncalo Guedes and Manchester City midfielder Bernardo Silva. Southampton’s Cedric Soares, Besiktas attacker Ricardo Quaresma and Andre Silva of Milan making way. Uruguay: Muslera, Caceres, Gimenez, Godin, Laxalt, Nandez, Torreira, Vecino, Bentancur, Suarez, Cavani. Subs: Campana, Varela, Sanchez, Rodriguez, De Arrascaeta, Stuani, Gaston Silva, Maxi Pereira, Gomez, Coates, Urreta, Martin Silva. Portugal: Rui Patricio, Ricardo Pereira, Pepe, Fonte, Guerreiro, Bernardo Silva, William Carvalho, Adrien Silva, Joao Mario, Goncalo Guedes, Ronaldo. Subs: Lopes, Bruno Alves, Fernandes, Joao Moutinho, Andre Silva, Dias, Bruno Fernandes, Gelson Martins, Mario Rui, Quaresma, Cedric, Beto. Referee: Cesar Arturo Ramos Palazuelos (Mexico). The big preview. Here’s our man in Sochi, Sid Lowe, on Suarez, Ronaldo, lessons learned from the 1954 World Cup, and the dangers of typing the word “shithousery” into a popular internet search engine. We now know that the winners of tonight’s match will face France in the first quarter-final on Friday afternoon. If you were unfortunate enough to miss the changing of the guard, 19-year-old Kylian Mbappe demolishing Argentina as Lionel Messi took his leave of the World Cup stage, relive every moment with Jacob Steinberg’s MBM ... then get on Jonathan Wilson’s match report from the Kazan Arena. You can dress this one up any way you want. But when you boil the bones down, this is Luis Suarez versus Cristiano Ronaldo. You know, apologies to Edinson Cavani, Ricardo Quaresma, Diego Godin, Pepe and all ... bottom line, this is a showdown between two of the greatest players in the world. Hey, there’s nothing wrong with being a little starstruck, it’s the innocent fun of the World Cup. Don’t let that cynical old inner hipster smother your childlike wonder. That doesn’t mean we’re talking about one-man teams, of course ... oh no, because both of these countries have a decent chance of winning this wide-open World Cup. Both boast a superstar; both can rely on a super-strong supporting cast; both are usually parsimonious in defence; both are dangerous in attack; both have been battle-hardened in recent major tournaments. Portugal are the reigning European champions, and were World Cup semi-finalists in 2006; Uruguay made it to the last four in 2010, and plenty who won the 2011 Copa America remain. It wouldn’t be beyond the realms of fantasy if either side lifted the trophy on July 15. Uruguay look in better nick: they won all three of their Group A games, swatting aside hosts Russia 3-0 with contemptuous ease. Portugal by comparison were so nearly knocked out by Iran in Group B, Mehdi Taremi rippling the side netting from close range during the last knockings of the final game. But then Cristiano Ronaldo is after that Golden Boot, and he’s already found the net four times, whereas Suarez has just the two goals to his illustrious name. So it’s swings and roundabouts. There’s little history to go on. These lads have only played each other twice: just before the 1966 World Cup, when a Jose Torres hat-trick won it for Portugal, and at the 1972 Brazil Independence Cup, when the teams drew as the hosts celebrated the 150th anniversary of their going it alone. Nothing at a World Cup. This is a first. And it’s a tough one to call. It could be a grind ... or it could be a cracker. Let’s go with cracker, because it’s the Euro 2016 winners versus the two-time champions of the world! It’s the second round of the 2018 World Cup! It’s on! Kick off: 7pm BST, 9pm at the Fisht Stadium in Sochi.
7||Sajid Javid is Tory activists' choice to be next party leader – pollSajid Javid, the home secretary, is the popular choice of Tory activists to be the party’s next leader, a survey revealed on Saturday. The MP for Bromsgrove came top of in the monthly poll by the ConservativeHome website with the backing of 22% of the 1,107 votes cast. He replaces Jacob Rees-Mogg who last month topped the poll for the fifth time in succession having been either at the top, or second choice to “other”, since the 2017 general election. Rees-Mogg is now the fourth most popular choice, with Michael Gove, the environment secretary, lying second and “other” third. The shift in opinion has been dramatic. Three months ago Javid was polling just 2%. In the wake of his appointment as home secretary, he took 10% of the vote, coming third. Last month, that rose to 13%. The poll is seen as a reliable barometer of grassroots opinion although it can shift quickly. The latest result seems to suggest a move away from finding a replacement from the old team and looking for someone new. Commenting on the result, ConservativeHome editor Paul Goodman said: “There may be a sense that change is coming sooner rather than later – that Theresa May might not be prime minister by this time next year, or even earlier, and that the time has come to think more probingly about a replacement. “Javid may offer what party members seem to have been looking for since we restored the Next Tory Leader question: something new – a change from the old gang. “At any rate, his elevation to the Home Office has clearly persuaded many of our panel members to give him a second look, and some like what they see – especially, perhaps, since he has now come round to backing a clean Brexit.”
10||The Observer view on the school system that does little to help our poorest pupilsBritain’s poor social mobility can be summed up in one unfortunate dynamic: from the moment a child is born, disadvantage begets further disadvantage. We like to think of education as the great leveller that works against this. But a report from the Institute of Education at UCL, reported in the Observer today, shows the opposite: our school system itself amplifies social advantage. So much of the focus of education policy in the past two decades has been on school improvement, with hugely varying results. But what this study highlights is that when schools become better, their intakes also become more affluent. Conversely, when school quality has declined, children from disadvantaged backgrounds tend to pool in those schools. While the research does not draw a causal link, it did find that some schools are engaged in “aggressive marketing campaigns and ‘cream skimming’ aimed at recruiting particular types of students”. The result is one of the most outrageously unjust features of the English school system. Children from the most affluent backgrounds are twice as likely to go to a school rated as “outstanding” as children from the poorest backgrounds. And it is those children for whom school quality matters the most in shaping how they go on to do in life. This injustice is further exacerbated in a system with limited resources. Despite the growing school population, the number of teachers working in English state schools has fallen to its lowest level since 2013. Qualified teachers are leaving the profession at a faster rate than new recruits are joining. The best schools find it easiest to attract the best teachers; low-rated schools in poorer areas suffer most from teacher shortages, forcing them to rely on expensive agency staff, dragging down standards. It’s not just teachers: school funding is more constrained than it has been for decades. The cash each school gets allocated is overwhelmingly determined by its number of pupils. So it is undersubscribed – read underperforming – schools that tend to face the biggest budget struggles. This is further compounded for schools in disadvantaged areas, which are most affected by cuts to local children’s services and are too often left to pick up the pieces of serious behavioural and emotional problems that require support from specialist services. The UK has one of the most socially segregated school systems in the developed world: a huge problem not just in terms of equity, but in terms of the overall performance of the economy. According to the OECD, the more socially mixed a school system, the better it performs. England is the only country in the developed world in which baby boomers have better levels of literacy and numeracy than young adults. Compared with our competitors, we have high numbers of young people from poorer backgrounds who are failed by the system and never given the opportunity to fulfil their potential. Virtually all parents say they want to get their child into a highly rated school, regardless of their social background. But it is generally the more affluent, highly educated parents who have the resources to achieve this. House prices near top comprehensives tend to be 20% higher than they would otherwise be – an average premium of more than £45,000 in these areas. That’s a price that affluent families are more than willing to pay. Moreover, middle-class parents are more likely to conduct extensive research in choosing a school. No one would begrudge any parent doing what they can – within the rules – to get their child into their preferred school. That’s why it is down to government to fix those rules to make them fairer. Schools should no longer be able to run their own admissions, and local authorities should instead be responsible for operating a fair system for all local schools, either allocating places by lottery, or ensuring that each school has a distribution of abilities. Either would result in a far more equitable, socially mixed system. It would be no panacea: in some rural areas social mixing would be hard to achieve while still ensuring children can attend local schools. But it would at least put a stop to the best state schools quickly becoming magnets for pupils from the most affluent backgrounds, which limits the impact of any school improvement on disadvantaged children. Instead, by spending £50m on expanding grammar school places, the government has taken school admissions in entirely the wrong direction. In creaming off the most able pupils, grammars increase social segregation to the detriment of poorer children. In London’s comprehensive school system, children from every social background do better than in Kent, which still has grammars. Reforming admissions would undoubtedly be a big political fight to pick with those middle-class parents who would staunchly defend their right to move house to get their child into the best school. But it’s a fight worth picking. Parents will understandably do everything in their capacity to do best by their child, and that’s usually something to be celebrated and encouraged. But when it comes to state schools, it’s the government’s job to ensure that this doesn’t happen to the detriment of the most disadvantaged children.
11||Australia's middle class is being given a new look, and it's not prettyThis week saw criticism of Labor starting a class war. But the real class war is being fought by those who seek to erase people on low and middle incomes from the debate. And too often the media are willing participants in this erasure. Let us be honest: Australia is a nation whose politicians are for the most part drawn from similar socioeconomic (and education) backgrounds, covered by journalists who (including myself) come from similar backgrounds, and where any interruption to this course of events – such as when Ricky Muir was elected to the Senate – is greeted with a barely disguised level of condescension that someone not university educated or white collar has deigned to enter the sanctum. It is a situation of course not solely devoted to income – gender and especially race are also major factors at play. In positions of power we remain a very white, relatively well-paid male nation (and I speak as one of that group). It is not a situation without consequences. Retirement age of 70? Well, that seems doable to one who sits behind a desk. The shift of jobs to the services sector? Well, after all, who would want to work in a factory? Low levels of industrial disputes? That must be good – let me quote some measure of international competitiveness while I pass over these record low wages growth and wonder at the coincidence. It’s the type of thinking that has journalists asking “Is $120,000 the new rich” because that will generate a headline without even caring that it is more than double the median income. And it is why I have little time for the theatre criticism that can infest political coverage where journalists writing for publications whose target audience is the very wealthiest in our society talk about how Labor’s “class war” attacks on Malcolm Turnbull are poor politics that won’t fly, and are divisive. That’s pretty rich given today low-paid fast-food, hospitality, pharmacy and retail workers around the country are seeing cuts to their penalty rates. Let us not fall into the trap of believing we can’t suggest that the situation and wealth of those in power has no impact on the policies they put forward, even while such policies actually benefit those same people who are putting them in place. Oh no, we must instead keep to the myth that Australia is some egalitarian paradise where our history is one of everyone buckling down and working together to forge a nation against the odds. Bugger the rum rebellion, put John Macarthur on the $2 note, and bask in the warmth of misremembered history. You only need to look at the small handful of names (think Gonski or Murray), who constantly get appointed to head inquiries or to corporate and government boards to see we are a nation where positions of influence are restricted to the few. A nice example of this came earlier this month when the minister for communications and arts announced that Dr Brett Mason (former LNP MP and current ambassador to the Netherlands) had been appointed as chair of the council of the National Library of Australia, replacing Ryan Stokes (the managing director and chief executive of Seven Group Holdings). That same day Mitch Fifield also announced the appointment of the new chair of the council of the National Gallery of Australia – one Ryan Stokes. Instead of acknowledging this, we must play the same game – pretending those in power, with wealth and privilege, achieved that power, wealth and privilege not due to any systemic circumstances, while in the meantime not daring to suggest they may have a vested interest in advocating policies which will ensure that system is not changed in any way that would weaken their position. We pretend that we’re not a nation of class or powerful elites – that’s England and the United States. At least Turnbull no longer attempts to spin his life with a veneer of egalitarian myth. When he first became leader of the opposition in 2008, he felt the need to downplay his wealth, and in his first speech as leader spoke of how “I know what it is like to be very short of money. I know what it is like to live in rented flats.” It caused the Australian’s Jack the Insider to note with magnificent precision that it made Turnbull “the only man in Australia to have moved from rags to riches without changing postcodes”. Now he sees little need to play the poor working class boy made good. And similarly we should not need to pretend that policies won’t greatly benefit him and his peers while also exacerbating inequality. And neither should we hesitate to note his common strategy of erasing those on median or lower incomes from the debate. We see this erasure in his speeches where he talks of “school principals and police superintendents” to describe those deserving of a tax cuts as being somehow not wealthy – indeed as very much middle class. The base level salary for a Victorian police superintendent is $154,412, the median salary for a Victorian school principal in 2015-16 was $113,446. That someone would use such incomes to talk up tax cuts says all you need to know about who he sees as the most deserving. And here I must admit the media is often hostage to this erasure as well. Upon the passing of the income tax cuts, one newspaper ran the line “What do low-medium income earners get?” and noted that “From July next year, Australians who earn up to $125,333 will get up to $530 cash-back when they lodge their tax return”. In 2017 the median income was $52,988 and the top 10% of employees earned more than $109,668. Congratulations to those in the top 10%, you’re now officially middle-income Australia. It means those who are actually middle and low-income workers are effectively erased from the debate – their situation ignored, and where to even raise it draws a rebuke – how dare you play the class war card! Why do you hate deserving middle class like the police superintendent? The budget, despite what we might be led to believe, given the tax cuts that have just been passed without any savings measures attached, is not a magic pudding. Money spent on tax cuts to those presented as middle class but who are actually wealthy, means less money for those on actual low and middle incomes. We do have a class war in Australia, and right now it is being won by those who not only would have you believe it is not occurring – and should not be mentioned – but who also would have you believe that those who are actually well off are doing it tough. We need to be honest about who makes decisions in this country, how they are made and who they benefit. And we need to be honest about what is the reality for people on low and middle incomes. Failure to do so not only erases them from the debate, it ensures the system remains unchanged. • Greg Jericho is a Guardian Australia columnist
10||How the drive to ‘empower’ our schools created chaos in classroomsCarolyn Roberts, the head of Thomas Tallis school, a comprehensive in south-east London, is facing an agonising decision. The school has always prided itself on embracing the creativity of its students and the arts, but now it is grappling with whether the curriculum should be overhauled to meet targets designed to ensure that the majority of pupils complete a core of maths, English and science GCSEs. “We are consulting staff and parents about whether we follow the accountability measure to entirely shift our curriculum,” Roberts explains. “If we took a decision that the measure was the most important thing, that would mean fewer choices for students. Things that weren’t compulsory might sink or die. While it’s unlikely that the arts in our school would be a casualty of that, that is why the take-up of arts at GCSE is falling year-on-year.” The prevailing rhetoric of educational reforms since 2010 has been to empower schools and their leaders, stripping away the control of local authorities. The drive to turn schools into academies, outside council control, was turbocharged. Schools were encouraged to join chains of other academies to help them to improve. Power moved away from local councils towards top-performing schools and their heads, who were lauded for their performance and given responsibility for improving others. Eight years down the line, however, the findings of a seminal work on England’s education system published in the Observer reveal a tension at the heart of the nation’s classrooms. According to the UCL Institute of Education, the drive to increase school power has been accompanied by a web of accountability, attainment and progress targets that boxes schools in. It creates, the researchers say, a “chaotic process of centralisation”. Whitehall ends up with greater control over schools, while free sources of support dry up. Roberts, now into her third headship, has always opted to work in schools that remain under local authority control. “It always seemed to me that the rhetoric around autonomy was unconvincing,” she says. “I never understood what we were trying to escape from. It is the accountability structure and progress tables that are the things that constrain our lives. That’s nothing to do with the governance structure that we have.” Others involved in drawing up policy since 2010 warn that too much emphasis was placed on the benefits of giving schools more power. “There was always undue optimism among some of the advocates of academisation about the potential benefits in what in England was already quite an autonomous schools system,” says David Laws, the former education minister who now heads the Education Policy Institute. “What we know is the most successful part of the academisation programme was the early part of it under New Labour. Those early academies had absolutely everything thrown at them. They were academised school by school, with huge ministerial intervention. The new governors were almost hand-picked. They often brought in the best headteachers to replace failing management teams. They had new buildings. Sponsors had to put in extra cash. “Our research shows that much of the programme since then has had little impact on standards. If the same people are running a school just with a different nameplate outside, it is optimistic to think they will suddenly make a dramatic change in performance.” The UCL study finds no statistically significant benefit for student attainment from the drive to force secondary schools to become chains of academies. There is also mounting evidence that the system has created a desperate scramble for students that, despite attempts to alter the way schools are judged, is seeing poorer, more difficult students disappear from top and improving schools. The fear is that government policies are increasing inequality. Meanwhile, the UCL report also raises the dangers of handing so much power to favoured, charismatic headteachers. There have been a number of high-profile falls from grace. Former “superhead” Jean Else was stripped of her damehood in 2011 after it emerged she had failed to observe minimum standards in recruiting and promoting staff. Sir Greg Martin, once seen as Michael Gove’s favourite headteacher, was criticised when it emerged that he had a £400,000 salary, partly as a result of operating a leisure centre on the school site. These tensions are made harder by a funding and teacher recruitment crisis that has led Roberts to conclude that it is the most difficult period for teaching that she has ever experienced. “Head teachers will try to act as a barrier between the pressures and the classroom, but it is very difficult,” she says. “Workload becomes an issue and fewer teachers will stay over a 20, 30 or 40-year career. We are anxious about the future,” she says.
4||Edinson Cavani sends Uruguay to World Cup last eight as Portugal bow outCristiano Ronaldo walked Edinson Cavani out of this game, helping the Uruguayan to the touchline, but not before Cavani scored the goals that put Portugal out of the World Cup. Cavani departed with 20 minutes remaining, slowly making his way around the edge of the pitch, limping slightly, a lost look on his face after he felt a pain in his calf that prevented him from continuing. Two superb strikes took Uruguay through to the quarter-finals but, while the striker said he hoped that it was nothing, he departed the stadium hobbling and there are doubts now that he will be with them when they face France in Nizhny Novgorod on Friday. Twenty minutes after Cavani departed it was Ronaldo who looked lost: his World Cup is over and he would not be drawn after the match on whether he will continue with Portugal, though the manager Fernando Santos expressed the hope that he will. “There is a tournament in September, the Uefa League of Nations, and we hope that he is with us so that he can help the young players who will need their captain’s example,” Santos said. As the final seconds ticked away Portugal threw everything they could at this, the goalkeeper Rui Patrício sent forward and almost heading goalwards, the Portuguese bench leaping with every tackle and tumble, calling for the VAR to rescue them. But in the end it could not. Cavani had gone but he brought delight to a resilient and often impressive Uruguay, built on solidarity and skill, whose manager Óscar Tabárez talked afterwards about their “absolute commitment”. France will not welcome playing them even if Cavani is absent – without him Luis Suárez occupied an entire defence alone. It was that kind of night and it ended with supporters in blue and white singing. It had begun with a goal that was genuinely breathtaking: brutal in its beauty, beautiful in its brutality – a 100‑yard one-two taking them from halfway line to byline, the ball twice smashed high, hard and with incredible precision diagonally from one side of the pitch to the other and back before it flew into the net. Rodrigo Betancur turned neatly, setting the ball rolling, the play spread to the right for Cavani. His strike partner Suárez was almost the entire width of the pitch away, but while they were distanced they came together once again – the story of their footballing lives. Born a month apart in Salto, population 104,000, Suárez left for Montevideo at seven and they did not know each other until they met at 19 but they have played together almost ever since, 207 Uruguay caps between them. Here they did so to devastating and dramatic effect. Cavani drove a long diagonal across towards the left for Suárez that could be heard from the stands. Suárez controlled, ran at Ricardo, cut inside and sent it back again. From beyond the top corner of the box he bent a vicious, superb ball in a fast, long arc to the far post where Cavani was running in. It might have hit Cavani on the shoulder or the face but the result was perfect, the ball rocketing in. It was a superb start, despite the fact that the first two attempts on goal had been Portugal’s, Bernardo Silva heading over and Ronaldo shooting sharply in a game that had begun as might have been predicted, Cavani unlucky to be penalised as he turned Pepe and then Diego Godín pushing over the Portugal defender while they waited for a corner, though with the ball not in play that one was free. Others would be too, the referee seemingly reluctant to pull out cards. Next, José Fonte headed over and Ronaldo had a shot blocked, but Uruguay appeared reasonably comfortable. There were crosses in, but mostly they were just headed out again. And if Godín and Giménez did not get to them, Fernando Muslera did, advancing from his line. There was sharpness when they sprung too, Betancur offering clarity, Martín Cáceres overlapping, Suárez looking sharp. And just before half-time, Cavani brought down Godín’s wild hoof inside the area, but scuffed his shot past the near post. The game soon reopened. Bernardo Silva’s ball in was flicked back to Adrien Silva. His shot was blocked but from the corner, taken short and eventually delivered by Raphaël Guerreiro, Pepe leapt behind Ronaldo and Godín to head the equaliser. Having conceded their first goal in 2018, Uruguay were under pressure now, unable to get out until a long ball released them and put them ahead once more. Thumped forward by Muslera, it dropped near the Portugal area and Betancur rolled it to Cavani who curled a wonderful shot first time into the corner. He departed not long after, leaving Uruguay with a lead and 20 minutes to protect it. It was not going to be easy. Bernardo Silva offered a little more subtlety to what had previously been a more frontal attack, although he did hit the best opportunity over when the ball escaped the scrambling Muslera. His run on one side drew a corner and then, on the other side, Matías Vecino stood firm as Ronaldo dribbled into the area. There was tiredness and nerves. When Carlos Sánchez gave up possession, Ricardo Quaresma’s curling cross with the outside of his foot just evaded Ronaldo’s leap. As the momentum built, Suárez became an island battling with Pepe but often beating him. And Portuguese chances were few: two long and inoffensive Manuel Fernandes shots and a sliced effort from Ronaldo way wide before Diego Laxalt dived to clear. Then, a long ball found Suárez again, alone against the world, who got away from three defenders and crossed to Cristian Rodríguez. His control escaped him, leaving more minutes of nerves, but Cavani’s two glorious goals would prove to be enough.
7||Cabinet anarchy as Chequers summit loomsEarly on Wednesday evening a middle-ranking minister stopped on his way to a meeting in the House of Commons and offered the following observations about the government in which he serves. “There is no discipline at all. Everyone thinks they can say just what they want. It is not good for anyone or good for the country.” Crucial decisions on Brexit had to be made within days, and time was running out, he said. But within the cabinet, disagreements were widening as the moment of truth approached. Ministers were briefing against one another in public, giving an impression that the ship of state was heading for the rocks just when the national interest required those steering it to pull together. “She has to lead,” the minister added. “The can has been kicked into the corner on Brexit. It can’t be kicked any farther.” He then headed off, turning back for a second, to sum it all up as “midsummer madness”. Normally ministers and senior MPs will show some caution when having private conversations with journalists at Westminster. They will at least make efforts not to be overheard. But these days they brief without fear on every corner, in every cloister. Soon after the minister departed, a former cabinet minister who has worked for the Conservative party for several decades strolled by and was happy to talk. The atmosphere was dreadful, he said, and Theresa May’s position was becoming more perilous by the day. “I don’t think the [leadership campaign] telephone lines are being installed quite yet, but it’s pretty clear that the endgame is afoot,” he said. “Things are very, very bad indeed. The end of Thatcher doesn’t seem as bad as things feel now. How does it happen? May upsets the Brexiteers, and they bang in the letters [calling for a leadership contest]. People like me will support her because without her all hell will break loose. But the whole thing is on a hair trigger. If she can get through to 23 July, everyone will be going away for their holiday. But it could be a bloody autumn. They are more frightened of David Davis resigning than anything else.” Westminster is always a hothouse in high summer, in which disagreements and splits within parties seem more important to those inside the bubble than they do for the world outside. Now, arguably, the reverse is the case. Last week’s burst of Tory bloodletting came less than a week after the EU withdrawal bill had passed the last of its big parliamentary hurdles en route to the statute book. But rather than bank that success and move on, as one, to the next, even bigger challenge – agreeing a united negotiating position on what Brexit will actually mean, at an awayday at Chequers this Friday – the cabinet did the reverse. It went into meltdown. It began last weekend with some of the most senior ministers in May’s team falling out over whether the UK’s biggest businesses had the right to speak up about the risk to jobs from a hard Brexit. What Brexiters fear most is that employment and contracts will go abroad and that this will turn public opinion against a clean break with the EU. The cabinet infighting was triggered by a chilling warning from Airbus that it could leave the UK in the event of a hard Brexit, putting around 14,000 jobs at risk. BMW then gave similar gloomy assessments. The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, is supposed to have reacted at a private reception by saying, “Fuck business.” So great is his, and the Brexiters’, desire to leave everything to do with the EU that he even seemed prepared to put at risk the Tory party’s close relationship with their friends and donors in business in the name of Brexit purity. It all went downhill from there. Cabinet unity and collective responsibility crumbled. The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, went on television to say that it was “entirely inappropriate” for big businesses like Airbus to say such things, only to be contradicted by the business secretary, Greg Clark, who slapped his colleague down, saying “any company and any industry that supports the livelihood of so many working people in this country is entitled to be listened to with respect”. Tory donors in business despaired. Alexander Temerko, who has given hundreds of thousands of pounds to the party, said that May was not suited to be leader. “There is no economic and business agenda,” he argued. “Business will support clarity. All of us, with small exceptions, say we need to be in the customs union and be part of EU regulation. Theresa is a good lady with strong morality, but she doesn’t have political intuition.” Throughout last week the arguments spiralled like a playground brawl, with everyone piling in, working off their own frustrations, showing they could throw good punches too. Perhaps fearing their time in high office might be limited, ministers appeared to be deliberately raising their profiles while they had the chance. The defence secretary, Gavin Williamson, was seemingly sore that the NHS had received promises of an extra £20bn a year while his department had got nothing. If it did not get the same, some of his people briefed, he could bring May down. Asked why cabinet anarchy had descended when unity was demanded more than at any time in recent history, a former minister said she could only think it was fear of failure and the human instinct to blame others for impending catastrophe. “A sense of doom seems to have stirred selfish instincts of self-preservation. They all fear we are heading for no deal and disaster. Now it’s every man, every woman for himself and herself. It is about salvaging reputations.” Levels of farce were reached on Tuesday night when Liz Truss, chief secretary to the Treasury, targeted Michael Gove and other ministers for meddling too much in people’s lives. “Too often we’re hearing about not drinking too much, eating too many doughnuts, drinking from disposable cups through plastic straws, or enjoying the warm glow of our wood-burning Goves … I mean stoves,” she said in a speech at the London School of Economics. “I can see their point: there’s enough hot air and smoke at the environment department already.” Was she joking? Perhaps, but cabinet ministers would not risk such attempts at humour in normal times. Her comments about doughnuts came just three days after Hunt had announced a long-awaited anti-obesity strategy. Brexit disunity was spreading like a virus across the government’s entire domestic agenda. “Brexit is destroying the party,” said another former minister. “What are we now? Are we pro-business? Are we internationalist? Are we pro- or anti-regulation?” This Friday the disunited cabinet heads for Chequers, charged with agreeing the content of a white paper that is supposed to contain the vital elements of UK policy on Brexit that can then be negotiated on with Brussels over the next few months. The prime minister is said to want an agreement that would involve staying closely linked to the customs union and single market in goods, though Downing Street insists, to placate Brexiters, that will definitely not mean accepting free movement of workers. It looks like another unrealistic attempt to square the circle. EU leaders have already made clear they will never accept what they regard as more demands to pick their cherries on departure. And another problem for May is that Johnson and Davis say a customs deal that in any way keeps the UK linked to EU customs rules and institutions will be unacceptable to them. It would be Brexit in Name Only (Bino). The likes of Clark and Hammond, on the other hand, want maximum closeness to the customs union and single market. Cabinet ministers are split many ways. One arch-Eurosceptic in the cabinet told the Observer that in the end they may have to accept temporary membership of the customs union beyond Brexit and the two-year transition, and decouple later. This, the cabinet minister argued, was because Tory Remainers might well win the next round of parliamentary battles over the trade and customs bills and insert pro-customs union amendments into them. The prime minister has decided the meeting will not end until ministers have reached a deal. But no one is betting much on a puff of white smoke rising from the Chequers chimney on Friday night, signalling a truly meaningful deal. Too many “crunch meetings” have been and gone over recent months to allow that kind of optimism to take hold. There are now only about six weeks of negotiating time left on Brexit, when parliamentary and Brussels holidays and the party conference season are taken into account, before a deal has to be done in October. Any agreement then has to be voted on by the European parliament and by MPs at Westminster before Brexit day on 29 March next year. Without a deal, there will be no two-year transition period, no soft landing, and instead a hard descent into chaos of the kind that businesses say will drive them abroad. Brussels looks on in despair. After May attended a summit there on Thursday, the prime minister of Belgium, Charles Michel, said: “The feeling that dominates is the impression that the Brits continue to negotiate with the Brits and not with the EU. The red lines set by the UK are globally incompatible with the fundamental principles of the EU.” More than two years on from the referendum, with time fast running out, and the cabinet unable to agree a negotiating position on issues as fundamental as customs and trade, there seems to be only one thing that everyone in the UK and EU agrees on: the prospects for a good deal for all on Brexit look bleaker than ever.
12||The voters trust May, so ministers now need to unite behind herKing Sisyphus cleverly cheated death but was punished with eternal labour: pushing a boulder up a mountain just to see it roll down again. Theresa May might have empathised as she approached yet another EU summit this week. Her seemingly endless task is to deliver an orderly departure from the European Union, with no overall majority in Parliament and in the teeth of opposition from some who still delude themselves that the referendum vote can be ignored. The PM is winning considerable support in the country for her determined perseverance. Unpicking four decades of EU law and regulation so closely entwined with our own statute was always going to be complicated. The arithmetic of this parliament makes it doubly so. The main opposition party might have offered much the same prescription for leaving the Single Market and the Customs Union when it was seeking votes at last year’s general election, but Labour has played all the slippery games of opposition ever since. Governments expect to have to navigate around the traps and obstacles laid for them from the other side of the house. It is harder to see how anyone on the government side can think it is in the national interest to send Mrs May to negotiate the best future relationship with the EU with anything less than a united team behind her. Securing the passage of the European Union withdrawal act after hundreds of hours of parliamentary debate was a moment of huge significance: it provides for the end of the supremacy of EU law in the UK and allows a smooth transition by transposing existing EU law into our own domestic statute. Over the past couple of weeks, most Conservative backbench MPs who have had particular concerns about our exit from the EU have recognised the need to compromise and support this central element of the government’s programme: allowing the prime minister to go off to Brussels with a solid – if not resounding – vote of confidence from the House of Commons. This was built on as the government settled 50 years of dithering over airport capacity in the south-east, securing a majority of 296 for a new runway at Heathrow: supported by more Labour MPs than voted with their leadership to oppose it. This too is a ringing endorsement of our commitment to a future as a global trading nation. So, backbench MPs on the government side have seen the importance of unity in the national interest. Even an increasing number of Labour members have been prepared to recognise that we are dealing with issues that are far bigger than party politics. It is all the more remarkable, therefore, that it has been so difficult to maintain discipline around the cabinet table. Our system of government has been built on a long tradition of collective responsibility – lively debate behind closed doors followed by ministers coalescing around the agreed position. As we move into the final stages of our efforts to agree a close cooperative relationship with the EU after Brexit, it has never been more important for ministers to observe the cardinal rule of cabinet government. The danger of disunity at the top is not just that it makes the prime minister’s job more difficult in negotiations with Brussels, and therefore puts at risk the good Brexit deal that is in reach, but it also gives an impression of division to the country. Electorates these days are volatile, but one thing is certain: they do not vote for divided parties. They rejected decisively the divided Tory party in 1997. If we were to let Labour in again, it would be a disaster for this country. It’s not just backbench Conservative MPs who expect ministers to pull together behind May: the great swathe of the electorate which either voted Leave, or voted Remain but recognises that a united team will achieve a better trading relationship for the future than a divided one, expects it too. • Graham Brady is chairman of the 1922 committee
4||Fernando Hierro – Spain’s emergency manager with a pastoral touchThe message arrived very late on the night Spain played their opening match against Portugal, so Miguel Linares did not see it until the following morning. When he looked at his phone, he says he could hardly believe it: it was from the national team manager, Fernando Hierro. The day before Linares had announced that, out of contract at 35, he was leaving second division Real Oviedo, where he had played for four seasons. During one of them – and not an especially successful one in 2016-17 – his manager had been Hierro, who now wrote from Russia to wish him well and offer thanks for everything he had done. “Me? I’m a pintado, a nobody,” Linares says. “He had just started as Spain manager, it’s 3am, and he’s messaging me? I looked at it: ‘I can’t believe this.’ He’s got so much going on and he thinks of me. It’s incredible. It makes your hairs stand on end. “That tells you what kind of person he is. You get coaches who are nothing, who’ve played three Copa del Rey games – you can’t even look at them, they act like you owe them your life – and then there’s Hierro, who’s been everything in football and he thinks of everyone. His humility isn’t normal. In 20 years, I’ve never met anyone like him.” The captain of Real Madrid, the captain of Spain, Hierro played more than 800 games. A tough, talented, imposing centre-back, he might be the finest defender Spain has produced. Twice the sporting director at the Spanish Football Federation, the director of football at Málaga, the assistant coach to Carlo Ancelotti, he has indeed been everything. Except the one thing he had just become when he messaged Linares – a manager at the highest level. His coaching career extends to that one year at Oviedo. Defeated 15 times, they finished eighth, missing the play-offs on the final day by two points. “I am the seleccionador because of the circumstances, not my CV,” Hierro said when he stepped in after Julen Lopetegui was sacked two days before the World Cup began. He had arrived in Russia as the sporting director. In a radio interview he was asked if he would ever be Spain manager. “I’m not even contemplating it,” he replied. A day and a half later, he was Spain manager, thrust in a little reluctantly. “I came in a suit, I’ll leave in a tracksuit,” he said. Hierro also said he would change as little as possible. That was not really his role – and at Oviedo he was not an especially interventionist coach during games. But now, as Spain prepare for a last-16 game against Russia after a knockout phase that did not entirely convince, the pressure builds. Virtually everyone is demanding change; some, a revolution. It is time, they say, for Hierro to be a manager. Few, though, really know if he really is a manager, or at least what kind. “Oviedo was an enriching experience, fundamental for me,” Hierro said, yet when he departed, the city’s paper, La Nueva España, wrote: “There are doubts about his ability on the bench. He says he wants to be a coach and sounds convinced but his first experience has seen him stand out more in organisational and institutional questions than actually coaching.” After Oviedo, Hierro returned to the federation as the sporting director. When it came to getting this job, it seemed he had one fundamental thing going for him: he was there. But the only players to have worked with him insist that is not fair. He was a natural choice. “When I saw Lopetegui had been sacked, I imagined Hierro was a possibility,” says the Oviedo full-back Diego Johannesson. The Oviedo striker Toché adds: “I was delighted for him – he’s one of the best people I’ve met in football and has the capacity to succeed. He’s very intelligent and knows how to get into the players’ heads.” Linares says: “I thought straight away: he’s the ideal person, there’s no one better. A good coach, prepared, qualified. As for the lack of experience, everyone starts somewhere.” The former Swansea forward Michu was among Hierro’s players at Oviedo. “He was a huge figure at Madrid and with Spain, his career is impeccable, we respected him enormously and he got us to the edge of the play-offs. “Oviedo is a difficult place. This season [when they finished seventh, missing the play-offs] showed that. Did people expect better results? Maybe. But it was not as bad as some want to make out. “As a person, he is a gentleman from head to toes, 10/10. His group management is exceptional. You’ll find very, very few people who don’t speak highly of him.” This is a recurring theme. The pun is inevitable: at Oviedo, some expected “mano de hierro”, which translates as an “iron fist” and also “Hierro’s hand”. Instead they got someone with what’s known as “left hand” – a more pastoral touch, vital when taking over Spain at a time of crisis, making him the perfect person according to his former players. He visited Toché in hospital after a knee ligament injury – when no longer Oviedo manager – and Johannesson talks about a coach who would embrace everyone, someone who talked and listened, who “liked to exchange ideas, was approachable and always tried to create a good atmosphere”. It was not just Hierro, either. With Spain he has been joined by two former Oviedo colleagues: the fitness coach, Juan Carlos Martínez, and the assistant coach, Julián Calero. “They’re a very good partnership,” Linares says of Hierro and Calero. “Julián was the leader tactically and they’d talk constantly.” Johannesson says: “Calero led sessions with Hierro adding details. They complemented each other.” Toché adds: “Calero did more tactical work with the group; one on one, Hierro is the best.” Oviedo shifted between styles, among them 4-2‑3‑1, 4-4-2 and 4-3‑3, and there was a sense sometimes that although the details were good, they had not found an overarching idea. Linares recalls moving to the left wing and it working well. Hierro had seen something in him that, over almost 20 years, he had not seen in himself. “Tactically he talked to us about the need to close off the passing avenues inside,” Linares says. “He talked about a strong square inside, recovering positions quickly, preventing counters. That’s what Spain are struggling with. We worked on that a lot.” Linares also says the free-kick routine from which Diego Costa scored against Portugal is one Oviedo did “a thousand times”, with David Fernández as Sergio Busquets. How far the lessons from Oviedo can, or should, be applied to Spain is another issue. “What we did isn’t applicable to Spain and people have to understand that,” Michu says. “Oviedo is very, very, very far from there. Even a crossing and finishing drill with me, Toché, Linares is not the same as with them – they’re the best in the world.” Toché says: “It was a very difficult year. He wanted to play from deep but reality got in the way. He had a squad that found it hard to do that, then there was a period when we conceded a lot so they wanted to close off, play more on the counterattack. With Oviedo, you might have 50% of the ball. Spain always have the ball.” That is not about to change, for all the calls for a revolution. “You can’t change anything. He’s there on the rebound, the players are already there,” Linares says. “He’s not going to force anything and nor should he. The idea is clear. You have to manage the group.” Stepping up was not easy but the players who have worked with him insist he is the right man for it. “A revolution? You want the guy who took over two days before the World Cup started to start a revolution?” Michu says. “You know how you’re going to play: no one’s going to hoof it. Two days before, he wasn’t thinking of being seleccionador. It was a complicated, unexpected moment and it fell to him. He had to stand up. “Now they’re through, in first place, on the theoretically better side of the draw. People say: ‘We were lucky, it was VAR,’ but that’s the World Cup. Spain are through, Germany aren’t for example. “He’s been coach for a fortnight. There’s virtually no time to train tactically, you have to prepare to compete. He’s there now and he knows how to handle the pressure. It’s Russia, Putin in the directors’ box, the stadium full, Moscow but the team is good and he’s been in thousands of situations like this. “Whatever happens, people will go mad: if he wins the World Cup, he will be the best manager in the world; if he loses, he’s a disaster. If we get there and we win it with [Iago] Aspas scoring in the 92nd minute with VAR, great.” Linares says: “It would be a huge pleasure for all of us who know him.”
4||Maurizio Sarri set to be announced as Chelsea manager before players returnChelsea finally hope to resolve their managerial situation in advance of the return of their non-World Cup players for pre-season training at the beginning of next week, with Maurizio Sarri set to replace Antonio Conte. The club has been in a state of flux since the end of the season, with Conte expecting to be sacked and Sarri teed up as a replacement, only for talks over compensation to delay the process. There is now an acceptance at Chelsea that the process has to gather pace, with those first-team squad members not involved in Russia having been told to report back to Cobham on 9 July. The playing staff have been in the dark over the managerial situation and, until last week, had been unaware as to when they should return. Their first friendly is against Perth Glory in Australia on 23 July and Conte, as a precaution, had drawn up a pre-season programme should he remain in charge. However, the expectation is Sarri will be in situ by the time the players report back, with the remainder of the summer likely to prove hectic. The record signing, Álvaro Morata, is expected to hold talks with the club’s hierarchy to determine his future after a disappointing first season in English football. The Spaniard posted a message on Instagram on Friday suggesting he wants to make a more favourable impression second time round – “Very exciting to start again. The past was hard but that is only one more reason to begin fighting again” – but Chelsea will assess his state of mind first-hand. If a suitable bid is lodged, the £58m signing could move on. Chelsea are making progress on potential incoming transfers, with sources in Italy suggesting Conte has had no input over potential targets. Talks are ongoing with CSKA Moscow over Aleksandr Golovin, who would cost around £27m, but confirmation of arrivals is likely only after the World Cup. There is interest, too, in the 23-year-old Juventus defender Daniele Rugani, and Alisson Becker at Roma has been mooted as a potential replacement for Thibaut Courtois if the latter moves. Sarri would be content to welcome that trio. There has been a rejig in the coaching setup at Cobham, with Andy Myers replacing Jody Morris as under-18s manager and Chris Jones, a fitness coach at the club for 12 years, having joined Morris and Frank Lampard at Derby County as head of performance. He will split his time between the clubs until the start of the season before leaving Chelsea. Negotiations have been ongoing between intermediaries seeking to secure Sarri’s release from his contract at Napoli – who have replaced him with Carlo Ancelotti – with Chelsea then to address Conte’s compensation. The Italian has 12 months to run on his £9m-a-year contract and, having made clear his frustrations last summer in the wake of his team’s title success, he has kept his counsel as he waits to be informed whether he will go into a third season in charge.
4||Argentina and Messi’s World Cup tilt is lost in translation against FranceAs Argentina’s defenders punted the ball from net to centre circle for the third time, Lionel Messi gazed down with hands on hips and you wondered who he would be more tempted to curse. Would a stray dark thought double down on the figure of Franco Armani, who had just let Kylian Mbappé’s shot through his legs to undo the work – and it had not all been good – that Argentina had put in so far? Perhaps a special place in hell would be reserved for Jorge Sampaoli for giving him such Atlas-like responsibility and styling a side that, behind their figurehead, appeared bereft from the get-go. Or maybe there would be harsh self‑flagellation, wondering exactly what he had been doing when, persuaded by Edgardo Bauza, he reversed his decision to retire from international football two years ago. It had been an occasion that tantalised you, often at unexpected moments, with the idea that Messi might get to fight another day in an increasingly desperate-looking quest to lift the game’s biggest prize. During the national anthems the camera settled upon his face, so often inscrutable, and was that the hint of a smile? Kazan Arena was, at best estimate, 70% Argentina supporters and as they bounced to the strains of Himno Nacional Messi seemed genuinely amused. Perhaps the sight of four tribunes pulsating with Albiceleste on the edge of the Tatarstan steppe would alleviate all that pressure; perhaps an error‑strewn group stage had simply been the kind of illusion that once afflicted parched horseback raiders out in the grasslands. In the end, the horror was simply confirmed. Earlier in the day many of those South American supporters had checked into tenements in the stadium’s hinterland, fumbling between languages with local property holders as they fulfilled Airbnb appointments. This World Cup has been a breakthrough moment for live use of Google Translate, certainly in Russia’s provincial cities, and Argentina were lost without a footballing equivalent. They are a team who seem set up to cope, to get by as best they can, until an individual moment changes everything and Messi was on a hiding to nothing from the start. He began as a false 9 with Ángel Di María and Cristian Pavón either side of him; the thought was, presumably, that he could pull France’s defenders around while the wide men made hay in behind but, on the rare occasions that bore fruit, Argentina had nobody to attack their low crosses. Messi had one touch inside the France penalty area in the first half; the problem was that if he did not stitch things together nobody else would and, in a backhanded way, Di María’s spectacular equaliser underlined that if Argentina were to pull this off it would not be on account of a cunning plan falling into place. The biggest disservice, though, was done by those charged with giving Messi the platform for another bail-out. Éver Banega’s passing range, showcased with the wondrous sand-wedged ball that Messi tamed so thrillingly against Nigeria, was supposed to be the key that released him but this time the midfielder miscontrolled a simple pass and Mbappé flew away to win France’s penalty. In lukewarm pursuit was Javier Mascherano, spluttering earnestly like a man determined to let the children who had stolen his wallet know they were in for a hiding. It was a scene that repeated itself throughout the game and it is unfair to single out Mascherano given that none of Argentina’s back eight – nine if you count Federico Fazio who, as Mbappé’s second goal proved, was clearly not introduced at half-time for his speed – had the faintest notion of how to steady the ship. When Messi took optimistic aim and, via Gabriel Mercado’s wafted boot, put Argentina ahead the notion of the world’s greatest player completing his own against-all-odds story briefly seemed to make sense. But Kazan’s mural painters, who worked overnight to hurriedly daub Messi’s likeness alongside an image of Cristiano Ronaldo that had appeared outside Argentina’s hotel, might be asked to get their mops and buckets out now. The last 16, we were warned while basking in the afterglow of such a rumbustious group stage, was where the fun stopped and the real stuff kicked in; that half-smile, though, was the only hint of levity Messi and Argentina have seen all month.
8||Reece Prescod and Dina Asher-Smith storm to British 100m titlesWhen Reece Prescod arrived for breakfast on Saturday he wore a T-shirt with a solitary word on it – Berlin. It was a sign of his confidence, and his powers of prophecy. A few hours later, the 22-year-old showed he was Britain’s best sprinter as he glided away from a stacked field to book his place at the European Championships in the German capital. He will be joined by Dina Asher-Smith, who stormed away to win the women’s 100m in 10.97sec – a championship record – and Morgan Lake, who set a personal best by clearing 1.97m in the high jump. Prescod was hoping to go even better by breaking Linford Christie’s 25-year-old British 100m record of 9.87sec. However, he could manage only a modest 10.06, the result of getting away from the blocks before he got in his stride. From then on, though, he was deeply impressive – gliding past Zharnel Hughes, who took the second automatic place in 10.13, and CJ Ujah, who was third, to win his second national title. “Everyone was watching me, putting the pressure on,” admitted Prescod. “But I got myself in a good zone, ran hard to the line and came away with the win, so I’m really happy.” Afterwards he attributed his victory to his mental strength, which he said had partly come from watching YouTube clips of how Anthony Joshua and Michael Jordan handled the white heat of competition. “It is about taking bits of what they say about mentality,” he said. “Even though I am in a different field it is about embracing that – training hard, preparing right and coming to the championships and doing what you need to do. My mental game is what is going to take me to that next level. “I have also spoken to Greg Rutherford and CJ but there is so much on YouTube with the world we live in. I go on there, put in motivation video and get Kobe Bryant, Michael Jordan and take bits from each. I am at a stage where I don’t want to waste any opportunities.” He has every confidence that he can win 100m gold in Berlin – and believes that a British 1-2-3 is also possible. “Me and the boys are doing well,” he added. “Zharnel is in good shape, and me and CJ will be ready to go, so I don’t see why not.” As for Christie’s record, he is just as confident that will come too. “It is about the right conditions and field. If I am surrounded by the top guys in the world I don’t see why not. It is in reach. It definitely will happen.” Asher-Smith, meanwhile, was delighted with her third sub 11-second 100m of the season, running away from the field at halfway to beat Daryll Neita and Bianca Williams. “I can tend to get out great and especially when I race the girls in the Diamond League I’m in a good position at 60m and then they come and overtake me,“ she said. “It’s been a big focus, to end the races faster and stronger. We’re looking to push on to faster times as the season goes on but I’m happy.” It was a far cry from her performance on this track a year ago when – hampered by her recovery from a broken foot – she could run only 11.56sec. “It shows what a difference just being healthy makes. This time last year I was still in pain with my foot, just about running so I would be eligible for the 200m in London. It’s been a bit of a strange year, lots of improvements but I’m just happy to get my third sub-11.” There was annoyance in some quarters as Laura Muir raced the 800m heats despite not appearing on the list of entrants on the official website. As expected, she breezed through to Sunday’s final, where she will meet her fellow Scot Lynsey Sharp and Shelayna Oskan-Clarke. Sharpe, for one, did not appear happy with the late switch. “It made for an interesting dynamic, especially when she gets added to the event on the night before the heats – which isn’t necessarily how the rules stand,” she said. “There seems to be exemptions for some people.” • This article was amended on 2 July 2018 to correct Morgan Lake’s high jump personal best. She cleared 1.97m not 1.98m.
8||Joseph and Donnacha O’Brien halt an Irish Derby victory for O’Brien SrThe Irish Derby fell to a pair of young brothers from the famed O’Brien family as Latrobe sprang a 14-1 surprise. The previously low-profile colt is trained by 25-year-old Joseph and was ridden here by 19-year-old Donnacha, the pair combining to defeat their father, Aidan, who trained the next four horses home. O’Brien Sr’s Saxon Warrior was favourite for this ever since the Epsom equivalent, when the rollercoaster layout was blamed for his disappointing effort. This time he undermined his chance by getting on edge in the preliminaries, jig-jogging round the paddock and sweating up. His stablemate Rostropovich set what appeared a steady pace, presumably to avoid stretching Saxon Warrior’s suspect stamina. No jockey was more alive to that than Donnacha O’Brien, who initially settled Latrobe in mid-pack but soon allowed him to stride on and settle in second place. “That was the winning and the losing of the race,” said Joseph. “He had a perfect posi all the way and he committed him at the perfect time. The horse is tough and he stays well.” O’Brien Sr appeared just as happy as if he had won the race and perhaps even a bit more relaxed than on the dozen occasions when he actually has done so, since on this occasion he did not have to worry about saying the right thing about the successful colt. He is still only 48 and there are other Irish Derbys in his future but he is evidently going to face stiff competition from family members. “It was something I couldn’t dream of,” he said. “There was good horses and good riders on either side of the two lads and they didn’t surrender all the way up the straight. I can’t tell you how delighted we are. It’s an unbelievable special day. “Obviously, I was hoping that the two lads would keep going. It would have been a sickener for us to chin the lads because they work very hard and it’s day in, day out. We know how tough it is and how hard the competition is.” This is Joseph O’Brien’s third year with a licence. To have won an Irish Derby, an Irish Gold Cup and a Melbourne Cup in the space of eight months is extraordinary but it seems not to have turned his head. “I could never have dreamt I’d have won those races by now,” he said. “I’m just in a very, very good position, really.” Meanwhile, Donnacha O’Brien has come of age as a jockey this year. He has won three Classics in two months, having also landed the 2,000 Guineas and the Oaks in Britain. The Melbourne Cup has been touted as the long-term target for Latrobe, who has an Australian owner, but that must be in some doubt now. His trainer thinks a mile and a half is his ideal trip, which suggests Ascot’s King George and the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe will be under consideration. Definite plans were put on hold while the family went off to celebrate.
8||Andy Murray to play Wimbledon ‘unless I wake up and don’t feel good’The waiting is nearly over for Andy Murray who, after days of procrastination, says he is ready to play at Wimbledon – “unless in the next couple of days I wake up and don’t feel good”. The former world No 1, currently lurking at 156 in the rankings after nearly a year away from the Tour, sounded more positive about his prospects at the place where he has won two of his three slam titles than he has since he began his comeback at Queen’s nearly a fortnight ago. He has a tricky first round match on Tuesday against the unorthodox Frenchman Benoît Paire but has beaten him in each of their two meetings and, if his injured hip holds up to the stress of a best-of-five-set match, there is every chance he can work his way deeper into the draw. Indeed, Nick Kyrgios, who took two hours and 39 minutes to grind Murray down over three sets when he returned at Queen’s, thinks he will do better than that. Murray is taking nothing for granted, though, and said on Saturday: “I have to view it very much day by day. I’m practising at a high level, a high intensity every day with some of the best players in the world. That’s really positive for me as part of getting better, to compete again.” On a warm, still afternoon, he hit with Diego Schwartzman, the world No 11 and 14th seed, whom he could meet in the quarter-finals, and Murray said later he has things to work on. “I’d like to be playing better,” he said. “I’ve not been practising that long. You notice things that are maybe not quite where you would like them to be or where you remember them being a year ago. But I was trying my best today, although not maybe playing as well as I would have liked.” He added: “In other sports when you come back, you don’t tend to be competing against the best in the world immediately, like, for five sets or three sets, whatever. You would build up a little bit, play 15 minutes, 30 minutes, and so on. “I’m just trying to keep building, practising with these guys, then hopefully pulling up [well] each day and competing in the matches, which went well, I think, the last couple of weeks, at Queen’s and Eastbourne. So far here, that’s also been the case, which is good.” He still needs to guard against the slightest physical regression, though. “In the past, that’s something that I would have taken for granted. Now, with where my recovery is at, I’m very aware of how I’m feeling each day, very aware of how my hip is. I’m spending lots of time working with my physios, trying to get stronger. “I need to be very mindful of how I’m feeling on a day-to-day basis. Right now, I can’t say with 100% certainty – when I only started competing 10 days ago – how I’m going to feel after every match and each day. Maybe in the past, when things are a bit sore, you just get on with it. Now I need to be smart with that.” If there is a single compelling reason for Murray to stand by his conviction to play, it is that, at 31 and nursing an aching body back to full working order, he knows there will not be that many visits to Wimbledon left in his distinguished career. A shot at a golden hat-trick at the Tokyo Olympics in 2020 remains a target, according to his most optimistic assessment. He said, also, he would love to be competing at a high level so his young daughters get to see what he does for a living. “I would want them to watch me playing where I’m physically capable of playing properly, at a level that I’d be happy playing at. I’m not just going to keep playing for four years or three years if I don’t feel like I can play, if I’m in pain, if I’m not enjoying it. “I’m saying that based on the hope that I’m physically good and healthy, all of those things. If I had to stop tomorrow, yeah, I’d be pretty gutted, because I still love playing, I love the sport. I enjoy watching it. I enjoy the travelling. There’s nothing about it that I’d be looking forward to giving up, really. “I want to keep playing as long as I can, providing I’m physically capable and I’m not in a lot of pain and discomfort.”
8||Hampshire’s Rilee Rossouw puts Royal London Cup out of Kent’s reachForty years of hurt, and Kent will still be dreaming. While England’s footballers look to rectify 52 years without a trophy, Kent’s last one-day triumph was in 1978 and the wait continues. A Rilee Rossouw century, four run-outs and an unbeaten 75 by their former captain Sam Northeast denied Kent a title once more, with Hampshire ultimately easing to a 61-run victory. Queues around the corner and a crowd of almost 21,000 to witness the occasion gave evidence enough that a Lord’s final, despite the growing uncertainty surrounding domestic one-day cricket, retains an aura. Pre-match, the sense of occasion was not lost on the players. Dale Steyn talked of how special a Lord’s final was, his Hampshire captain, James Vince, spoke of being desperate for the trophy and Sam Billings wanted “the glory days back at Kent”. The last time Kent won a final, county cricket’s Sunday league was one of the few places where consumption of alcohol was permitted on this denoted day of rest. While Billings was trying to re-enact the feats of yesteryear on the pitch, however, Kent’s travelling supporters appeared just as enthusiastic about achieving something similar off it. At least, the presumably beer-induced chanting made it appear so. At first, it was amicable enough. As Darren Stevens entered the Kent attack at the ripe old age of 42 and with 16 wickets in the tournament to date, chants of “Stev-o, Stev-o” started ringing around the ground. They say spinners do not reach their prime until 30; the same might be said of Stevens, a niggling, teasing seamer, but at 40. Although Stevens toiled wicketless for 59 runs, when the left-arm spinner Imran Qayyum had the in-form Vince, his second wicket, caught at long-on for 23, there should have been much to cheer about among the Kent-centric spectators. Cue the ugly side of parochial county crowds. Northeast was booed first on walking to the crease and once again on reaching a sweetly struck 50. Perhaps it was the reprieve handed to Northeast when he was dropped off a sharp chance by his successor, Billings, on 41 that dulled them. Maybe it was the afternoon sun. For only by the time Northeast strode off the field, having steered Hampshire to 330, did the boos finally make way for tentative, albeit reluctant, applause. Sport can be fierce, emotional and at times brutal but this reception, for a man simply trying to achieve his dream of playing for England, was uncalled for. “That’s not really cricket, is it,” said Billings post-match of Northeast’s reception. “Sam’s a classy player, he showed that today, he played very well. Of course, whenever a player leaves a club there is going to be a bitterness but I don’t think that’s fair at all, really, to be blunt.” Not that the ever-sanguine Northeast cared all that much. The England coach, Trevor Bayliss, was present in his bid to watch more county cricket, as was the national selector, Ed Smith, here to keep an eye on the generous smattering of young English talent. It was not a bad time for Northeast, who has missed almost two months of this season through a finger fracture, to deliver. However, while Northeast (75 not out off 60), Daniel Bell-Drummond (86 off 89), Billings (75 off 60) and Tom Alsop (72 off 75) all put in admirable performances, it was another Kent veteran, albeit one 10 years younger than Stevens, who was living up to the spinners’ cliche. Before Saturday, only four wickets had fallen to an Englishman’s leg spin in Lord’s domestic finals. The 32-year-old Joe Denly’s four wickets doubled that tally. The calls, now more in jest, of “Denly for England” have resumed. Alongside Rossouw’s 114-ball 125, this was the standout feat. Combining with Qayyum, spin provided returns for Kent of six for 117, compared with seam’s contribution of two for 211. Asked if Denly might be called a genuine all-rounder, Billings’s response was immediate. “Without a doubt. I think he’s done it consistently now and it’s a great asset to have on your side – if you’ve got that genuine sixth option who can bowl 10 overs. Some people might have thought it was Mumbai with him bowling in the last five overs!” That this is only Billings’ first season as captain was demonstrated perhaps in his reluctance to turn to Qayyum, who picked up the first two wickets, sooner than the 23rd over. Hampshire, by contrast, had gone to great lengths to ensure they had their two England spinners at hand, Mason Crane playing despite a stress fracture, alongside Liam Dawson. Billings might be forgiven, however; this was only the second time this season that Kent have not taken a wicket in the first 10 overs. The first-wicket stand of 136, between Alsop and Rossouw, ultimately provided the platform for Hampshire’s daunting total.
13||The Marvellous Mechanical Museum review – marvels ex machinaStanding sentry at the door to this enthralling exhibition is a lively figure known as The Connoisseur. He wears a linen suit and an expression of expert discrimination. Press a button and he leans forward to examine some unseen object, then gradually backwards to give serious weight to his judgment. He might be one of us, a fellow visitor who is also our surrogate. Tim Hunkin’s sculpture – made out of papier-mache art reviews, some from this very newspaper – is comical, mechanical, exquisitely expressive. It is both a work of art and an automaton. So it was with the earliest automata: the mythical clay figures animated by Prometheus; the female statue that Pygmalion brought to life and loved; and so it remains. This is one crucial difference between an automaton, a robot and a puppet. At Compton Verney this summer you can see automata created by artists across four centuries, including Ting-Tong Chang’s modern speaking goose (2017), so lifelike it seems about to take flight in the middle of a hilarious lecture on avian digestion. Exotic birds flutter and sing in their 18th-century cages. A Victorian girl walks on her own two elegant feet, crinoline swishing, and mice skitter across a table top while the women in Picasso’s Demoiselles d’Avignon emerge into three dimensions, courtesy of Paul Spooner, untwisting from their cubist contortions. They have the spark of life – or half-life; beautiful yet eerie, like us but soulless and abjectly dependent. Or frightened and frightening, like the monster in Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, published two centuries ago and which this show partly commemorates. We make these creatures in our own likeness, however approximate, and sometimes they get away from us – which is, after all, the intention. Prints by the contemporary artist Stuart Patience visualise with considerable graphic force the plot of ETA Hoffmann’s celebrated short story The Sandman, which inspired Sigmund Freud. The young man Nathanael falls in love with a lifesize automaton, the perfect Olimpia; woos her, talks to her, dances with her at a ball and then watches her moving about through distant windows. Eventually he is shattered to discover what everyone else can see: the mechanical limbs at work beneath her dress. Clockwork is the beating heart of these marvellous machines, especially in earlier centuries. It makes the birds sing, the lovers kiss, the Fabergé elephant swing its trunk while ambling along. In a mesmerisingly strange rococo vignette, straight out of Watteau, it keeps the dancers twirling and the melancholy violinist bowing away until the power runs out: a chronicle love’s death foretold. A Swiss clockmaker named Henri Maillardet built the most famous of 19th-century automata: a little boy, seated at a desk with a pen in his hand who could draw four different pictures when wound up and presented with paper. Maillardet used a camshaft invented by Islamic scientists centuries earlier to motivate the figure, which disappeared for many years but is now in an American museum. Compton Verney has one of the boy’s drawings, of a garden with fountains and palms that looks fabulously exotic and slightly oriental. (China was for a long time the main automaton market.) The mechanism, for all the infinitely subtle hand movements required to produce this drawing, is so complex as to be justifiably compared with a modern computer. The curators of this compelling show started out with an object in Compton Verney’s own collection: a pair of wooden workers from 1900, one turning a clay pot, the other labouring to sustain the motion of the wheel, wiping the sweat from his brow. Automata may represent the human condition, reflecting our lives back to us. This is the subject of a brilliant 2016 film called The Machinery by Caroline Radcliffe and Sarah Angliss, in which the former performs a heel-and-toe clog dance that was once tapped out daily by female workers in Victorian cotton mills. Industry turned them into automata, almost. The dancer resembles a latterday Coppélia. One section of this show is devoted to slot-machine automata: Blake’s Tyger whirling about in the forest; painters grafting away at easels; a bather diving straight from his beach hut into cold blue waters. There is much English whimsy and seaside humour, but the real star here has a far more eccentric imagination: Rowland Emett, Punch cartoonist, kinetic sculptor and designer of the elaborate contraptions of Caractacus Potts in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang. Here for almost the first time in its working entirety is A Quiet Afternoon in the Cloud Cuckoo Valley, in which Emett’s elaborate train carriages trundle their way around lifesize tracks, bearing the old gentleman playing his gramophone, the old lady leaning out to catch songbirds, all to the sound of music-box lullabies. The names of the trains invoke those dreamy pre-Beeching days – Bluebell, Cuckoo, Watercress Line. This is the kind of creation Heath Robinson might have drawn in all its improbable intricacy, but Emett actually invented and made. With its theatrical installation and jewel-coloured lighting, this show is a performance in its own right. It seems to tell an alternative version of European history, in which man and machine have an otherworldly relationship that goes far beyond master and creation. In the final gallery, sculptures that resemble vast grey brains lie dormant in glass cases – dormant until mechanical fingers prod at them. The organisms shiver, quiver, recoil, retrench, as if in fight or flight. The work, by the young sculptor Harrison Pearce, probes at the very quick of one’s own imaginings. And beside it a scarlet velvet-clad arm rears and turns on a plinth, articulate, emphatic, jabbing, as if preaching to some unseen congregation of fellow automata. Like the sculptures of Prometheus, or the little drawing boy at his desk, it is recognisably human yet entirely alien. • The Marvellous Mechanical Museum is at Compton Verney, Warwickshire, until 30 September
4||Åge Hareide hoping to channel Danish Dynamite spirit of ‘86 against CroatiaIt is perhaps the most famous piece of graffiti in Danish football history. The question had been spray-painted in downtown Copenhagen. “What if Jesus comes back?” The answer would appear the following day. “Then we’ll move Elkjaer out wide.” It was 1986, the Mexico World Cup was being played, and it was one of those vignettes that resonated widely, capturing the mood in a heartbeat. The tone was lighthearted but the pride was evident. Preben Elkjaer, the national team’s striker, could not be supplanted – even by the son of God. Sepp Piontek’s lineup, which also featured Michael Laudrup, Frank Arnesen and Jesper Olsen, would reach the last 16, but it was not where they went but how they got there. The class of ’86 played a Danish version of total football. It was fast, fluid and forward-facing and the team have remained the benchmark for this nation of romantics. Laudrup said at the time that Denmark played like “the Brazilians of the north”. Åge Hareide and his current squad have made it back to the World Cup last 16 – they play Croatia in Nizhny Novgorod on Sunday night – and it is only the fourth time that Denmark have got this far. Yet the fans are split and the debate is framed by 1986 and all that; the notion of how a Danish team is supposed to play. Everybody would probably agree that, in stylistic terms, it is not as they did at the group stage, where even Hareide admits they were lucky to have beaten Peru 1-0 in the opening game. They were underwhelming in the 1-1 draw against Australia while both teams were booed off after the 0-0 with France. Denmark have managed nine shots on target in Russia – only Iran, who have been knocked out, had fewer – and they have been an awfully tough watch: heavy on perspiration, low on inspiration. There are some supporters who believe the results justify everything and Hareide can point to an unbeaten run which now stretches to 18 games. With Kasper Schmeichel, in outstanding form in goal, they have conceded only once in 2018 – a sequence of seven matches. For Hareide, the result is all that matters and he has the country on the verge of history. Only once previously – in 1998 – have they reached a World Cup quarter-final. But to others, Hareide’s direct and pragmatic style is akin to a betrayal or an embarrassment. Denmark are a small country who are not going to win the World Cup, so why not play with a little joy and beauty? That way, the world might talk about them positively. There are some Danes who would rather have played attractively and gone out at the group phase. Hareide has lamented how difficult they are to please and it feels as though there is a cultural issue at play. He is Norwegian and it is fair to say that a lot of Danes look down on Norwegian football, particularly the long ball stuff from the 1990s with Tore André Flo. The style discussion has felt like the only one in town and it was significant to hear Hareide promise “a different Denmark to what you have seen”. He made the point that they need to attack more and also that he expected the tension that looked to have suffocated his team in the group games to dissipate. “There is always tension,” Hareide said. “Most of our players have not played the World Cup before. But this game will be different. We will release energy because we need to win. We will take a positive approach.” Can Denmark cast off the shackles? One thing is clear. They will have to do a better job of creating a platform for Christian Eriksen, their creative fulcrum. His personal battle with Croatia’s Luka Modric should be fascinating. Denmark can be at their best when nobody expects them to deliver. The most relevant case in point comes from the 1998 World Cup, when they were poor in the group stage only to advance. They even played France in the third game, losing 2-1. But, rather abruptly, they broke out to hammer an excellentNigeria team 4-1. It could take only one stellar performance to transform perceptions. Hareide senses opportunity.
8||Serena Williams the one to beat at Wimbledon whatever rankings sayFew athletes in the history of sport have rushed towards drama with as much enthusiasm and panache as Serena Williams has. So, when the extraordinary American cancelled her pre-Wimbledon press conference at the last minute on Saturday afternoon to go to a polo match with Prince Harry and Meghan, the reaction around the All England Club was one of resignation rather than surprise. Williams was a guest at the royal wedding in Windsor in May and the three of them – along with various courtiers and celebrity chums – were back there again to watch some polo on a glorious afternoon when, critics might point out, she might have been better employed attending to her day job. She has become close friends with the Duchess of Sussex, apparently, and her own regal bearing can rarely have been so pronounced as in this minor snub to the media before her first appearance at the tournament since she won her seventh singles title here in 2016. Williams is a mother now, and grateful for the seedings committee’s decision to give her the 25th place among the protected 32. Her career has been a blizzard of aces, soaring triumphs and swooping lows, rows and celebrations, controversy and excitement – but, underpinning it all, are the numbers. For Roger Federer, the number that matters is one. The Swiss – who trails the American 23-20 in singles slam titles, and turns 37 in August, seven weeks before her – told the Wall Street Journal: “I came up through Switzerland with the federation, she did it with her dad and her sister. It’s an amazing story unto itself, and then she became one of the greatest, if not the greatest tennis player of all time.” From one Goat to another, that is as definitive a judgment as is possible in sport. The players who have to confront her on court are similarly effusive, if reluctant to embrace the concept while still in active rivalry with her. Dominika Cibulkova, who was bounced out of the seedings to accommodate her return, is not her greatest fan at the moment. Elsewhere, there is awe. On Monday she begins her campaign with what should be a routine assignment against the 27-year-old Dutch left-hander Arantxa Rus, who is ranked 107 in the world – 76 places above Williams. Only three active players in the Open era have not lost in the first round here: Williams in 17 appearances, Maria Sharapova in 13 and Agnieszka Radwanska in 12. It is unlikely Rus is going to change that. Among those closer to Williams in ability and realistic ambition, she reigns with authority. Of players still competing, nobody else has double-digit slams. Her sister Venus owns seven, Sharapova five. That is a gap as convincing in its dominance as Donald Bradman had over every batsman who has ever played. And only Venus and Sharapova can boast double-digit appearances in finals, with 16 and 10 respectively. Serena has been to the final Sunday of majors 28 times. More numbers. But, as Martina Navratilova said on Saturday: “Serena’s ranking is completely irrelevant. Whatever the computer says, Serena isn’t really the 183rd best player in the world. As everyone knows, she only has that low ranking because she is a new mother, with this the fourth tournament of her comeback. She could be the world No 1,000 and I would still put her as my favourite for the Venus Rosewater dish.” It remains an oddity that the one-on-one career battle she is best known for, against Sharapova, is no rivalry at all. She wipes the floor with the Russian. And what is eternally admirable about their strange relationship is the mutual respect involved in each of the clashes. After defeating Williams in the Wimbledon final and the WTA Tour Finals in 2004, not once in taking 18 subsequent beatings has Sharapova given up; she has fought for every point to the last scream in her lungs. And, although the enmity between them is obvious, Williams has deep respect for her – as a competitor, at least. Williams has reached three of her slam finals by saving match points in the semi-finals: against Kim Clijsters in Melbourne in 2003, in Australia again two years later against Sharapova and at Wimbledon in 2009 against Elena Dementieva. Nobody in the history of the game has achieved that hat-trick of rescued lost causes. And now she has to fight again, to prove to the sport and the world that, as a contented mother with a hinterland more interesting than any other player, she is still worth her place. She would not do this unless she loved it, because it brings her nearly as much angst as joy. When she withdrew at the last moment from a fourth-round match at the French Open with Sharapova because of a pectoral muscle injury, there was much harrumphing and raising of eyebrows. Yet who would doubt that she did not relish that prospect? She has never shied away from a challenge, on or off the court. When she failed to make it to her press conference on Saturday, the immediate suspicion in the media room was that the injury had returned. It would seem not – but one informed observer says she has done well to even be back competing at such a high level, given what she has endured before, during and since giving birth to Olympia last September. Prof Greg Whyte, a sports scientist and author of Bump it Up, a study of exercise and pregnancy, told the Observer that having an emergency C-section birth would have inflicted considerable physical trauma on her body, the effects of which would take months to abate. “It is very complicated and aggressive surgery,” he said. “It involves cutting through muscle and the significant shifting of internal organs. That is why she has been wearing the suppression garments [that she had at the French Open but is unlikely to be allowed at Wimbledon]. While there is a good physiological rationale for wearing something that supports the body, the clothing is also a psychological comfort blanket for her.” He added that Williams represents a select band of elite female athletes who have been able to return to their sport after pregnancy and perform at previous levels. “In recent times there have been outstanding role models in Jessica Ennis-Hill, Jo Pavey and Paula Radcliffe. Serena also has to cope with the baby blues, which is aided by a hormone called relaxin, which leads to laxity of the joints. It helps the expansion of the pelvis and change of body shape. “But Serena’s stability and power will have been affected by this, and to get it back takes time. I think she is absolutely inspirational, as are all athletes and mothers who come back to sport. It’s incredible. It’s something men will never know about.” And now there are more numbers for her to crunch. When Williams won her last slam – in Melbourne 18 months ago – she moved to within one trophy of matching Margaret Court’s all-time record of 24 majors. Had the small matter of pregnancy and subsequent physical struggles not intervened, she would be a raging favourite over the next fortnight to draw level with the Australian but, as John McEnroe said recently, she should at least be regarded among the top 10 contenders, whatever her seeding.
2||‘Smell this!  It tastes alive...’ A day on the streets with the urban forager‘Smell this!” Chef and wild food enthusiast Nurdin Topham is inhaling a lungful of shrub called pineappleweed, picked fresh from a stretch of east London formerly known as Murder Mile. He hands me a couple of yellow buds with an instruction to sniff; sweet fruitiness floats under my nose. Topham takes a chew. I gamely follow suit. The clue, it seems, is in the name: we’re eating what vaguely tastes like pineapple and feels a lot like chewing grass. “This is food,” he explains, as we ramble on, to forage for a lunch he will be cooking later. The future of food and our relationship with nature is at the core of Topham’s philosophy for what he calls “nourishing gastronomy”, a subject he will deliver a lecture on this week at FutureFest in London. He has two decades of experience in the field, first as a qualified nutritionist and personal development chef for Raymond Blanc, and later as head of NUR, his own Michelin-starred restaurant in Hong Kong. “Wild food is about connecting to our ancestors and to the earth we’re living on,” he says, as we tramp past the early morning joggers and dogwalkers of the local park. “It’s a struggle living in the city – I long for a more outdoors life – but picking food in an urban setting helps.” Although he was born in London, Topham grew up, I’m not surprised to learn, surrounded by rolling fields, forests and orchards in the Brecon Beacons. His father, Anthony “Top” Topham, who was the lead guitarist in 1960s band the Yardbirds before Eric Clapton joined, converted to Islam and moved his young family to the good life, where they had a Muslim upbringing, grew their own food and made their own jams. Nurdin’s first wild food experiment was with nettle soup, made outdoors in the dark with his best friend, aged around eight or nine, and hastily gulped down. “We proudly took it indoors to show our parents – under the light we discovered it was crawling with caterpillars.” Since then, he has managed to poison himself twice but also to establish himself as an authority on cooking more closely with nature. “I wouldn’t force foraging down anyone’s throat,” he says, by way of joyful apology. We pause to peer at some unidentifiable green. Is it brassica? Mugwort? Topham whips out his phone and takes a picture to upload to PlantNet, the app designed to help users identify what they’re looking at. Inside his bag is a trove of plant tinctures (essential oils he has made and labelled himself, extracting the essence of a range of plants and herbs), some homemade kombucha and a load of food bags. “I shouldn’t be using all this plastic,” he frowns, “I should have bought my tins.” He pops the mugwort in anyway. Dorkily, I ask if we’re allowed to pick, willy-nilly, across the city. “Yes, this does bring us on to some of the ethical dilemmas of plants and where you’re picking from…” Another sighting of pineappleweed snatches his attention. “This wouldn’t be the ideal place to pick anyway,” he says, motioning towards the weeds sprouting through pavement cracks. “It’s where people are treading through and dogs are pissing, but you do get to learn a lot. For instance, it helps you realise that there aren’t four seasons: when it comes to plants, you can have several seasons in a week. And that’s what’s really special for me. A dish I make is never static; it’s also constantly evolving.” In Hong Kong, Topham invested serious time in setting up a supply chain directly with local farms “to source deliveries three times a week – which is a headache in an area where 94% of the food is imported – just so we could pick plants and use them for a short period of time”. It’s because of this that NUR earned a reputation as “the most innovative restaurant in Hong Kong”, according to Forbes, and a rave write-up for Topham’s “absolutely flawless cooking” from Frank Bruni at the New York Times. So what, for him, makes plants so important to his cuisine? “They’re our medicine! That’s an obvious thing to say, but their deliciousness is important, too.” Topham is especially keen to bring “food democracy” to the UK and help develop a culture where, as in Japan, “a delicious bowl of noodles can be had for a fiver”, and there is an emphasis on the link between nutrition, health and taste. But isn’t urban foraging a bit of a middle-class indulgence? “Oh yes, I’m not suggesting everyone has the luxury of time to forage – that is a luxury. People are out there working, living in cities, struggling to pay rent and bills, keep a roof over their head and buy food which has gone up incredibly in price over the past few years.” But, he says, “as mental health is such an issue these days, to get out for a walk in the countryside is a fairly nourishing thing for people who can’t connect to a sense of calm and still. It’s natural aromatherapy from being among blossoms and breathing deeply.” We arrive under a bridge by the canal, mostly used by runners, dogs and narrowboat owners. So far, we have a haul of leaves – sorrel, something cabbagey, ragwort. This patch doesn’t look promising, I suggest. Topham emerges with bunches of wild, peppery rocket which taste nothing like anything that would ever emerge from a supermarket salad bag. “It tastes alive,” he munches. It’s rocket amped up to 11. Satisfied, we head to Carousel, a central London restaurant where Topham is resident chef for a week and is to convert our haul into lunch. There is an element of cheating – we didn’t catch the mackerel or harvest the watermelon, but Topham says our morning of picking and chewing in the park is just one element of bringing a dish together. Unsurprisingly, his meticulously presented dish is a hit. “We’re good at keeping pace with changes in the UK, and people are interested in food now,” says Topham. “Ten years ago, you wouldn’t have heard men in pubs talking about food. It wouldn’t have happened and that’s a massive change. Thanks to people like Jamie Oliver – whom I haven’t met but have such awe and respect for – it has changed. He’s a food warrior.” For his part, Topham is on the hunt to develop a food lab: to study plants, “to feed people – and not on a £100 a head menu”, and to offer workshops. “I’d like to illuminate and inspire. I don’t like to educate because I’ve got so much to learn for myself. I would like to be in a position where I can facilitate more nourishment and a more humane relationship with food.” Five to forage Ground elder Use it as a herb; like parsley, it pairs well with fish and pasta Dandelions Brew the leaves for tea; use the petals for risotto Rocket Good for all summer salads Sorrel This is at its best in a sharp, citrussy soup Yarrow Sweet and medicinal as a dried herb
14||Tommy Orange: ‘There’s a monolithic version of what a Native American is supposed to be’Tommy Orange is a Native American writer. He teaches creative writing at the Institute of American Indian Arts and his debut novel, There There (Harvill Secker, £14.99), is a New York Times bestseller. There There is about urban Native American lives. Are these lives and experiences under-represented in fiction? Yes, you already find Native people in fiction, but there aren’t many representations of us as modern, contemporary and living in cities, so that was definitely something I saw lacking. What made you decide to have 12 narrators? I really liked what a chorus of voices could do. I like, within a novel, to jump around and see how the different voices connect. It gives the reader a lot to do. And when the reader gets the connection, something really special happens: like a clicking in place. It gives it a kind of propulsion and makes it a really active reading experience. Did you also want to portray as many different Native urban experiences as you could? I guess so. There’s a monolithic version of what a Native is supposed to be. Writing a polyphonic, multigenerational novel is resisting this one idea of what being Native is supposed to look like. If we all have to be historical, with a headdress, looking off into the distance, that’s hopeless as far as building a proper, complex, human identity. Many of your characters are deeply troubled. Why? I wanted to write characters that felt true and real, and there’s a lot of harrowing detail about the lives of Native people. You can just look at the health statistics and they’re pretty staggering. I wanted the characters to be working-class, because so often the characters in novels that I’ve read are white and upper-middle-class with white, upper-middle-class problems. I didn’t want to go anywhere near the old romanticised view of the Indian as the warrior, the powerful, the unflinching, the brave. That just doesn’t feel whole to me. The title is taken from a Gertrude Stein quote: “There is no there there.” What’s the significance of that quote? In Stein’s Everybody’s Autobiography, she talks about how someone was asking her what it’s like to come back to her childhood home in Oakland, where I also come from, and she says, “There is no there there.” She was talking about how it had been developed over and was unrecognisable. I was using that as a parallel to Native experience and the “there there” of the land before it was colonised, developed over and bordered. The novel explores what it means to be Native American today. What does it mean for you? It’s meant a lot of different things over the years. Currently it means going back to see my dad, who lives in Oklahoma now, and slowly trying to learn the language, because while he’s fluent he didn’t raise us with it. It means making sure my son knows that he’s Native too. It’ll keep meaning more things along the way. Why didn’t your dad teach you the language? There’s a lot of pain related to the past, and I think he was wanting a fresh start, wanting to raise us in Oakland and have us figure it out for ourselves. I think if we had been born in the 21st century to a dad who was fluent in Cheyenne, we probably would have been taught it from an early age. But my dad had a lot of pain in his childhood. It was a time of assimilation. Which writers have most influenced your writing? Clarice Lispector was a pretty big influence. Also, Andrei Platonov, Denis Johnson, Louise Erdrich, Roberto Bolaño, Haruki Murakami. What’s the book you most like to give to people as a gift? Clarice Lispector’s The Hour of the Star. Is there a classic that you’re ashamed not to have read? I skipped a lot of the classics because I didn’t read in school, and I don’t really feel like I’m missing out. Sometimes I’ll try to go back and read older stuff, but I get really bored with old voices. What’s next up on your reading list? I’m reading a book by Katherena Vermette called The Break and it’s been compared to mine because it has a whole bunch of different voices: it’s urban and it’s Native but it’s set in Winnipeg. Given that publishing is historically white and middle-class, do you think it’s an ongoing challenge to get more diverse voices into fiction? There’s a change going on and it’s related to Trump. People are coming to terms with a really ugly, white supremacist, racist side to our country and our history, and so I think although publishing’s still super-white, there’s a lot of people wanting to bring in diverse voices. The fear for me is that if we don’t change the institution of whiteness in the publishing industry as a whole, the trend will change and there’ll be a backlash. You know, you have people like Lionel Shriver who are claiming that diversity over excellence is harming literature as a whole, as if the diverse voices that are being heard right now are only getting published because of their diversity. It’s so depressing to hear that because as a person of colour publishing now, there’s always the fear of tokenism and this fear that you’re not being published on the merit of your work. And then you hear people like Shriver and you think: “Yeah, that’s what we suspected.” • There There by Tommy Orange is published by Harvill Secker (£14.99). To order a copy for £12.74 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99
14||Book clinic: which literature would inspire a men’s prison reading group?Working in a male prison library has its challenges, especially when it comes to inspiring and motivating the inmates. I’m hoping to start a reading/reflection group shortly. Which poems and books would you suggest? Anonymous, 24, Nottinghamshire Kate Kellaway, Observer feature writer and poetry editor, writes: The first poem that springs to mind is Invictus by William Ernest Henley, but only because these are the verses said to have inspired Nelson Mandela on Robben Island. It is a hyperbolic, late-Victorian pep-talk of a poem, although, as a comfort, it might easily backfire. But it would be an interesting poem upon which to speculate (why did Mandela depend on it?). The question you face is whether it is more helpful to read books that reflect prisoners’ situations, or the reverse. If the former, a compelling memoir such as Inside – One Man’s Experience of Prison by John Hoskison, a professional golfer, about his life in prison after being convicted of drink-driving (he killed someone) might be a provocative choice. But if escapism is preferred – reading is, after all, the ultimate displacement activity – I would dare to suggest The Poetry of Birds. It is in no way namby-pamby and, edited by Simon Armitage and Tim Dee, removes you from wherever you are, allowing you to fly. Meanwhile, you might consider this memoir: Running the Books: The Adventures of an Accidental Prison Librarian by Avi Steinberg. A Jewish journalist, fed up with writing obit columns, he became a prison librarian. His book could be read as a cautionary tale, yet could also give you ideas. His prison nickname was “Bookie”. If you’ve got a question for Book Clinic submit it below or email bookclinic@observer.co.uk
12||Welcome to Malta, playground for the frivolous grandees of the rightLittle remains of the Malta that Nazi bombs were so close to sending back to the stone age that its residents moved into caves to escape the onslaught. The brands you see wherever the wealthy consume fill Valletta’s shops. Yachts the size of double-decker buses squat in the harbour below the capital’s ramparts. Across the bay in Kalkara, entrepreneurs are building SmartCity, a home for tech businesses and hotels, on what was once parched scrubland. Malta is finding new ways to get rich. It’s tried online gambling and offshore banking. Now it has moved into the people-smuggling business. Not the type of people smuggling that ends with refugees drowning in the Mediterranean, or provokes the new right to denounce metropolitan liberals as “people from nowhere”, who want to flood the west with migrants. Rather Malta encourages the migration of the offshore right; of the patriots who love their country but are happy to ditch somewhere for nowhere because they love their money more. Malta sells EU citizenship for €650,000 up front to the government and a further €350,000 in property. Naturally, this makes it a popular destination for high-end criminals. Citizenship for sale “foments corruption and imports organised crime and money laundering into the union”, the European parliament warned. As did the Maltese journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia before she was murdered in 2017. No one knows why she was assassinated, not least the Maltese police whose job it is to know. It remains a matter of record that, among the many instances of corruption she was investigating, was the allegation local politicians were taking kickbacks for passports. Criminal migrants flooding into Europe? Surely this is everything the modern right fights against. Meanwhile, the publicity-shy billionaire Christopher Chandler, who applied for Maltese citizenship through official channels before the Brexit process began, seems, on the face of it, to lead something of a double life. On the one hand, Chandler founded the pro-Brexit thinktank, the Legatum Institute (Legatum says Chandler has no role within it and Chandler refutes he is a Brexiter). Legatum provided a home for Iain Duncan Smith’s former aide Philippa Stroud, Tim Montgomerie, Matthew Elliott and other anti-EU Tories. On the other, Chandler joined the offshore right by obtaining EU citizenship from the Maltese government. We have learned that the Belize-based Tory Michael Ashcroft, a true citizen of nowhere, had access to evidence of Russian involvement with the Leave campaign. He cheerily acknowledges the Brexit he supported has brought uncertainty, and recommends that businesses looking “for a base in the EU in future” should consider Malta and its “advantageous tax system”. In the 1980s, the hotel tycoon Leona Helmsley earned immortality when she encapsulated the philosophy of the coming generation of oligarchs with the cry: “We don’t pay taxes. Only the little people pay taxes.” Brexit is for the little people too. They must suffer the falls in income and the lost jobs, while the men who led them can follow Jacob Rees-Mogg by setting up an investment fund in Ireland or imitate Arron Banks and run their businesses from,Gibraltar. The men who lead the Trump backlash are no different. They claim the right to govern at home while keeping their money offshore – as we would see Trump does, if he ever released his tax returns. Like workers’ revolutions led by the children of the bourgeoisie, the counter-revolution from above is riven with contradictions. The leaders of the offshore right oppose immigration but migrate to the tax havens. Theresa May has been unfairly criticised for condemning “citizens of nowhere”. If you go back to her original speech you read that she was talking of men and women who treat “tax laws as an optional extra”. Yet she could not face the contradiction that these are some of the very nowhere men who are driving Brexit forward. I could discuss how the Brexit right wants to rip up workers’ rights and environmental protections, or how, despite their boasts that they are speaking for the “left-behind”, neither the Trump nor Brexit movements has found room at the top for an authentic working-class politician. But I’m sure you’ve spotted that. Less noticed is the frivolity of rich men and women in politics. Any true patriot would look at a paralysed government, and fear for the future of their fellow citizens. The rich, and I include the high-born and equally anti-European Marxists at the top of Labour, can treat a country as a playground because they do not know the fear of losing their livelihoods. However the game ends they won’t lose. It’s not as simple as saying that the dogmatists who dominate left and right do not understand Airbus engineers and car workers because they are not forced to work in a factory every morning. Their fault is an absence of imaginative sympathy as much as a lack of experience. They cannot put themselves in the place of others or feel any kinship with people who are suffering now and will suffer more. The frivolity of Brexit was there from the beginning. Unlike Scottish nationalists before the independence referendum or the Irish government before the abortion referendum, the Leave campaign offered no explanation to the voters of what victory would entail. If it were to present concrete proposals, it risked providing “an undefendable target” and “open[ing] an unwinnable debate”, its leaders explained. Our national crisis – which can best be defined as a failure to agree on what Brexit even means – goes back to the unforgivable dilettantism of a campaign that believed that, if it levelled with public, it would lose the game. The nationalism of the leaders of the Brexit movement is sincere but not serious. How can it be serious, when they know that if the game goes awry they can buy a business address in Dublin and skip away? • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist
15||Matt Haig: ‘I kept thinking, can’t my own mental health advice help me?’Matt Haig is a writer of novels and nonfiction books for children and adults, including The Humans and How To Stop Time. He is also the author of Reasons to Stay Alive, a bestselling memoir about his descent into depression, aged 24, and his subsequent efforts to climb out of it. His new book, Notes on a Nervous Planet (Canongate, £12.99), explores how to stay sane in our fast-moving, anxiety-inducing world. Why did you decide to return to the subject of depression in Notes on a Nervous Planet? Not wanting to be nauseatingly name-dropping, Stephen Fry warned me after Reasons to Stay Alive not to become Mr Depression, and I thought he must know what he was talking about. So I wrote a book about Father Christmas [A Boy Called Christmas] and a novel, How to Stop Time, and tried to concentrate on other stuff. But the subject kept coming up at readers’ events. What struck me really strongly was, while we acknowledge things like alcohol or drugs can be bad for our mental health, we don’t really understand how more day-to-day stuff affects us. So I thought it might be useful to write a book placing our mental health in the context of 21st-century society. One of the main messages in the book is we need to disconnect more from the internet for the sake of our mental health. Do you feel better when you’re disconnected? Without a doubt. It doesn’t sound like a big deal not to have my phone by my bed, but for me, making that move was really hard. That sounds so sad, but it’s made a huge difference. I charge my phone in the kitchen now, so at least I have to come down and have my breakfast before I check emails and Facebook and Twitter. But that doesn’t mean I don’t still spend ages just scrolling through my phone, getting distracted. Isn’t there a difference between just wasting time on social media and having your mental health affected by it? The two things are related because sometimes you can feel really guilty and unproductive and bad about yourself if you’ve spent three hours on Twitter pointlessly. You certainly don’t feel better about yourself. Would you say most of us are addicted to social media? Unlike video-game addiction, social media addiction is still not a recognised thing, but I’m pretty sure one day soon it will be. Platforms like Twitter and Instagram try to get us as emotionally and psychologically invested in them as possible. And sometimes, if you just go on Twitter and passively scroll down your feed, it depends who you follow of course, it just seems like a fireball of anger. Wherever you are on the political spectrum, you can find something within five minutes to be really, really cross or anxious about. And there’s a psychological fall-out from all that. Were you surprised by the success of Reasons to Stay Alive? Absolutely. I always saw it as a side project. I thought it would find a nice little readership among people who were struggling with their own mental health. Obviously, that’s a lot of people, but I didn’t realise there would be this big crossover readership. I found the reaction a bit overwhelming at times. I was getting lots of emails every day from people asking for advice and saying how much it had helped them, but I was in an anxiety patch myself, so I was pacing around in circles feeling a bit of a fraud. I kept thinking, why can’t my own advice help me? Did it feel like quite a responsibility, all those people writing to ask for help? It did, and at first I didn’t really know what to do with that. I’m not a doctor, I’ve not even been a Samaritan, and I got this sort of stage fright about my new role as a sort of Henry Kissinger of mental illness. Since then, I’ve spoken to charities like MIND, who have given me tips on how to politely tell people I’m not an expert, then refer them to people who are. You are dealing with people’s lives, so you have to be so careful. We are talking more about mental health as a society, but do you think anything has really changed in the way we view and treat people with depression? Most people would now say they’re OK about depression and anxiety. But certain mental health conditions have as much stigma as ever, for instance, eating disorders and self-harming. I think we still love to imagine it’s all about strength of mind and strength of character, and we do need a more subtle understanding of mental states. What can we do to change this? I think, boringly, the answer is money. We need more funding to raise awareness and to combat mental illness, not less. For all the government’s lovely words about mental health, it’s the first part of the NHS that they’re willing to cut. I hear about waiting times and how ill you need to be to get help. No one would think you should only get treatment for a physical illness if you’re on the point of death, whereas with mental illness they’re literally assessing how likely you are to kill yourself. You once said that books saved your life. How did they do that? When I became ill, back living at my parents’ house, the only books I had were the children’s books on my bedroom shelf, and I found myself reading Winnie-the-Pooh over and over again, just for the comfort of knowing the story. There was something so therapeutic about it. I’d been quite snobby up to then about books, because I did a master’s in English literature and I was encouraged to believe it was all about style. We read all these postmodernist thinkers and plot was almost a dirty word. Then I found I wanted an actual story – I wanted beginning, middle, end – because that’s what was nourishing me and I lost that pretension almost overnight. I just wanted to go back to storytelling. • Notes on a Nervous Planet by Matt Haig is published by Canongate (£12.99) on 5 July. To preorder a copy for £11.04 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99
9||Life as an NHS nurse in the 2010s: ‘People tell me I’m mad starting now’I left school at 17 and eventually became a secretary in the City of London, earning a nice salary answering phones and booking train tickets. It felt like a job anyone could do. Then I temped as a medical secretary, working with a prescribing nurse who was brilliant, caring and clever. I’d help her by reassuring patients, talking them through their treatments, and I got so much satisfaction from it – I’d be talking to insular 16-year-olds with skin conditions, and six weeks later they’d have come out of their shell. I thought, imagine the satisfaction of doing that every day in even more serious situations. Then the nurse told me that the NHS bursaries were closing, and that this was my last chance to get a funded place to train. I knew in my heart I should go for it. However, I meet nurses who have been in the NHS their whole lives who tell me I’m mad starting now. You have to be political to be in the NHS today. I was a pay champion for the Royal College of Nursing just before the cap was lifted. But a 2% rise year-on-year for three years is meagre, especially when new nurses are going to be leaving university with £50,000 of debt. Because I was one of the last trainees to have tuition paid by the government, they made a £30,000 investment in me and in my skills. I know nurses training now who don’t want to work in the NHS because they’ll be in so much debt, or because of the benefits the private sector offers them. As I’ve been funded and supported, I feel loyal to the NHS. I still have to work around my training as I only get £300 a month to live. My placements are seven and a half hours a day, where I’m obviously not being paid, so I work shifts as a healthcare assistant to pay my rent and bills. I know trainee nurses who wait tables or work in pubs after being on their feet all day. It’s exhausting, so you have to be absolutely driven to do this. Brexit is affecting nursing so much. I work with nurses from Italy, Spain and Portugal – over there, nurses are trained to the equivalent of UK junior doctor level. I learn so much from them, but so many of them want to leave because it’s such a hostile environment. Quite often I get patients going: “Oh, I’m glad you’re an English one.” I tell them people who come here to work are trained better. I see part of my role as patient education! The NHS is still functioning, but social care hasn’t caught up, and that’s where problems lie. Mental health patients coming to A&amp;E because they have limited support elsewhere is a huge issue. That has to change – for them, and for others whose care is delayed as a result. The elderly need better care at home, too. They shouldn’t be dying in hospitals. These are attitudes that lots of my generation have, so I hope they’ll feed into policy. You have to be hopeful. • Life as an NHS nurse in the 2000s: ‘With Brexit, we’re seeing colleagues leave’
9||'Cuts leave scars': thousands join protest over NHS fundingTens of thousands of people have marched through London to mark the NHS’s 70th anniversary and demand an end to government cuts and further privatisation of the health service. Bearing placards reading “Cuts leave scars”, “For people not profit” and “Democracy or corporate power” demonstrators moved down Whitehall on Saturday afternoon to the chant of “Whose NHS? Our NHS”. They stopped outside Downing Street to demand Theresa May’s resignation en route to the stage where they were greeted by the National Health Singers choir singing “the NHS needs saving, don’t let them break it”. Shortly after, Jeremy Corbyn addressed the crowd – organisers said there were about 40,000 people present – demanding an end to privatisation, the closure of the internal market, for staff to no longer be subcontracted to private companies and for social care to be properly funded. “There have been huge attacks on our NHS over many years,” he said. “The Tories voted against the original legislation and have always sought to privatise it and continue an internal market. “Paying money out to private health contractors, the profits of which could and sometimes do, end up in tax havens around the world. “Think it through, you and I pay our taxes because we want a health service for everybody, I don’t pay my taxes for someone to rip off the public and squirrel the profits away.” A festival atmosphere permeated the diverse crowd throughout the day, although the anger towards the government’s NHS policy was palpable as protestors proceeded down Regent Street to the thump of a marching band. Some spoke of how the NHS had saved their lives and those of their relatives, while others feared that a comprehensive health service might not exist for future generations unless there is radical change. “I wouldn’t be here if it wasn’t for the NHS, they saved my life at 15,” said Polly Ridgewell-Cook, from Essex, who added that the unit she was treated in has now been closed because of cuts. “I’ve worked for the NHS as an analyst for 10 years, I’ve seen the frontline cuts, staff leaving because they’re not supported enough – they’re in tears in A&amp;E. “We outsource things because we have to do so to meet targets because we don’t have the capacity. I think that’s a design. It’s just terrible, we can do better than this, we did do better than this.” Others paid tribute to the dedication of NHS staff who saved their loved ones from the brink of death. “NHS staff saved my mother’s life when she stopped breathing,” said Dan Harper, a protester from Camden. “The ambulance drivers resuscitated her and then went above and beyond to get her to hospital. “Nurses from many different countries then treated her and gave me the opportunity to spend more time with her.” A giant birthday cake for the NHS with a candle with a “For sale” sign sticking out of it was held aloft, while copies of This Is Going to Hurt: Secret Diaries of a Junior Doctor were handed out for free as “No ifs, no buts, no NHS cuts” rang out. At midday, campaigners and politicians took to the stage outside All Souls church in Marylebone to give speeches before the march. “I come from a generation that had to pay for their healthcare and in a climate like that it was only the rich who could afford to be healthy,” said Jan Shortt, the general secretary of the National Pensioners Convention. “On the street in Luton, Bedfordshire, where I lived there were various families who lost their children to whooping cough. My grandad told me he used to pay one and six every time the doctor came to visit and medication was extra. “Since the budget cuts my chronically asthmatic son has been forced to change his inhaler and the new one isn’t as effective.” NHS estate and facilities workers from Wigan, who have been on strike over privatisation at their hospital, spoke about how there are plans to transfer hundreds of staff from the NHS to a private sector company called WWL Solutions on 1 August. “The NHS isn’t just a logo, it means everything to us,” said Joanna McClure, a striking domestic. “We’ve done two two-day strikes, we’re currently on a five-day strike and we’ll carry on striking again until we get where we need to be. “We’re passionate about working for the NHS but a lot of things have changed: there are longer waiting times and people can’t get appointments for months. It’s getting so much more difficult.” The government has faced enduring criticism that it has failed to adequately fund the NHS since 2010, and that it has overseen a decline in the once widely admired public health service as a way to privatise it by stealth. Earlier this month, Theresa May promised an extra £20bn of funding as part of a “Brexit dividend”, although a government spending watchdog challenged the basis of the pledge, which it suggested was ambiguous. • This article was amended on 2 July 2018 to make clear that staff striking at Wigan are estate and facilities workers, including Joanna McClure who is a domestic, not a nurse as originally stated.
7||Furious Michael Gove 'ripped up' Brexit plan after perceived snubAn angry Michael Gove reportedly ripped up papers on post-Brexit customs options after his concerns about the proposals were downplayed. The Sun reported that the environment secretary was so angry at the snub that he tore up a report on Theresa May’s plan for a new customs partnership with the EU at a meeting on Wednesday. Brexiters like Gove oppose a customs partnership with the EU, which would involve the UK collecting tariffs set by the EU customs union on goods entering the country on behalf of the bloc. Their preferred maximum facilitation (“max fac”) alternative would use technology to minimise the need for customs checks rather than scrapping them entirely. May split an inner cabinet committee on Brexit into two groups to allow more work to be carried out on each option. But after six weeks of meetings, a summary drawn up by civil servants on discussions about the customs partnership option favoured by the prime minister “downplayed to almost nothing” concerns raised by Gove, the Sun reported. The newspaper’s claim that Gove was so “livid” that he “physically ripped” the document in two has not been disputed. Both customs systems being considered by the cabinet have been dismissed by the EU. Details of a white paper setting out the UK’s plans for issues including trade and customs will be discussed by cabinet ministers on Friday at Chequers and tensions over the deep divisions on how to proceed threaten to boil over. The government continues to push the idea of keeping frictionless trade with Europe on goods, claiming that it would be a good deal for the EU, given the large trade surplus it enjoys. However, May has been told by European leaders that an attempt to protect the UK’s industrial base by gaining single market access for goods alone after Brexit is a nonstarter.
4||France 4-3 Argentina: World Cup 2018 – as it happenedJoin Scott Murray. Let’s end it here. I need a lie down after that. A seven-goal thriller’s not a bad way to start the knockout stages. Unless you’re Argentinian, of course. You won’t be happy if you’re Argentinian because your team’s out of the World Cup. But you’ll be happy if you’re French. If you’re French you’ll be very looking forward to a quarter-final against Uruguay or Portugal and very excited about teenage superstar Kylian Mbappe, who could be about to take this World Cup by storm. Thank’s for reading and emailing. I’ll leave you with Jonathan Wilson’s match report from Kazan. Bye. Underrated moment of the World Cup: Nicolas Otamendi starting a mass brawl when Argentina had two minutes to find an equaliser in stoppage time. Next for France: a quarter-final against Portugal or Uruguay. Those two kick off at 7pm BST. That was an extraordinary match. France started so well and won a penalty when Marcos Rojo’s foul on the electric Kylian Mbappe allowed Antoine Griezmann to score from the spot. But back came Argentina, equalising just before half-time when Angel Di Maria scored a blinder and taking the lead when Gabriel Mercado turned Lionel Messi’s shot past Hugo Lloris shortly after the interval. France were under huge pressure. The obituaries for Didier Deschamps were being prepared at that point. Yet Les Bleus summoned the perfect response. They stayed cool. Paul Pogba drove them on in midfield and Benjamin Pavard’s excellent equaliser provided Mbappe with the platform to do his thing. Sergio Aguero’s header set up a frantic finale, but France were worthy winners. They’ve flushed a lot of lethargy out of their system today. This was just what they needed. After all the doubts, they’ve finally shown why they’re one of the tournament favourites. Have we just seen Lionel Messi’s last ever World Cup game? It’s baffling to think that he’s never scored a goal in a knockout game. It will be understandable if he decides to call time on his international career. Argentina are a mess. Lionel Messi stares into the middle distance. Argentina’s captain looks fed up. It wasn’t to be. Another World Cup ends for the little magician and it now seems extremely unlikely that he’ll ever win this trophy. His genius simply wasn’t enough to lift this mediocre team. It’s a team sport and France had the superior collective, enabling Kylian Mbappe to run riot and announce himself on the world stage. Peep! Peep! Peep! It’s all over! 90 min+5: Giroud tries to take the ball to the corner flag. Argentina end up with a goal-kick. One last chance. A huge roar from the Argentina fans. Argentina attack. The ball’s played into the middle by Di Maria, finding Aguero. He plays it to the left. The ball’s driven into the middle but it’s deflected wide by Meza (I think)! France escape! 90 min+4: A mass brawl’s broken out after Mercado fouls Pogba. Lots of pushing and shoving. Otamendi’s booked. So’s Giroud. Messi pops up on the right. He looks up and curls a beautiful cross into the middle with his left foot. The ball floats through to the unmarked Aguero, who plants a low header past Lloris! What an assist from Messi. It’s not over yet! 90 min+1: There will be four added minutes. Mercado is starting to lose his cool. He berates the linesman after a decision goes against him. Di Maria also puts his head near the official’s face. Oh dear. “Where is Maradona-Cam now?” Peter Oh says. 90 min: Di Maria wins a corner on the right. He sends it to the near post. It comes back to him off Tagliafico and he’s offside. 88 min: Tuxedo model Florian Thauvin replaces the magnificent Kylian Mbappe, who could be about to take this World Cup by the scruff of the neck. 87 min: Di Maria swings a cross behind. Colin Livingstone nods smugly. “Bit unfair of the referee,” Adam Roberts says. “Mascherano clearly wants to end his WC career with a red card.” 86 min: Messi plays a clever pass through to Aguero, but the striker’s shot is blocked by Varane. 85 min: Fekir loses the ball in midfield, Mascherano touching it Messi, who finally has space. Messi scampers forward and beats Umtiti. He’s through on goal, but he’s falling as he shoots and sends a tame effort straight at Lloris with his right foot. 83 min: Mascherano raps Griezmann’s shins. Again, no second booking for Argentina’s veteran hatchet man. Griezmann’s not too bothered, though. He knows this is done as he makes way for Nabil Fekir. 82 min: Would you like a stat? 19-year-old Kylian Mbappe is the youngest player to score twice in a knockout match since 17-year-old Pele did it at the 1958 World Cup. 80 min: Messi skips past Kante and plays it out to Meza on the right. Meza’s cross is a waste of time. 78 min: “Meza?” Zafar Sobhan says. “Again?? No Dybala, no Higuain?” 77 min: Pavard runs down the right. Mascherano, on a booking, fouls him. That’s your last one, Mr Manager. 76 min: What recent World Cups have lacked are memorable knockout games. This is a promising start in that regard. 75 min: Corentin Tolisso replaces Blaise Matuidi for France, while Argentina bring on Maxi Meza for the flimsy Cristian Pavon. 74 min: Kylian Mbappe, though! 72 min: Matuidi picks up a booking, meaning he’ll be suspended if France reach the last eight. Moments later Pavard clatters into Di Maria near the byline. He’s booked. 71 min: You have to admire the response from France. They could easily have collapsed after going behind. Instead they hit back immediately and have seized control of the match in the blink of an eye, Mbappe too much for Argentina to contain. This could be the turning point for Didier Deschamps. 70 min: France are threatening to run riot. Pogba charges forward and finds Giroud, who takes a touch before lashing a shot into the side netting. Argentina are done. They’ve run out of steam. This is surely too great a mountain to climb, even for Messi. France saunter through the middle, easily passing their way round the Argentina midfielders. The ball’s worked to Giroud, who has space in front of the Argentina defence and Mbappe unmarked to his right. Giroud’s pass is perfect. Mbappe doesn’t have to break stride. He simply has to run on to the ball and fire it into the bottom-right corner! He’s only 19! Mbappe has his second! This is surely over now! 68 min: It was fine skill from Mbappe to make space for the shot, such quick thinking and movement, but Armani should have saved it. 66 min: Messi, determined to inject some urgency back into Argentina’s play, dribbles through the middle and wins a free-kick when Griezmann trips him. Before the free-kick can be taken Sergio Aguero replaces Enzo Perez. Messi eventually takes the free-kick. It’s blocked and comes back to him. He shoots. It’s blocked. Pogba plays a pass out to Hernandez on the left. Nobody deals with the left-back’s cross. Matuidi sees a shot blocked and the ball falls to Mbappe. He takes it in his stride, jigs to the left and drives a low shot underneath Armani to restore France’s lead! Argentina can’t defend. They’ve gone from deflation to elation and back to deflation again. France are in front thanks to their whizzkid! 61 min: Kieran Trippier will probably do something similar against Colombia. 60 min: Both right-backs have scored. Imagine that. That was quite similar to Nacho’s goal against Portugal. France attack down the left, Hernandez embarking on a strong run down the left, Matuidi releasing him. The cross evades everyone in the middle but it reaches Pavard, 20 yards out. The right-back’s never scored for France before. But he lets the ball bounce and, although it sits up awkwardly, he shows wonderful technique and composure to control a swerving, vicious drive into the far corner with his right foot! Out of nothing, France are level! What a second half we have on our hands now. France are level thanks to another stunner! 56 min: Giroud flicks a harmless ball into the area. Fazio reverts to his Tottenham days and decides to usher it back to Armani. Er, Griezmann’s there! The France striker nips it round the goalkeeper, who seems to tug him back and muscle Griezmann away before he can tap it into an empty net! What a farce! A replay shows Armani is very fortunate not to have conceded a penalty. Instead, despite Fazio’s brainless play, Argentina have a goal-kick. 55 min: Argentina’s inspiration, Colin Livingstone, returns. “Very funny turn of events with Di Maria there. However the point stands. Being generally rubbish and popping up with the odd worldy just makes you Charlie Adam. Who’d have an outside chance only of making the France starting eleven. Super game now though, great to watch.” It’s the commentator’s curse, Colin. Can’t be helped. Welcome to the club. 54 min: Mbappe’s free-kick is dangerous. Otamendi heads it away to Di Maria, who lures Griezmann into fouling him on the edge of the Argentina area. 53 min: Perez brings down Kante on the left. Mbappe will take the free-kick. 52 min: Pogba tries to stand a ball through for Griezmann, but it’s too straight and Armani can usher it behind. 51 min: It was Mercado, of course, who put in the cross for Rojo’s winner against Nigeria. The right-back’s having quite the tournament. 50 min: Mbappe sets off on a turbo charge. Di Maria has a nibble. Mbappe falls and Banega slides in with a heavy, ugly challenge, earning a booking. Banega stands over the free-kick on the left. He clips it into the middle and it’s cleared by Pogba. The ball drops to Messi on the right. He swivels and turns back on to his left foot, making space for a shot. It isn’t a great effort. It’s probably going straight at Lloris - until it hits the unwitting Mercado and goes past the helpless France goalkeeper! Argentina have turned it around! 47 min: Di Maria, Argentina’s unlikely first-half hero, runs at Pavard on the left. He twists this way and that, all neat footwork, and Pavard pulls him down deep on the left. Argentina could be in business if Di Maria’s going to start playing well. 46 min: Argentina get the second half underway. They’ve made a change, Roma’s Federico Fazio replacing the hapless Marcos Rojo in central defence. “Nice stadiums over there, but note to architects don’t design a stadium that has a strip of sunlight running down the centre of the pitch,” Roger Kirby says. “Both goalkeepers have had it in the middle of the goal for the first half. Can’t they pull down some blinds?” Half-time reading Half-time emails “Whose idea was it to put Messi in the false 9 role; Messi or Sampaoli?” Billy Graboso says. “Either way it’s a bad idea as he simply does not have the work-rate from 2012. Of course as I type this email Di Maria stopped being anonymous. So who knows, maybe Messi comes up with some magic.” “Presumably France thought it was Colin Livingstone because they made no attempt to close him down,” Niall Mullen parps. “I take back anything I said about Di Maria!” Matt says. “I’m grateful France/Argentina were paired against each other because I can’t take both of these teams in the tournament,” C Noyes says. “They are both so infuriating. What formation are Argentina playing? They have almost no threat at all going forward. But what does France do? Leave Angel di Maria unmarked 25 yards from goal with five French defenders standing 5 yards off. Why? Inexplicable. Good riddance to one of these teams today.” Peep! Peep! The whistle blows and the Argentina fans keep singing. It’s been a difficult half for their team, but they’re happy now! France started superbly, taking the lead through Antoine Griezmann’s penalty, and for a while it seemed that they were going to destroy Argentina. Then Colin Livingstone Angel Di Maria scored one of the goals of the tournament. The second half is going to be something else. 45 min+1: There will be two added minutes. “I take back all my cursing of Di Maria!” Mike Mackenzie says. “Talk about a timely perfect strike for a goal.” 45 min: Pogba charges down the right. He’s closed down by Mascherano and Tagliafico, who’s brought down by Pogba. The delay gives us a chance to see the Di Maria goal again. France’s midfielders will regret not closing him down. 43 min: Mascherano finally gets his booking after catching Kante. “Was that Colin Livingstone who just scored? John Pitre says. Messi’s corner is glanced away by Pavard, the ball heading off for a throw on the left. Argentina get going again and stroke the ball around for bit. Then they move it inside to Di Maria. He takes a touch, looks up and then he whips a spectacular left-footed shot to Lloris’s left and into the top corner! What a goal! That’s Argentina’s first shot on target! Diego Maradona punches the air and celebrates in his seat, the fans go wild and Di Maria’s mobbed by his jubilant team-mates! He’d been so poor. What a goal! 40 min: Messi wins a corner off the tireless Kante. 38 min: Messi slides a pass down the right to Pavon, who pulls the ball back into the area. It’s an easy clearance for Pavard, though. “Sampaoli can’t change tactics until half-time as he needs to get permission from Messi and Mascherano,” Ewan Aitchison says. 37 min: Di Maria clips a pass to Messi, who takes the ball in his stride before going down in the area. That was a tangle of legs with the covering Griezmann. The Argentina fans roar for a penalty. The referee shakes his head. 35 min: A few meaty challenges go in. Kante’s sent flying by Mercado. Play continues and Giroud catches Otamendi, who rolls off towards the corner flag in apparent agony. Giroud’s also down. Medic! “I’m 55, unfit and rubbish at football and yet could play wide for Argentina in place of Di Maria and they wouldn’t be noticeably worse off,” Colin Livingstone says. “Whatever happened to the player that lit up European football just a few years ago.” 34 min: “Messi is playing in midfield so far,” Andy Gordon says. “This is the worst choice of a midfield tactic since Manuel Neuer.” 32 min: This system isn’t working for Argentina. France are so comfortable. Argentina need to get Aguero or Higuain on. France’s centre-backs are being shielded by Matuidi, Kante and Pogba. Messi has nobody to pass to whenever he drops deep and looks up. 31 min: Griezmann sends Pogba powering through the middle. Where’s the Argentina midfield? Oh well. Pogba moves it to Mbappe, who tries to befuddle Tagliafico. The left-back stands up to him well this time. 27 min: Pavon dinks a clever ball over Hernandez, who’s dozed off, allowing Mercado to race into the area. Mercado tries to dink a ball into the middle. The ball brushes Umtiti’s arm and rolls harmlessly past the far post. Argentina scream for a penalty, but the referee isn’t interested. They don’t even get a corner. There’s no VAR check. 26 min: Argentina have had 69% possession. They aren’t doing much with it. Messi is going very deep and Pavon and Di Maria aren’t in the game. There’s barely anything for France’s defenders to think about. All the meaningful action is taking place up the other end. Now Griezmann, the goalscorer, wriggles past Rojo, who tries and fails to bring him down. Griezmann slips a pass into the middle but Armani claims it. 25 min: Perez fends off Umtiti, who goes down, and springs into the France area. Lloris charges out to smother. Umtiti gets back to his feet. 24 min: Mbappe is having a blinder. All Argentina can do is kick him. 23 min: Banega’s deep corner is headed away. Argentina haven’t created a chance yet. You wonder if they’ll ever turn to Dybala. 22 min: Banega’s shot from 25 yards takes a deflection and spins over for an Argentina corner. 21 min: Another chat between Pogba and Griezmann. Griezmann took the last one. This one looks made for Pogba as it’s slightly to the left. Griezmann leaves it to him. Pogba belts a dismal effort miles over. Argentina breathe a sigh of relief. 19 min: A long, raking pass from Pogba sends Mbappe hurtling behind the Argentina defence again. He brings the ball down with Messi-esque control and Tagliafico trips him on the edge of the area! The left-back’s booked. No penalty this time, but France have a free-kick in the D. Argentina are all over the show and they could be about to fall further behind. 17 min: Mascherano sprays a pass out to the left. Di Maria’s poor header goes to Pavard, infuriating the Argentina fans, but Tagliafico’s hustle forces the France right-back to concede a corner. It comes to nothing, though. Di Maria is having another shocker. 16 min: What are Argentina made of now? This situation will suit France. Argentina have to come at them and we’ve already seen that they can’t handle the pace of Mbappe. 15 min: That was a stupendous run from Mbappe, although it must be pointed out he was veering slightly away from goal when Rojo decided to foul him. Brainless defending. There’s a chance Mbappe had taken himself wide with a heavy touch. Griezmann waits for Armani to dive to his left. When he does, he rolls the ball down the middle with his left foot. Cool as you like. What a start for France! How about Mbappe, though 12 min: A quick VAR check confirms that Rojo bundled Mbappe over, the foul starting just outside the area and continuing inside it. Griezmann will take the penalty. 11 min: This is spectacular from Kylian Mbappe! Argentina lose the ball near France’s area, Banega and Tagliafico getting themselves in a muddle. Mbappe picks up the loose ball and embarks on a power surge. He’s so fast! There’s no catching him! Argentina’s snails are left trailing in his wake and the danger’s clear as he approaches the area. He tears to the right, away from Rojo, who desperately brings him down! Penalty! Booking! No doubt about it! That was the teenager’s Michael Owen moment! 9 min: Pogba takes a few steps back, which makes it look like he’s going to take the free-kick. But then Griezmann winds up and whips a delicious effort over the Argentina wall with his left foot. The ball curls and dips and Armani can only watch it fly to his left - and twang against the face of the bar! The ball bounces to safety and Argentina survive! That was a brilliant effort from Griezmann. 7 min: Mbappe picks up a loose ball in the middle of Argentina’s half. He turns smartly and speeds towards the area. He’s too quick. Mascherano slides in to bring him down 25 yards out. Here’s a chance for France. Pogba and Griezmann are having a chat. 5 min: France attack. Argentina’s fans whistle. Giroud lays the ball off to Mbappe and falls as Rojo goes through the back of him. Play continues and Otamendi steps in to dispossess Mbappe. Argentina counter and the ball’s played down the left for Di Maria, who had a stinker the other night. He’s one-on-one with Varane, but he chooses to cross and sends the ball sailing out of play. 4 min: Messi gets back to his feet, which is just as well from Argentina’s perspective. They have a free-kick on the right. Banega puts the ball down and the big men trot forward from the back. Nothing happens, though. 3 min: Pogba wins the ball in midfield, gives it away and chops down Banega. Moments later Matuidi clatters into Messi. Mascherano has a strong word with the referee. 2 min: Argentina are seeing plenty of the ball early on. It’s France who’ve dropped back. Peep! France kick off from left to right. They’re in dark blue shirts and white shorts. Argentina are in their light blue and white stripes. France immediately launch the ball long and Giroud gives away a free-kick. France go first with their atmospheric tune. Then it’s Argentina’s turn. Their fans relish the chance to bellow their country’s anthem. A small smile flickers across Messi’s face as he hears the roar. “I’m pretty certain Maradona’s eyes will roll back to the very recesses of his skull and stay there when he reads your spooky Messi knockout game goal drought stat,” Peter Oh says. Here come the teams! It’s hot and sunny in Kazan. Plenty of blue and white stripes in the stands. Plenty of talent on the pitch. It’s Argentina! It’s France! It’s the first knockout round of the 2018 World Cup! But first, the anthems. “Am I the only one who thinks a midfield with Mascherano in it is going to get destroyed by this young French team?” wonders Paul Fitzgerald. “Has everyone forgotten Croatia, Spain or any other decent team Argentina have up come against. Messi can only do so much, and receiving 3 foot passes in the middle of the park isn’t going to cut it.” It could happen, Paul. The doubt is because France haven’t played well yet. I can see them winning handily if they click. So far, though, they’ve been stodgy and bland. Argentina have a bit of soul. It’s illogical. There’s no reason to think they’re good enough - ok, Messi’s a reason - but this is knockout football and knockout football can be weird. If France don’t show personality, Argentina could take advantage. “Except for a moment of madness by Umtiti, the French defence has been rock solid so far,” Kari Tulinius says. “Varane has been especially impressive, bringing his Real Madrid form the national team. Of course, being screened by Kante has its advantages. If the attack keeps not clicking, the defense might still let them 1-0 their way to the final. Mind you, potential quarterfinal opponents Uruguay have been equally impressive defensively.” True - they are very strong at the back. However they haven’t faced a strong attack yet. Australia were one of the weakest teams in the tournament, Peru lacked a cutting edge and Denmark were happy with 0-0. “Seems like most people are looking forward to a Argentina-Portugal showdown,” Paulina B says. “So am I, with the exception of Messi getting booked this game and Ronaldo later tonight, leading to the game everyone wants but without the two reasons they want it. Hilarious.” Paulina! How could you even think that! “The venerable France Football is reporting (under the French equivalent to Oof - What A Scorcher) that it’s very hot in Kazan,” Charles Antaki says. “Now that’s proper coverage. For shame, Guardian!” It’s also very hot where I am - east London. An email! “You left one more possibility out for Argentina,” says Aravindh Balasubramanian. “Final against the greatest national team, England.” Imagine Diego Maradona. He’d demand to play. In fact he’d probably get the winner after a VAR debacle. An Argentina win sets up the possibility of: A Messi v Ronaldo quarter-final breaking the internet A quarter-final with Luis Suarez’s Uruguay (a repeat of the 1930 final!) A semi-final against Neymar’s Coutinho’s Brazil (imagine the emotion!) You want stats? I’ll give you stats! Did you know that Lionel Messi has gone 666 minutes without a goal in the knockout stage of the World Cup? Spooky. Argentina are likely to need Messi to end his barren today. Although at least they’ll be heartened to hear that Olivier Giroud is also struggling in front of goal. The France striker is yet to register a shot on target in Russia. These two teams don’t have much of a World Cup rivalry. They’ve only met twice before on the biggest stage, with Argentina victorious both times. Their first meeting came in the first round of the 1930 World Cup, with Luis Monti sealing a 1-0 win for Argentina, who also beat France 2-1 as hosts in 1978, Michel Platini’s goal not enough for Les Bleus to advance to the second round. That’s your lot. Games between Argentina and France are rare. In total they’ve only met 11 times. There have been six wins for Argentina, two for France and three draws. Pre-match reading France are back to full strength after resting players against Denmark. It’s the same 11 that beat Peru 1-0, with the steel of Blaise Matuidi preferred to the skill of Ousmane Dembele. Argentina make one change to the team that beat Nigeria. Out goes Gonzalo Higuain, in comes Cristian Pavon. It’s a big call from manager Javier Mascherano, who has named co-manager Lionel Messi as a False Nine. France: Lloris; Pavard, Umtiti, Varane, Hernandez; Kante, Pogba; Mbappe, Griezmann, Matuidi; Giroud. Argentina: Armani; Mercado, Otamendi, Rojo, Tagliafico; Mascherano, Perez, Banega; Pavon, Messi, Di Maria. Referee: Alireza Faghani (Iran). A strange game to work out, this one. It’s a collision between the rickety force and the meandering object; fiery, furious flappers against bores with enough bite to draw blood; bronca versus beige. It’s a meeting between a team who have subjected themselves, their fans and the rest of us to an emotional rollercoaster, all in the space of 10 nerve-shredding days, and one searching for a plan. On the one hand we have the genius of Lionel Messi propping up the least impressive Argentina side in living memory. On the other we have an odd France team whose featureless football threatens to cancel out their frightening depth and array of talent. Trying to make sense all feels like a futile task. Your guess is as good as mine, although the feeling at the moment is that France have the edge before the first second-round tie of Russia 2018. They’re the more settled team, they cruised through their group and the sense is that they have far more ways of winning than Argentina. They have Paul Pogba, Antoine Griezmann, Kylian Mbappe and, er, Olivier Giroud. They can unleash Ousmane Dembele, Nabil Fekir, Thomas Lemar and Florian Thauvin if needs be and on paper they possess enviable balance, with the magnificent N’Golo Kante screening a solid defence. Yet is there a more frustrating team left in the tournament? Unlikely. All that firepower and France have managed three goals in three matches. They laboured against Australia and Peru, were booed off after a grim 0-0 draw with Denmark and have more than a whiff of England 2006 about them. That’s a big accusation to level at anyone. But unless France find a way to conjure some Gallic flair soon, neutrals will start to wish ill on them. Time for the monotone Didier Deschamps to lift the handbrake. And if that happens, then Argentina could be in trouble here. The south Americans are, after all, still a bit of a shambles. Their manager, Jorge Sampaoli, has been stripped of any influence over the team, their defence is a mess, the midfield isn’t much better and they were on the verge of going out in the first round before Marcos Rojo pulled back his right foot against Nigeria on Tuesday night. They are thrilling and terrible all at once, a mass of contradictions and exhausting to watch, magnetic in their madness and captivating in their chaos. Nothing summed this absurd team up more than Javier Mascherano’s demented display against Nigeria in the second half. Was he good? Was he useless? Who knows. He gave away a penalty. He can’t run. He can’t pass. He is 34. But with blood pouring from his face, Mascherano played like he’d been told that the world depended on Argentina winning and he went about his mission like a concussed James Bond, always demanding the ball, always giving it away, always winning it back, always demanding more from his team-mates. Mission accomplished in the end. Defiance and desire have kept Argentina alive, while it also helps that Messi recovered from his existential crisis in time to produce those three magical touches against Nigeria. There are echoes, in fact, of the 2006 World Cup, when Zinedine Zidane awoke from group-stage torpor to inspire France to knockout wins over Spain and Brazil. If Messi’s in the mood again here, France’s team of individuals might be beaten by solo brilliance. Alternatively this could be the day when the volcano erupts and France discover their identity. One way or another, it’s bound to be eventful. Kick-off: 3pm BST, 7pm in Kazan.
16||Major incident declared as moor fires converge in LancashireTwo moor fires converged on Saturday afternoon, prompting authorities to declare a major incident. A blaze on Winter Hill in Lancashire, which has a television transmission mast that broadcasts signals to millions of people, merged with a fire around Scout Road to the south. Tony Cook, Lancashire fire and rescue service’s area manager, said his crews had been tackling the Winter Hill fire while colleagues from Greater Manchester dealt with the other front. The priority on Winter Hill was protecting the transmission mast, Cook said. “We still have 10 fire engines and the fire engines from Manchester at the scene. We advise members of the public to keep clear of the areas for their own safety,” Lancashire fire and rescue service tweeted. Crews were initially called to multiple fires on the hills near Horrocks Moor farm in the early hours of Friday morning. They were contained but as the heat intensified in thedry weather, the fire flared up again early on Friday afternoon. Seven square miles of land between Tameside and Oldham has gone up in flames and blanketed the Greater Manchester region and beyond in smoke and ash. The Ministry of Defence said the army would remain on Saddleworth Moor over the weekend and into next week to help keep control of moorland blazes in the area following a request on Friday afternoon for continued support from Greater Manchester fire and rescue service. It could take weeks to fully extinguish the fires on the peat-embedded terrain and dry shrubland, given there is no prospect of rain in the next week. Andy Burnham, the mayor of greater Manchester, said on Friday: “As it is an ongoing situation and because there has been in some places a flaring-up today of the fire, we believe we continue to need large numbers of people out there providing support.” Greater Manchester assistant chief fire officer Leon Parkes said: “It continues to be an extremely challenging time for Greater Manchester fire and rescue service and conditions for our crews up on the moors are very difficult. We are doing everything we can to put this fire out but we will be here for some time to come.”
12||I’ve left London for rural Ireland. So long fancy bars and shoe shops. Hello optimismThe day we left London, torrential rain battered our belongings that waited forlornly beside an 18-tonne truck. The removal men fashioned waterproof capes from bubble wrap, squeezed the last bit of decades of accumulated crap on board, and then set off damply to catch the ferry. They didn’t, of course; “conditions” on the M4 saw to that. So we arrived in Co Kilkenny 12 hours ahead of them, and sat on some borrowed plastic garden chairs, waiting. “Stop telling people we’ve bought a farm,” my bloke keeps saying. “It’s a farmhouse. We haven’t got a tractor or any livestock and you don’t even know what arable means.” Pfff. Whatever. I haven’t moved from a main road in central London to a lane in the back of beyond not to indulge my fantasy of playing Marie Antoinette at the Petit Trianon (Kirsten Dunst version). There’s hay. I can hear cows. It’s a farm. Not only have I never lived in the countryside, I’ve barely been there; if you grow up in home counties suburbia with an internal drumbeat thudding “get-to-London”, you try not to go via the Lake District. Everything that has been good about my life – my friends, libraries, newspapers, bars, restaurants, train stations, shoe shops – has been urban. I am a person who once had Amazon Prime Now deliver extra provisions in the middle of a dinner party – so sue me. But then we got older, and so did our loved ones, and many of them are in the Republic of Ireland. And then, the killer blow: the Republic of Ireland is in the European Union, and our country, through a combination of hilarious mishaps and outright swindles, is about not to be. In the words of the old commercial for the Irish lager Harp, time for a sharp exit. Actually, it was anything but sharp: several years of waiting for circumstances to align perfectly, then the realisation that they never would and that we just had to make the leap. Thus, we find ourselves engaged in a little light commuting, which itself tees up an interesting process of compare-and-contrast. In Ireland, things that I had no reason to notice throughout years of visiting suddenly present themselves as unromantic daily facts: privatised rubbish collection, more limited booze-buying hours in supermarkets, a marked absence of public transport. But they are as nothing to the delights of small-town and rural life. The shebeen – put simply, a pub in someone’s house – at the end of the road, the only place of entertainment within walking distance, is open four nights a week. And when I say “nights”: it starts up around 10pm and serves until 3am. If the owners aren’t about, they leave an outside light on to let you know it’s fine to go in and help yourself. In the proper pubs in town (use of the word “village” is a very specific business here, and quite unlike the Cotswolds definition), you can buy shotgun cartridges and rat poison along with your pint. At Christmas a few years ago, my roiling Irish adopted family persuaded me and my English father that a complicated-looking tool on the wall of the pub was what farmers used for trepanning sheep suffering from the gid, a brain disease. It turned out to be a standard gouge. Now, I am making arrangements to have my own hay baled. I fear terribly that I will become the ex-city dweller of Stewart Lee’s comedy sketch, begging friends to come to visit, promising horses at the end of the garden and finally plaintively requesting they bring cocaine. I am already cross that I can’t access the BBC iPlayer, and that my favourite online makeup company doesn’t deliver to the ROI. But what’s more likely is that I try to out-Irish the Irish. I am already in love with the language, especially as it pours from the mouth of the bloke’s mum. She threatens to give you a fellandibang (“wallop”), or hop your head off the wall; anything in her way, particularly a cow, is a Protestant; you might want half a cup of tea out of your hand, if you’re in a rush; and anybody displaying airs and graces might be displaying gorster, and definitely notions. Already, I am starting sentences with “Sure, lookit” and “Howya”, a sure sign that I must guard against becoming what Danny Dyer would quite rightly call “a twat”. And I must let Dyer also remind me that the British, too, have a brilliant way with the language; it’s just that the gift seems to be more widely distributed this side of the Irish Sea. As does the gift of optimism. Another favourite Irish phrase, in response to a piece of gloom and doom, asks: “Could you not have the good word?” In fairness, Ireland has more to have the good word about; following a series of dramatic referendums, it is throwing off its constitution to become a progressive and liberal version of its already beautiful self. Am I now a citizen of nowhere? It doesn’t feel like it. Through the sheer good fortune of wandering into an Irish family, I feel like I have allowed a billowing gust of air to blow through my life. I feel like I have granted myself the permission not to be chained to a bickering, divided, petty, cruel country, its plight not the fault of its predominantly decent populace but of a bewildered governing elite and a cabal of vicious chancers. As my beloved mother-in-law would say of the latter: “Feck ’em. Feck ’em all.” • Alex Clark is a regular contributor to the Observer
4||Kylian Mbappé doubles up in France’s rollercoaster victory over ArgentinaDreams can endure only so long before they are overwhelmed by reality – and there are few realities quite so brutally uncompromising as the pace and finishing of Kylian Mbappé, who scored twice and won a penalty in France’s 4-3 win. After a grim trudge through the group stage, France, finally, are off and running and looking like potential champions. They will meet Uruguay in the last eight. Lionel Messi, for all the hopes freighting his slight frame, will not be winning the World Cup this time. Quite how Argentina have ended up as this strange botch-job of parts that do not quite fit together, bound by nothing more than the magic of Messi, is a question that cannot straightforwardly be answered. But the fact is they are and, as such, they were never likely to survive a meeting with a side that looked into their eyes and were not cowed by their self-romanticising will to progress. That will, though, remains ferociously strong. It was embodied by Javier Mascherano who, at 34, announced his international retirement after the game. As Jorge Sampaoli kept reiterating, Argentina fought and fought and fought. Until the midpoint of the second half, when France opened up a two-goal lead, the game was underpinned by the question of how Didier Deschamps’ team did not already have it won. There had been talk of Argentina conjuring a repeat of 1990 when defeat by Cameroon inspired a defiant spirit that carried them to the final and, in some of their cruder challenges, it felt they might be following that template rather too closely. But the difference between then and now is that team could actually defend; this side can merely struggle. The deployment of Messi as a false nine as Sampaoli – or whichever cabal of senior players picks the side these days – opted for a fourth different formation in four games, served only to deny the wide men a target when they got the ball in crossing positions. Certainly it did nothing to add a defensive stability. “We tried many different tactics, surrounding him, creating situations for Messi,” said Sampaoli. “We tried to use everything we had to allow him to do what he can do. Sometimes we managed to do so, sometimes we didn’t.” Well, perhaps. It is all very well to play, as the coach promised they would, with a knife between their teeth, but only if you can actually catch your opponents to use it. Argentina’s lack of pace is a problem that will never easily be resolved, and certainly not by playing the sort of high line they attempted early on. Perhaps Deschamps’ France have become a fluent attacking unit; perhaps Argentina just made them appear so. Mbappé’s pace terrified Argentina, provoking the 13th-minute penalty from which Antoine Griezmann opened the scoring. There was something of the Brazilian Ronaldo about his surge, a comparison acknowledged by Deschamps. “Ronaldo was very, very quick,” he said. “But I think Kylian is even quicker.” Quite why Argentina had tried to play so high, against such pace, with such slow defenders, was mystifying but that divergence between Sampaoli’s instincts and his resources is an issue he has never quite reconciled. He was reluctant to accept the excuse but it cannot help that he took over the side only last June. “We adapted to necessity, maybe,” said the coach, speaking of his reign as a whole, “rather than having a clear identity. We had a clear need, and we had to win. That was our main goal, so that was maybe stronger than our football concept.” Yet for all their flaws, Argentina were level at half-time, Ángel Di María scoring with a 30-yard drive. Having scored one brilliant goal, Argentina, as they had against Nigeria, then added a second with the least implausible body part available to them, as Messi’s ball back into the middle was deflected in by the left foot of Gabriel Mercado. Could they cling on? They could not, and did not even come close. It took only nine minutes for Benjamin Pavard to conjure a goal the equal of Di María’s, cuffing a volley from the edge of the box into the top corner. Then it was Mbappé’s time, with two goals in four minutes around the midpoint of the half, a neat turn and finish and then a slick breakaway. At 19 he is already a wonderfully efficient footballer, the first teenager to score two goals in a World Cup knockout tie since Pelé in 1958. Yet still Argentina were not quite finished, Sergio Agüero heading in a late third. From the grave, the hand thrust up through the soil but it got no further. Argentina, at last, were done. France have been criticised for their ungainliness and caution, for being too much about substance and not enough about style. On the day Deschamps became the longest serving manager in France’s history, he could perhaps reflect that a little planning and a little stodge goes a lot further than a slow and shambolic defence and a nostalgic faith in a bastard spirit.
5||France pays tribute to Simone Veil with hero’s burial in the PanthéonSimone Veil, the former minister and Holocaust survivor who led the battle to legalise abortion in France, will be buried in the Panthéon today with all the pomp and symbolism the French republic can muster. Veil’s death last year sparked a wave of emotion in France, with thousands signing a petition requesting she be buried in the secular mausoleum, the giant marble building in Paris’s Latin quarter which has become the final resting place for the country’s most illustrious citizens. Veil, who will be joined on her final journey by her husband Antoine, a high-ranking civil servant who died in 2013 after 67 years of marriage, will be only the fifth woman to be buried in the Panthéon. It was originally built in 1790 as a church to outdo St Peter’s Basilica in Rome and St Paul’s in London. Veil was 16 in March 1944 when she was arrested in Nice by the occupying German forces just days after passing her baccalaureat. She was deported with her family to the Nazi concentration camp at Auschwitz-Birkenau. They were later moved to a second camp at Bergen-Belsen, where Veil’s mother Yvonne died of typhus shortly before the camp’s liberation by British forces in April 1945. Her father and brother were last seen on a prisoner transport bound for Lithuania, but never returned. Simone and her sisters, Madeleine and Denise, survived the war, but Madeleine, the eldest, died in a car crash in the 1950s. Returning to France after the war, Veil studied law and political science at Sciences Po university and began campaigning for European reconciliation and women’s rights. In 1974 she won what many saw as her biggest political and personal victory by convincing the Assemblée Nationale to legalise abortion despite bitter opposition in what was at the time still a fundamentally Catholic country. She served as a minister in several governments and was president of the European parliament between 1979 and 1982. She was repeatedly voted as one of the country’s most trusted and popular figures. Sunday’s interment is expected to feature many symbols of the EU – of which Veil was an unfailing supporter – and the Holocaust. The couple’s coffins, exhumed from Montparnasse cemetery last Friday, will be taken to the Panthéon from the Holocaust memorial in the city’s Jewish district in the Marais, where they were placed draped with tricolours to allow members of the public to pay tribute. They will be carried by members of the Republican Guard along Rue Soufflot on a blue carpet chosen by the presidential palace to represent “peace, the United Nations and Europe”, and will enter the Panthéon to the 1963 song Nuit et Brouillard by Jean Ferrat, a popular hymn to those persecuted for opposing the Nazi regime and victims of the concentration camps. Inside, the cortege will stop three times during which the choir will sing and films on Europe and the Holocaust will be shown. After an address by French president Emmanuel Macron, there will be a minute’s silence and a rendition of La Marseillaise. On Monday, the coffins of Veil and her husband will be placed in the crypt alongside other eminent French personalities said to have shaped the national identity, including François-Marie Arouet, known by his pen-name Voltaire, the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Emile Zola and the celebrated French resistance hero Jean Moulin. Out of more than 70 illustrious figures whose tombs are in the crypt, only four are female. The first was Sophie Berthelot, wife of the chemist Marcellin Berthelot, who was buried in 1907, but it was not until 1995 when Marie Curie’s remains were moved to the Panthéon that a woman was accepted in her own right. It took another 20 years before two more women were added: resistance fighters Germaine Tillion and Genevieve de Gaulle-Anthonioz, a niece of President Charles de Gaulle.About 1,000 guests will attend the ceremony, including former presidents Nicolas Sarkozy and François Hollande. Five screens will relay the service to the public outside. At Veil’s state funeral last year, Macron said in his eulogy: “You brought into our lives that light that burned within you and that nobody could ever take away.” Last month, the Paris metro authorities named a station after her when the “Europe” stop became “Europe – Simone Veil”. Commemorative coins and postage stamps bearing Veil’s image will also go into circulation later this month.
4||Russia’s rising star Denis Cheryshev out to upset his adopted homelandDenis Cheryshev was the player Russia chose to appear at their press conference the day before the biggest football match in the country’s recent history, a last-16 encounter with Spain at their home Luzhniki Stadium, and it was not hard to guess why. Cheryshev, quietly spoken and with a wry smile, has emerged as the unexpected star of the Russia team at the tournament, scoring two goals in the opening match against Saudi Arabia and another against Egypt. But his personal circumstances also lend his involvement against Spain extra spice. Cheryshev has lived in Spain since he was five, came through the Real Madrid academy and has dual Spanish and Russian nationality. On Saturday he answered most questions in flawless Spanish. He stands out in a squad of largely homegrown and home-reared players – one of only two of Russia’s 23-man squad not to play in the domestic league. “I feel half Russian and half Spanish,” Cheryshev has told El Pais in the past. “I was born in Russia and in my house we speak Russian, but I grew up here. Even though my character is Russian, rather cold, my behaviour is Spanish because I like very much to talk to people.” Cheryshev moved to Spain in his youth because his father, Dmitry, also a footballer, signed for Sporting Gijón in 1996. Denis attended local Spanish schools and picked up football from Spanish coaches. “His speed, technique and ball skills are unlike anyone else in the team,” said Igor Rabiner, a leading Russian football journalist. “After all, this is a guy who has gone through the Real Madrid academy from start to finish; in Russia, we simply don’t train people like that.” Cheryshev has not quite lived up to his natural talent, mainly because of a string of injuries that put him way back down the pecking order at Madrid. In December 2015 Cheryshev finally scored his first competitive goal for the club, in a 3-0 win against Cádiz in the Copa del Rey. However, he had picked up yellow cards in the previous season’s tournament while on loan and should have been suspended. As a result of the error, Real were kicked out of the tournament. For Cheryshev, who had never looked like being close to breaking into the Madrid first team, the incident appeared to be the final straw, and in summer 2016 he moved to Villarreal. “He often retreated inside himself and began to think and worry about why he’s plagued by injury and whether he’s doing something wrong,” said Dmitry Cheryshev in an interview with Russia’s Sport Express newspaper. “I was a footballer too and I understand what it’s like not to play for a whole year; how much you want to get on to the pitch. But my son has a lot of patience, and it’s because of that that he’s where he is now.” This year it seems that Cheryshev’s luck is turning. A late inclusion in the Russia squad in spring, it was touch and go whether he would make the final squad. Most Russian football journalists were expecting Dinamo Moscow’s Aleksandr Tashayev to make it ahead of him. But Cheryshev, having impressed as a substitute in a friendly against Austria, was selected. Even then he was seen as a fringe player, the sort who might, if lucky, be given 15 minutes at the end of a game to liven things up. Instead, Alan Dzagoev got injured early on against Saudi Arabia and Cheryshev came off the bench to score two delightful goals, one at the end of each half. “Even when Dzagoev got injured in the first game most people were not expecting to see Cheryshev, but clearly [the coach Stanislav] Cherchesov and his team were impressed by what they had seen of Cheryshev in training,” said Rabiner. He has three goals at the World Cup, one more than he managed in 24 appearances for Villarreal in La Liga last season, and it seems he has hit a rich vein of form at just the right time. His group stage was slightly marred by the final game against Uruguay, in which he scored an unfortunate own goal before being substituted in the first half after Igor Smolnikov was sent off. But he goes into the match against Spain as a key player. On Saturday he was circumspect and serious, playing down the significance of facing his adopted country but insisting that Russia believe they can beat anyone, even if the players know they are the underdogs. “All players have good times and bad times but we will try to be professionals and give it the best we’ve got,” he said. His father has said Denis is in many ways more Spanish than Russian but has some strong links to his ancestral home, including his Orthodox faith. Cheryshev said on Saturday his pre-match routine involves praying before coming on to the pitch. He, like most of the 80,000 who will pack Luzhniki on Sunday evening, will be hoping for a miracle against Spain.
6||'We're just a quiet area': Annapolis stunned by Capital Gazette shootingBefore the horrific shooting in which five people were killed at the Capital Gazette newspaper, Annapolis was known as a quaint and genteel city. More than 350 years old, built in red brick, it is the type of place where sailing and lacrosse are as big as baseball and football, and where antique shops and B&amp;Bs are major economic engines. The Maryland state legislature still meets in an 18th-century building, just down the hall from where George Washington resigned from the Continental army. Prior to the attack on the Capital Gazette on Thursday, the most notable act of violence to occur in the city may have been a battle in 1655 that is generally known as the last skirmish of the English civil war. “We’re just such a quiet area,” said Carol Donaldson, a 73-year-old retiree who has lived in Annapolis for 50 years. Besides the traffic, she said, “there’s not much here to get upset about.” The mass shooting that rocked this community happened just outside the city limits shortly before 3pm on Thursday. It took place in a nondescript suburban office building in which the Capital Gazette shares space with dentists and lawyers, across the street from an upscale shopping mall filled with department stores and the nicer sort of chain restaurants. In the aftermath, the scene was chaotic. Emergency vehicles surrounded the building: police cars, fire trucks, ambulances, a mobile command center or two. Helicopters whirled overhead while police officers in tactical vests and camouflage gear milled around in the distance. Bethany Clasing, a legal assistant who worked one floor above the Capital Gazette, only realized she was hearing gunshots when police officers arrived and yelled at people to “get down”. Speaking to reporters shortly after the shooting, she was still dumbfounded. “It’s not like you would expect someone to come and shoot up this building,” she said. Hours later, the Capital Gazette had published in tribute profiles of its five murdered staffers. They were the assistant news editor Rob Hiaasen, the editorial page editor Gerald Fischman, the special publications editor Wendi Winters, the sales assistant Rebecca Smith and the staff writer John McNamara. Sitting in a Starbucks on Friday, Donaldson was still adjusting to the events of the day before. She had left the mall only an hour before the shooting and was transfixed by the news when it happened. She said she didn’t stop following the story until 10pm, then spent nearly two hours lying awake in bed. Donaldson is the mother of a former Capital Gazette reporter and sister-in-law of a another former employee. She said she thought “people need an outlet right now to show their sorrow”. “I think once people get over being stunned, being shocked, maybe a month, it will slow down,” she said. The area around the Capital Gazette building still bore scars. It was still partially surrounded by police tape but cars were driving by and people were coming and going. In the bank directly in front of the building, employees sat at their desks, getting it ready to reopen on Friday afternoon. A makeshift memorial had been created at the corner in front of the bank, a half-block from the Capital Gazette. Under a long, low brick embankment, flowers and balloons were scattered with a sign bearing the slogan: “Annapolis Strong”. An handful of people stood around, looking at the display. Amber Thornton, 23 and from Glen Burnie, Maryland, was tearful as she described the shooting, saying: “You’d never expect something like this in this area.” Her infant daughter looked at the balloons that swayed in the summer air. Across the street, in the Annapolis Mall, an employee pushed a kid on a cart fashioned like a model train, while shoppers strolled by. Taking a walk along the edge of mall, Bob Mann, an Annapolis native, said violence like that which was visited on the Capital Gazette was “just endemic in our society right now”. Thursday’s killings came just over four months after a mass shooting at a high school in Parkland, Florida, left 17 students and staff dead. In May, 10 people died at a high school in Santa Fe, Texas. But Mann said that while “everyone was upset”, some Annapolis residents were already moving on. “People are going about their lives,” he said. “I went had beers with buddies last night and people aren’t even talking about it.” Other shoppers didn’t even realize they were so close to the crime scene. Gary and Pam Shupe from Waldorf, Maryland, had driven up to shop and were staring at a row of television cameras, in front of an adjacent strip mall that advertised “psychotherapeutics services”. “We come up here all the time and park right there,” said Pam Shupe. They had no worries about returning to Annapolis. “Stuff like this happens everywhere for no reason. It happens in DC, it happens in our little Waldorf,” said Pam Shupe. Her husband added: “You can’t lock yourself up.”
1||Another side of Amy Winehouse: intimate photographs by her friend Blake WoodFor Amy Winehouse, 2008 was a year of extreme highs and confounding lows – business as usual, in other words, but even more so. The zenith came in February, when the 24-year-old singer dominated the Grammys with five wins, a record for a British woman. She couldn’t be in the US, because of visa complications, but when Tony Bennett, one of her heroes, announced Rehab as record of the year – beating Beyoncé, the Foo Fighters, Rihanna and Jay-Z, and Justin Timberlake – she was shown, by satellite linkup to London, staring straight ahead, mouth agape, briefly speechless. But there were many profoundly distressing episodes, too. Throughout the year, Winehouse battled her addictions to alcohol, crack and heroin, while a gleeful tabloid press documented every tumble from the wagon. Her live shows could descend into chaos and she was roundly booed at both V Festival and Bestival that summer. Blake Wood, then a 22-year-old proto-photographer from Vermont newly arrived in London, met Winehouse in early January 2008. They were introduced by their mutual friend Kelly Osbourne and quickly became inseparable – in red-top parlance, he was “Good Blake”, in contrast to Winehouse’s husband, Blake Fielder-Civil, who had not long been jailed for attempting to pervert the course of justice, though her relationship with Wood was always platonic (he eventually took legal steps to correct false reporting). Their friendship deepened and, on Winehouse’s invitation, Wood began taking informal photographs. After her death in 2011, he could scarcely bring himself to look at them, but now he feels the time is right for a different, more nuanced narrative of that surreal period. “A big reason I wanted to put this out there was to change the conversation about her,” Wood says of his new book, Amy Winehouse, a collection of 150 mostly unseen images, taken in locations from Camden to Paris to St Lucia, in 2008-09. “There’s a false idea that it was all bad during those years and it really wasn’t – I was there.” Wood, on the phone from New York, where he now lives, goes on: “This book, really it’s a love letter to a friend. And it’s a visual diary of us at the time when she was most celebrated by the world, but she was also really misunderstood. She was very much loved by the people around her, and I hope this comes through the work.” Certainly the photographs present a contrasting image of Winehouse from the one that filled the newspapers at the time, or from that of the doomed, self-destructive naïve from Asif Kapadia’s Oscar-winning documentary Amy. Wood says that he wanted to capture “the person, not the persona”. In many of the images she has her natural curly hair rather than the extreme beehive we are used to. The book is dominated by an extended holiday that Winehouse took to St Lucia at the end of 2008, which Wood joined her on for almost four months. Winehouse looks natural and healthy as she rides horses on the beach or exercises on a trapeze, and she appears totally at ease with Wood snapping away on Polaroid and old point-and-shoot cameras that he’d brought on the trip. By the time of the St Lucia holiday, Wood insists, Winehouse was done with hard drugs, but she was still drinking. Either way, Wood – who grew up around addiction but has always been straight-edge himself – didn’t want to document that aspect of her life. “It was this unwelcome friend she’d go deal with and then come back and we’d hang out,” he says. “I just had no interest in taking bad photos of her. Why take a photo of someone who’s struggling? As a society we’ve captured that, we’ve seen that, at least from my perspective. But maybe not. Maybe other people need to connect to that visually and they need to see it more. But for me, I’m good.” Before St Lucia, much of the time that Winehouse and Wood spent together was housebound, hiding from the paparazzi. They would watch TV, talk about their lives, sketch out their creative dreams; once they made pillowcases from vintage T-shirts. “We were both outsiders and we connected on that,” says Wood. “When you grow up feeling like that, you don’t feel like you belong, that definitely brought us close.” Winehouse pushed Wood to do photography and it was her encouragement that led him to leave St Lucia and return to the States to pursue it professionally. “She really believed in my work,” he says. “She saw my abilities before I saw any of it. I didn’t really know if I was shit or not. But she pushed me to make work and it was really nice to have a friend like that.” When asked to pick a special memory from their time together, Wood selects the night of the Grammys, and the gathering of friends and family at the Riverside Studios, west London. There’s even been a suggestion that when Winehouse finally found her voice and made a speech – “To my mum and dad. To my Blake, my Blake incarcerated” – she was talking about Wood first and Fielder-Civil second. “I didn’t talk to her about it after, but you can jump to that conclusion if you like,” he says. “But when she won, it was the first time in my life I really cried from joy. Seeing somebody being able to experience recognition sober, they really deserve it, and to be able to really feel it. Just to see her whole family and how proud of her they were, to bear witness to that moment was really big. As much as it was televised and public, it was very intimate that night. It was almost like her own private ceremony.” Amy Winehouse by Blake Wood is published by Taschen on 27 July (£30). To order it for £25 go to guardian bookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.
11||Sun over Blackpool and Scarborough, but dark days are not overThe sky is cloudless and the tide is high. Seagulls are scavenging, skin is blistering and the sea looks tempting. The trams go rumbling along the front and the air is thick with the authentic smell of the seaside: malt vinegar on chips. On a day like this, Blackpool appears not to have a care in the world. The town grew up as an oasis of fun and still does what it was set up to do in Victorian times. As the ice-cream stalls coin it in, it is hard to believe that Blackpool is usually portrayed as a town without a future, the biggest victim of consumer demand for more exotic destinations. Simon Blackburn, leader of Blackpool council, says the idea that Blackpool is finished is a myth, spread by “people who have never been here or were last here a long time ago and are basing their assumptions on that”. Like other seaside towns, Blackpool has had to reinvent itself, because the days when Lancashire mill workers came for a week or a fortnight in a guest house are over. Long-term observers believe the town hit bottom some years ago and is now on the up. The council has invested in key elements of the town’s infrastructure: the trams, the prom, the tower – and this seems to have paid off. New hotels have opened, the Pleasure Beach has a new ride, and there are plans for a new leisure complex. “I believe the town is at a tipping point,” Blackburn says. “Private sector investment is coming in without the public-sector pump priming it.” John Young, the Bank of England’s regional agent for the north-west, agrees: “I’ve been going to Blackpool since the 1950s and have seen the long-term decline. But in the past couple of years I have seen things to make me feel more optimistic. To me, Blackpool could have bottomed out.” Even so, there is a long way to go. Professor Steve Fothergill of Sheffield Hallam University says Britain’s seaside tourist industry weathered the recession relatively well and now employs more people than the motor, aerospace or pharmaceuticals industries. But not all seaside towns are the same. Brighton and Bournemouth, for example, are doing better than Hastings or Margate. But it is Blackpool that has Britain’s highest hidden unemployment, and highest number of drug deaths per head of population. The town’s problem is that the decline in visitors coming for their main summer holiday left a glut of privately rented accommodation, which attracts people on low incomes, coming out of prison or with drug problems. Blackburn wants the government to give the council control over housing benefit so that multiple-occupancy properties can be turned into affordable family homes for local people. Despite its fun image, Blackpool is not necessarily the ideal place for a fresh start, Blackburn adds. “People come here with all their problems, but the weather is not always as lovely as it is this week. In November, December, January and February, it can be grey and miserable. There’s nothing quite as shut as a shut seaside resort.” Blackpool’s summer season is long, however, and only really winds down after Strictly Come Dancing comes to town for a one-off show at the tower ballroom in November. The ballroom is operated for the council by Merlin Entertainments, and the company’s head of operations for Blackpool, Kate Shane, says Strictly has made a real difference to perceptions of the town. “Strictly gives validation to Blackpool. Bringing the show here represents a big investment by the BBC. It is great that the contestants say their aim is to get to Blackpool and say how great the town is. It helps with civic pride.” Scarborough has an even longer lineage as a seaside resort, and fulfilled the same function for Yorkshire as Blackpool did for Lancashire. It is 112 miles between the two towns as the crow flies, and customers using Northern and Trans-Pennine express trains could be forgiven for thinking that a crow could complete the journey more quickly than the train. Leaving Blackpool North at 17.38 on a Wednesday, it takes me five hours and 10 minutes to cross the country. The Wars of the Roses live on in the rivalry between the two resorts. “This is still Britain’s premier seaside town,” says Richard Richmond, who runs food supplement firm Private Label Nutrition in Blackpool. But Jim Dillon, chief executive of Scarborough council, insists Blackpool is a “one-trick pony”, while his town is much more than a “kiss me quick” destination. Scarborough certainly has a more upmarket feel. There are art galleries, posher restaurants, and men in Panama hats heading off to see Yorkshire play Surrey at the cricket club. In Blackpool, social problems are easy to find a couple of streets back from the Golden Mile; Scarborough’s problems are there, but better hidden. According to the Insolvency Service, for instance, Scarborough has the third-highest level of personal insolvency in the country, at more than 38 per 10,000 of population – compared with the national average of around 20. The two towns have more in common than they might think. A key similarity is the need to improve the offer to visitors while diversifying the local economy away from over-reliance on tourism. Blackburn is optimistic that Blackpool’s enterprise zone will create between 3,000 and 5,000 new jobs. Scarborough has high hopes for a new potash mine under construction up the coast near Whitby. The owner of the mine, Sirius Minerals, says it will create 4,000 jobs, and has pledged to donate 0.5% of turnover – worth up to £14m a year – to a foundation supporting capital projects and charities. A second issue is infrastructure – both physical and digital. Getting around the north of England by public transport is a slow, often hit-and-miss affair. Blackpool has not been helped by the problems affecting Northern Rail. Scarborough is some 40 miles from York, but a rail trip takes 50 minutes, while by road the journey along the mostly single-carriageway A64 can take twice that. Andrew Clay, director of Woodend, a centre for small creative businesses in a converted Victorian villa in Scarborough, says that to be viable, it had to install its own superfast broadband. “That has been crucial to allow our businesses to explore wider markets.” A third issue is education. It is no coincidence that booming seaside towns – such as Brighton and Bournemouth – have thriving universities. Coventry university now has a small campus in Scarborough, with 450 students, but both towns suffer from a brain drain. “Scarborough has a lot going for it,” says the town’s MP, Robert Goodwill, “but too many young people move away to get a degree and never come back.” Austerity has been damaging. Public sector jobs – especially important in Blackpool – have been lost and council budgets have been cut. Even so, the acceptance in both towns that central government is not going to ride to the rescue has generated a willingness to innovate and use public money to bring in private investment. John Senior, who runs three restaurants on Scarborough’s sea front, says: “We don’t get a lot of help from outside. We have to be self-sufficient. We have to make our own luck.” And, like the ride on Blackpool’s central pier, the big wheel of fortune has started to turn. It is perhaps a stretch to imagine Blackpool becoming for Manchester what Brighton is to London, but the seaside’s death has been exaggerated. “Don’t assume seaside tourism is on the skids because everybody goes to the Costas these days,” says Fothergill. “We are not looking at something in terminal decline like the coal industry or shipbuilding.” Or as Shane puts it: “This place was built for fun. There will always be a demand for it.”
11||Dealers shift down a gear as Brexit takes the shine off new car market‘Had Brexit gone the other way, we’d be looking at a record car market this year,” says Andy Bruce, chief executive of Lookers, the UK’s biggest dealership. But it didn’t, and Bruce, who voted Remain, is instead faced with a car industry in turmoil. Anxious Britons have delayed buying new motors, and manufacturers, who rely on moving parts back and forth across the Channel, have slammed the brakes on investment, raising the prospect of thousands of job losses. A year-long slump in new-car sales ended in April, and Bruce hopes the market has bottomed out. “I don’t think there was anything to read into it other than Brexit,” he says. “There is no systemic downturn. The [new car] market was 2.7 million at its peak, and I believe we’d be heading for 3 million had Brexit gone the other way.” Investors in the sector ran for the hills in the wake of the referendum: Lookers’ market value halved in the panicked days after the vote. Its shares have since rallied but hedge funds still scent blood in the water and are shorting listed car dealers. At last week’s annual summit of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), leaders lined up to warn of the perils of Brexit uncertainty. “For this industry, the softer the Brexit, the better,” Bruce says. Lookers’ fate is not wedded to that of domestic carmakers, because the lion’s share of the £4.7bn of cars it sold last year were imported. But if Britain crashes out of the EU, it could face a bureaucratic nightmare. “All the Mercedes we sell come in from outside,” says Bruce, “as do the Volkswagens and Renaults. “It would be a real problem if we had to go through an onerous import process. You can imagine what Dover and various ports in northern Europe would look like. We can’t prepare for that; we just have to wait and see.” The Brexit currency shock, which pushed up grocery prices, also inflated car prices and a no-deal Brexit is likely to spell yet higher prices and delays for consumers, who typically wait 12 weeks for a new car. “You can imagine it would add a huge amount of complexity – and cost – to getting the cars to customers,” says Bruce. The weird thing, according to Bruce, is that the rise of personal contract purchase (PCP) loans means Britons no longer treat buying a new car with the same reverence as other big purchases, such as a kitchen. “Cars are not classed as big ticket items because of PCP,” he says. “People don’t really know the price of a new car any more. Everything is communicated in how much down [in a deposit] and how much a month. It has become a bit like a mobile phone.” Lookers’ glitzy Land Rover dealership, by the A40 in west London, feels a million miles from the car lots of old. It has white leather sofas, widescreen TVs and baristas serving frothy cappuccinos. A salesman says Range Rovers that cost more than your average house deposit sell “like sweets”. “This could be a Four Seasons hotel with cars,” says Bruce. “We’re trying to soften the whole thing and make it a brand experience.” Like other retailers, car dealers are having to adapt to an internet age. Accountant KPMG forecasts that up to half the UK’s 4,200 dealerships could close by 2025. The industry is also adjusting to big market shifts as collapsing diesel sales are offset by growth in new plug-in models. The tough market conditions have been compounded by the fallout from scandals such as “dieselgate” and more recently the recall of 300,000 BMWs, and Vauxhall recently announced plans to axe a third of its UK dealer network. Bruce predicts that by 2025, a quarter of new cars will be electric or hybrid, and diesels’ market share will have halved to 15%. “People used to drive round dealerships, do test drives and haggle over part-exchange, but all that happens online now,” says Bruce. “The average number of visits per sale is down from four or five to 1.5.” By next year, shoppers will be able to buy a car from Lookers’ website and have it dropped to their door without setting foot in a showroom, but Bruce believes most customers will still want some old-fashioned service between factory gate and driveway. He insists there is no prospect of car dealerships becoming extinct. “You can’t buy a car from Amazon. If one of the car manufacturers did decide to go through Amazon, they would be taking a huge risk. It would fly in the face of what consumers want.” But then travel agents, record shops, insurance brokers, mattress retailers, fashion boutiques and even banks used to think exactly that.
16||MI6 put questions to prisoner waterboarded 83 times by CIABritish intelligence officers put questions to a man despite knowing he had been subjected to appalling abuse, including being waterboarded 83 times, according to damning evidence contained in a UK parliamentary report published this week. In the years after 9/11, Abu Zubaydah was the only CIA prisoner who went through all 12 of the agency’s “enhanced interrogation techniques”, including being beaten, deprived of sleep and locked in a small box. After a four-year inquiry, the all-party intelligence and security committee (ISC) said in its report published on Thursday that MI6 had “direct awareness of extreme mistreatment and possibly torture” of Zubaydah. Despite this knowledge, from 2002 to at least 2006, MI6 and MI5 sent questions to be put to Zubaydah, the ISC reported. This was during the period he was being waterboarded and suffering other tortures, the committee noted. While MI6 may not have known the precise details of the abuse, which resulted in the loss of an eye while in custody, the committee found evidence that one of its senior officers, who had knowledge of the conditions, had noted that “98% of US special forces would have been broken” had they been subjected to the same mistreatment. In the lead-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, statements made by Zubaydah under torture were cited by the US government as evidence that there was a link between the Ba’athist regime of Saddam Hussein and al-Qaida: a connection that was said to justify the invasion of Iraq. That connection is no longer made. Zubaydah, a Saudi-born Palestinian national who is still being held in Guantánamo Bay, was also said to have confessed that al-Qaida planned to use an improvised nuclear device to attack Washington DC. This too is now accepted to be a false claim. The ISC report found evidence that UK intelligence officers had been involved in almost 600 cases in which a prisoner was mistreated in the years after 9/11, and that the British government had planned, agreed or financed 31 rendition operations. Scotland Yard has said it is studying the report, amid warnings that if the UK does not investigate, the international criminal court may do so. Some MPs are calling for a judge-led inquiry to be convened because Theresa May did not permit the ISC to question low- and middle-ranking intelligence officers, and did not call the then foreign and home secretaries, Jack Straw and David Blunkett. The committee heard that Scotland Yard had investigated one unproven allegation that a British intelligence officer had beaten a prisoner with a baseball bat. A different MI6 officer reported to London that he had questioned a prisoner at Bagram airbase, in Afghanistan, who had been deprived of sleep for three days and forced into stress positions. “He shook violently from cold, fatigue and fear,” the officer reported, adding that he and the US military “agreed to maintain pressure for the next 24 hours”. Another MI6 officer had admitted threatening a prisoner with rendition to Guantánamo, saying his wife might be forced to turn to prostitution to feed their children. When a Foreign Office official heard screams coming from a hangar at Bagram in October 2004, the department agreed to raise the matter with the US government, but there is no record of this having happened. And when one MI6 officer raised concerns that prisoners at a detention facility were being kept in cells approximately 2 metres long, 1.8 metres high and 1.2 metres wide, he felt he was regarded as having “let the side down” by pointing to an “inconvenient” truth. An MI6 lawyer who visited this facility described it as “a torture centre” in which prisoners were held in wooden crates, could neither stand nor lie and subjected to white noise. The location of this US facility is not identified in the report, but it is thought to have been at Balad airbase, north of Baghdad in Iraq. MI6 lawyers eventually formulated a policy under which nobody captured by UK forces was sent to this facility and officers would not interrogate anyone sent there. In practice, the report said, they would interrogate prisoners in a Portakabin next door to the prison, to which they would be returned once the questioning was complete. One MI6 officer is said to have submitted questions to prisoners whom she knew were being starved, dehydrated, deprived of sleep and mistreated somehow through the use of menstrual blood. Another had suggested that prisoners should be forced to parade around their cells with 14kg (30lbs) weights around their necks while being bombarded with rock music and strobe lights, but was overruled by his superiors. The shocking details buried in the report, which have hitherto not been highlighted, will intensify calls for a public inquiry into the actions of Britain’s security and intelligence services overseas. The shadow attorney general, Shami Chakrabarti, and the Conservative MP Ken Clarke, who chairs the all-party parliamentary group on extraordinary rendition, have called for an independent judge-led inquiry into the UK’s involvement in detainee mistreatment and rendition. “These are not small issues which can now be swept under the carpet – and the government must address them urgently,” Clarke said. However, experts have questioned whether the true picture of what happened will ever emerge. “The UK has always been reluctant to reveal liaison arrangements with other countries as this could prejudice further arrangements,” said Dr Dan Lomas, an expert in intelligence and security studies at the University of Salford. “Observers shouldn’t get their hopes up about many more details coming out. Nevertheless, this is an issue that will not lie down.”
8||Valtteri Bottas takes Austrian F1 GP pole from Lewis HamiltonMercedes may have proved they have the edge over Ferrari for Sunday’s Austrian Grand Prix but for the first time this season it was Valtteri Bottas who steered them to pole. His two flawless laps could not be matched by his championship-leading teammate, Lewis Hamilton, who was second, nor by Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel in third. However, crucially, the German’s hopes were dealt a further blow when he was given a three-place grid penalty after qualifying. Bottas absolutely deserved the pole and Hamilton accepted he had been well beaten at the Red Bull Ring but had earlier also issued another strident critique of the state of Formula One. Qualifying in Spielberg was closely contested at the sharp end, Hamilton ultimately just less than two‑hundredths of a second back from his teammate, with both Mercedes drivers three-tenths up on Vettel, with Kimi Räikkönen in the other Ferrari in fourth. But Vettel, who trails Hamilton by 14 points, was adjudged to have impeded Renault’s Carlos Sainz during Q2 and was subsequently penalised by the stewards. He will start from sixth. It is a potentially major setback given that overtaking is expected to be difficult at the Red Bull Ring, although Ferrari have the right to appeal. Vettel insisted it had not been deliberate. “I couldn’t see him,” he said. “I wasn’t told on the radio, so I can only apologise to him. Obviously, there was no intention.” The stewards, however, concluded that regardless of being unaware of Sainz, Vettel “should not have been so slow on the racing line during a slowdown lap”. Bottas, meanwhile, was jubilant. “I knew I could improve on the first run and I managed to find it. Apparently I needed it,” he said. “I just need a good clean start; no need to be a hero into turn one. I can guarantee I am more hungry for the win than anyone on the grid.” The team need Bottas to execute an error-free race, claim his first victory of the season and ensure he denies Ferrari the maximum number of points, especially with Vettel now under the cosh from the start. After heartbreak in Baku, when a puncture denied him the win in the final laps, and being hit by Vettel at the last round in France, the Finn has come back strongly. Hamilton conceded he could not match him. “Congratulations to Valtteri, he did a fantastic job and ultimately he deserved the pole,” he said. “I made a mistake on the first run and when you don’t have your first lap as a banker you’re kind of building from scratch for the second one.” Hamilton also told the Spanish newspaper AS that, off the track, fundamental problems in F1 remain and that he hoped they would be addressed when the new contract with the teams is agreed for 2021. “I hope that when they do the new concorde agreement that it’s better for the young teams so they can have a better platform for younger drivers,” he said. “It shouldn’t just be wealthy drivers coming through. It’s not just Formula One; it’s all the categories. You’ve got only rich kids coming through now. It should be people with talent.” Hamilton has previously criticised the lack of diversity within the sport and his belief that its governance needs to be addressed, feelings he reiterated. “I would probably look at the structure of Formula One and how it’s run, how it’s governed, and probably remove a lot of individuals that are in place,” he said. “If you look at big corporate companies, if the CEO or individuals high up, executives or whatever, aren’t doing their job, they get fired. If the racing drivers are not doing their job, they go. But it’s not necessarily the same within this sport.” Change at that level, however, comes slowly in F1, in contrast to the fearsome development fight at the front of the grid. One in which Mercedes now have a slight advantage over Ferrari. The team brought their first major aero upgrade to the Red Bull Ring and it looks to have been successful. To have taken the initiative on a track where Ferrari might have expected to hold a slight advantage has put the Scuderia under pressure, further increased by what will be considered Vettel’s second unforced error in two races after hitting Bottas at Paul Ricard. If tiny margins are to decide the title, these are the moments that may prove crucial. Red Bull, who had been hoping for more from the Renault engine’s new qualifying mode, were to be disappointed, with the Haas of Romain Grosjean getting in between Max Verstappen in fifth and Daniel Ricciardo in seventh. The two Red Bull drivers also had a falling-out at the team’s home race over who was running in front during the final laps, with Ricciardo dissatisfied that he had to go first across for all three runs. However it is a long-standing arrangement within the team to alternate which driver punches the hole through the air at each race and Verstappen had taken his turn in France so he refused to deviate from the procedure. Kevin Magnussen was in eighth for Haas, with the two Renaults of Sainz and Nico Hülkenberg in ninth and 10th.
9||Long hot summer: how kids can stay safe from gangsThe riots that scarred London in 2011 and swept through the country started about a fortnight after most schools in England broke up. Perhaps it was a coincidence. Perhaps not. David Lammy, the MP for Tottenham, warned of “civil unrest” in the weeks before those five days of mayhem, seven years ago. Now, after a week when London saw its 81st murder on top of growing numbers of moped muggings and knife attacks, he is worried again. “Very very sadly, I am very uneasy about this summer,” Lammy told the Observer. “My expectation is that the number of young people who have lost their lives on the streets of London will rise above 100 this summer. “The middle classes will party and go to festivals and take recreational cocaine, and they will be served by young drug-runners running county lines [where urban gangs use children to sell drugs in rural areas] across the country, and violence will ensue as they protect their turf.There will be young people who no longer have the structure of the school day, who feel vulnerable and believe they need a knife to protect themselves 24-seven as they go about their business. We have to invest in our young people and youth workers.” The problem identified by Lammy and others, including Siân Berry, a Green party London Assembly member, and Laurence Guinness, chief executive of The Childhood Trust, is that children on the fringes of gang culture are more vulnerable to being recruited into criminality during the summer holidays. Research by Berry shows that a third of London’s youth centres have shut since 2011 – a total of 81 – including places such as Grove Park Youth Club in Lewisham, which campaigners have been fighting to save from demolition since it was shut in 2013. “I’m trying to find out if councils are making similar cuts to their summer programme,” Berry said. “There will be a lot of youth workers who come out to provide activities, but there aren’t the facilities to use to hold events. I’m just dreading the summer.” How can it be, though, that a gang member would even consider going to a youth centre? The answer, according to George Turner, is a square meal. “A lot of these people are getting free school lunches,” said Turner, the founder of Carney’s Community, a youth centre, homework club and mentoring scheme disguised as a boxing gym in Battersea. “When you’re on the summer holidays that doesn’t happen, so where are you going to get your food from? We get people who are really struggling – maybe they don’t even have a fridge at home.” One of Turner’s success stories is Cyle Carth, who served time in prison for affray after a fight that led to the death of a boxer in 2008. Now, with Turner’s help, Carth has set up Good Guys Decorating with another Carney’s member. He knows exactly why kids join gangs. “There’s probably times he’s not eaten at home, hanging around with his friends and one of his friends might buy him something to eat,” Carth said. “After a while you start feeling like they’re more of your family, because they’re doing the necessary things that your own family don’t do.” Carth says the new street gangs – “road youth” – are “brainwashing these kids from young”. “They might say ‘give up on school, it ain’t gonna work, I did it, look where I am now, look how much money I’ve got, look at the car I’m driving, I didn’t get that through school, what’s your mum got, you’ve got food at home? Come do this for me.’ “Or not even that,” he corrected. “’Hold this for me.’” Without even knowing it, the teenager has become a drug runner. Giz Chu, the lead boxing coach at Carney’s, who also escaped trouble through boxing, said selling drugs could easily become an ambition. “There’s dream, sitting on the block, becoming the top drug dealer around the block, having all the young kids listening to you. Everyone that starts off boxing, they don’t think ‘one day I want to be a journeyman’. They want to be a world champion. “It’s same on the streets, all you’re doing is out there, sitting on the block, smoking weed, seeing the younger kids growing up, being told what to do by the older ones. You sit there and think ‘I can’t wait til I’m their age and I’ll be telling all them what to do’. It’s being that someone.” Often the issue is housing. Good Guys Decorating offers a “give back job” every month, painting a room of a child in poverty or who has mental health issues. The first was a 17-year-old who had been getting into trouble in his block and had attempted suicide twice. His room was covered in mould and took six days to repair: “We went back and he said ‘I’ve not left the room once’,” Carth said. “That was one of the biggest issues – he was always out with his friends, drinking, smoking, this and that. Now he’s got a job.” Carney’s now works with 500 people aged 11 to 30 – 100 more than last year – trying divert children away from criminality and offering them help, whatever they have done, waiting for what Turner described as the “teachable moment – the point where they’ll say ‘life isn’t how I want it to be, I want to make a change,’” he said. Giving them broader horizons is vital. “They don’t see any avenue into working as a lawyer or in a bank or finance as an accountant, or becoming an MP or a councillor. They don’t see those opportunities: ‘Either I go into dead-end job at McDonald’s, or I make it as a rapper, or a sports star or I make it as a criminal’.” Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, has backed a violent-crime taskforce of 150 officers and more stop and searches, but projects like Carney’s and the Sir Hubert von Herkomer Arts Foundation, a pop-up arts project in Camden trying to revive a former youth centre, that were vital to addressing the problem, Guinness said. And he added: “There are many children this summer who are at risk.” “They’ve told us they are frightened and they’re at high risk of exploitation, of abuse, of engaging in anti-social behaviour, being co-opted and pressured to do things that they wouldn’t want to do. “Given the scale of cuts across London particularly, of youth workers we’ve lost and youth centres that we’ve lost I think there is considerable risk of of criminality, of violence and I fear for those younger children who get caught up in that. I think there’s very little for older kids to do, for teenagers, and they are particularly at risk of becoming victims and perpetrators. This is the double-edged sword – kids who commit crimes who become antisocial are first victims themselves and find that culture very hard to escape from.”
16||Four young men killed in Leeds car crashFour men have died and a teenage girl is critically ill after a car and a taxi collided in Leeds early on Saturday, West Yorkshire police have said. All four victims – two aged 19, one 18 and another 21 – were pronounced dead at the scene on the A6120 in Horsforth. They were among six people travelling in a Seat Leon, police said. Two teenage girls who were also in the car sustained serious injuries and were taken to hospital. One, aged 16, remains in critical condition, while the other, 17, is not thought to have life-threatening injuries. Police said all those involved were local residents. A 42-year-old man from Bradford, who was driving a Seat Alhambra taxi, was taken to hospital with serious but non life-threatening injuries. Sgt Fiona Hoodless said the Seat Leon was travelling at speed at the time of the collision. “We are carrying out extensive inquiries to establish the full circumstances surrounding this incident, and that investigation is still at a very early stage,” she said. “We would like to hear from anyone who witnessed the collision itself or saw the circumstances leading up to it.” Officers were doing everything possible to support the families of those involved, Hoodless said. Ch Insp Richard Padwell, of Leeds district police, said: “The deaths of four young people in these circumstances is clearly very tragic and our thoughts and condolences go out to everyone affected by it. “We don’t underestimate the impact that the deaths of these young people will be having in the community and we would ask that people focus on supporting each other and supporting the police investigation.” Anyone with information can call the West Yorkshire police major collision inquiry team on 101 quoting log number 266 of Saturday 30 June.
17||The Endless review – playful and unnervingA mind-bending Möbius strip of a movie, this indie sci-fi makes up for what it lacks in budget with a wealth of playful ideas. It’s a two-man show – directors Justin Benson and Aaron Moorhead also star in the film (which was written by Benson), as Justin and Aaron, a pair of brothers who escaped what Justin describes as a “UFO death cult” as children. Life in the real world, however, seems grimly disappointing compared with that in Camp Arcadia; a washed-out grey-green colour palette speaks volumes. So at the insistence of Aaron, the pair return to the camp for a visit. And confronted with an idyll of beautiful people bonding around the campfire, Aaron starts to question why they ever left. Benson and Moorhead are canny enough to leave plenty of questions unanswered about just what it is that keeps the camp members so preternaturally young-looking and what prevents them from leaving. But while there is fun to be had trying to unpick the twisted logic behind the story, there are a few glaring plot questions I couldn’t quite resolve. What’s interesting is how little this actually matters. A lack of credibility would normally be enough to sink a high-concept indie picture like this – it undermined the tonally similar Another Earth. But here, the atmosphere and unnerving vignettes get under the skin. Like the brothers, we find it hard to escape the film’s sinister embrace.
18||Why are all my weather apps different?It was a tale of two storms. The first consisted of the rain and thunder forecast for Bournemouth by the BBC weather app on the Saturday spring bank holiday. The second came when the first failed to materialise and a tourism manager in the town complained that visitors who stayed away could have come after all and enjoyed sunshine and blue skies. This opportunity to rage at inaccurate forecasting, bash the BBC and highlight the grievances of small businesses did not go to waste. For the Sun, it was a “blunderstorm”. The Mail gave voice to furious social media users whose weekend had been ruined by “crap forecasting” and “total incompetence”. The Spectator even managed to use the row to take pot shots at climate-change predictions. So, just another non-storm in a media teacup? Perhaps, yet the story highlights important questions about how technology is transforming both weather forecasting and our relationship with it. Is our ability to predict temperature, precipitation and wind speed improving? If so, how come forecasts can vary so widely depending on which smartphone apps we use? How long have human meteorologists got before supercomputers and artificial intelligence make them redundant? And when can we expect 100% accurate forecasts? The foundation of modern weather forecasting involves gathering huge amounts of data on the state of the atmosphere and Earth’s surface, such as temperature, humidity and wind conditions. Gaps in the data are filled by extrapolating from available observations and past forecasts. Forecast models consisting of sets of equations governing physical and chemical processes use this as a starting point to calculate future conditions. The impact of weather forecasting on human activities is hard to overstate. A 2011 study by the economist Jeffrey Lazo found that US GDP alone could vary by as much as $485bn (£366bn), depending on the weather. No wonder huge sums have been invested in improving predictive capabilities. The number of weather observations has risen dramatically, along with their quality. The Met Office, for example, is integrating wind-speed data gathered from transponders carried by large aircraft for navigation purposes into its models. Nasa’s GOES-16 satellite, declared operational in December, scans the Earth much more quickly and in greater resolution than previous satellites. In February, the UK completed a £10m upgrade of its rainfall radar network, allowing it to deliver five times more data than before. All this data is fed into “petaflop” supercomputers capable of doing a thousand trillion calculations per second. These are needed because of the complexity of forecast models that approximate atmospheric processes. These models have become ever more complex as the science has advanced. The extra number-crunching firepower also enables “ensemble forecasting”, whereby forecast models are run multiple times using slightly different starting data to explore the probabilities of various outcomes. This combination of more data, bigger computers and better algorithms has delivered impressive results. A study published in Nature in 2015 found the ability of meteorologists to predict atmospheric pressures three to 10 days ahead had been improving at a rate of about one day per decade since 1981. The Met Office says its four-day air pressure forecasts are now almost as accurate as its one-day forecasts were three decades ago. The digital revolution has transformed how we get and use weather forecasts. Smartphone apps offer highly localised predictions and wider time frames – from what will happen in the next hour to a fortnight’s time. There are 8,000 apps with the word “weather” in their title for Android phones and 2,400 for iPhone users. With so much choice, how can non-experts work out which are most reliable? Measuring forecasting accuracy is far from simple. What is most important – temperature, rain or wind conditions? Is average overall error most useful, or how often a prediction meets reality? “There are many, many ways to measure forecasting accuracy,” says Eric Floehr, founder of ForecastWatch, a US company that analyses the performance of weather providers. “Different forecasters perform better on different measures, longer or shorter timeframes or in certain geographical regions.” A ForecastWatch report published last year compared the accuracy of six leading global forecast providers – AccuWeather, the Weather Channel, Weather Underground, Foreca, Intellicast and Dark Sky. The study covered one- to five-day forecasts for 1,145 locations, including 29 in the UK, during 2016. AccuWeather’s predictions were best for temperature averages and highs, probability of precipitation and wind speed. The Weather Channel and Weather Underground came top for low temperature predictions. Dark Sky came last in all these categories. In the UK, the BBC app has the most users, followed by the Met Office’s. In February, the BBC switched from using the Met Office to generate its app forecasts to MeteoGroup, a forecasting company owned by a US private equity group, on grounds, it says, of service quality and value for money. Floehr provided the Observer with separate data on 12 forecasters covering 29 UK locations during 2017. In a composite measure of accuracy, the Weather Channel and Weather Underground came top, AccuWeather fifth, MeteoGroup (the BBC’s new provider) sixth and the BBC ninth (based on Met Office forecasts). On the correct prediction of precipitation, MeteoGroup came fourth overall and the BBC 10th of the 12. Most regular weather app users will be familiar with the dilemma of trying to decide which to believe when predictions disagree. Given the improved accuracy of forecasting in recent years, why is there still such wide variation between different providers? Some forecasters can access more observations than others. And they use different algorithms based on different forecast models with different levels of detail. Some apps simply churn out computer models’ predictions, others employ meteorologists to supervise and correct these, especially in unusual or extreme weather. “We have unique relationships with governments and companies that allow us to obtain the most relevant, real-time data, and use over 125 global, regional, national and local forecast models, says Jonathan Porter, a vice president at AccuWeather. “We’re constantly integrating new datasets and enhancing our algorithms. Our human meteorologists provide an extra layer of expertise when needed.” Even if the raw data coming out of algorithms used by different forecasters were identical, there could still be differences by the time their reached our screens. “One big difference between apps is what information they choose to show,” says Derrick Ryall, head of public weather service at the Met Office. “Some choose to simplify things while others put in a lot detail. A lot can come down to perception of accuracy.” Another source of difference between apps is that, contrary to what some might expect, accuracy is not the sole consideration. In his 2012 book The Signal and the Noise, US statistician Nate Silver highlighted how plotting forecasters’ rain predictions against actual weather showed some consistently erred on the pessimistic side, especially at lower and higher probabilities of rain. “As a consumer you are going to be a lot more upset with a forecaster if you get rained on and forget your umbrella, than if you don’t have to use the umbrella you took,” says Floehr. “Because of this, some forecasters tend to over-forecast precipitation.” Some leading forecasters are now moving away from this approach. Peter Neilley, a senior vice president at the Weather Company says it stopped having a “wet bias” around three years ago. “Rather than trying to make judgments ubiquitously about what’s important to people, we pay more attention to the probability of precipitation so people can make their own judgments,” he says. The BBC app has faced widespread accusations of pessimism. It now includes hourly percentage chances of rain, which have caused confusion. “If you try to compare the weather symbol with just the probability of rain you won’t always see a direct correlation because other elements have an influence on that symbol,” said Nikki Berry, a senior meteorologist at MeteoGroup. The BBC app sometimes displays a daily rain icon even when it predicts a less than 50% chance of rain during just one hour of that day. “We use the most significant or impactful weather on that day so people aren’t caught out,” says Berry. She adds that those making important decisions based on forecasts should look beyond weather icons for more detail on the BBC website weather page. As in many other spheres, advanced computers are increasingly muscling in on roles previously done by meteorologists. As faster processors take over the grunt work, forecasters are shifting towards the more complex aspects of their profession. “There is very little human touch to the forecasts people receive on their smartphones,” says Floehr. “Meteorologists are increasingly focused on communicating forecasts, and helping people turn them into actionable intelligence. At some point in the next 10-20 years there will no longer be meteorologists in the forecast loop.” However, those for whom the joy of complaining about the weather is only surpassed by a good moan about forecasters – whether in the media or not – can rest assured. Science tells us there is no such thing as a perfect weather forecast. “To know everything about the weather you would need to model every single particle in the atmosphere and all interactions between them,” says Neilley. “That isn’t even theoretically possible, because the computer doing the modelling would generate heat and become part of the system, and then need modelling. Putting a thermometer in the air changes conditions a tiny bit. So no, weather forecasts will never be perfect.” And the latest forecast is… Smartphone data will soon be improving prediction accuracy Satellites have been key in driving better predictions one day and more ahead, but are less useful over shorter time scales. Barometers provide air pressure readings that can help signal imminent changes. Digital barometers have been included in some smartphones since 2011 to assist location tracking, and around 1bn smartphones can now measure air pressure. Prof Cliff Mass at the University of Washington has shown smartphone data can help improve the accuracy of short-term air pressure and rain forecasts. It could also help to predict wind changes. “Cellphone data could help us better predict things like thunderstorm initiation, and have a big impact in places where we have less data than we’d like,” says Mass, who is also using machine learning to improve the quality of smartphone air-pressure data. He is working with the Weather Company, which collects 250m pressure readings via its Weather Channel app. Peter Neilley of the Weather Company said this data should be incorporated into its forecasts during 2019. Other forecasters, including Dark Sky, have also been experimenting with using smartphone air-pressure data.
6||Protests set to sweep the nation, plus a week that shocked the DemocratsThe Resistance Now is a weekly update on the people, action and ideas driving the protest movement in the US. If you’re not already receiving it by email, subscribe. End family separation Hundreds of thousands of people are expected to gather in Washington DC today, in what could be one of the biggest protests since the Women’s March in 2017. The ACLU said more than 300,000 people will march from Lafayette Square, near the White House, towards the Capitol building, while events are planned in Foley Square in New York City and Daley Plaza in Chicago. But it’s not just in the big, traditionally liberal, cities where protests are happening – people have also organized scores of demonstrations in red border states at the heart of immigration battles. There are more than 30 rallies in Texas and 11 in Arizona. Elsewhere, people will gather outside Fargo library, in North Dakota, to protest against Trump, while the Alaskan island of Kodiak – population 6,130 – is holding a rally at the Y intersection downtown. The Families Belong Together Coalition, which includes National Domestic Workers Alliance, the Leadership Conference, MoveOn and the ACLU, has helped to organize hundreds of other events, across all 50 states. It’s part of a wave of protests against Trump. On Thursday almost 600 women were arrested at the Hart Senate building in Washington DC following a protest against Trump’s policies. Representative Pramila Jayapal, from Washington, was among those detained. The Trump administration has reversed its policy of taking children away from their parents, but activists fear the government’s hardline stance could still unfairly target those seeking entry to the US. Progressives in New York and Baltimore offer hope Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez thrashed the guitar-playing establishment Democrat Joe Crowley in Tuesday night’s New York’s 14th congressional district primary, taking 57.5% of the vote to Crowley’s 42.5%. Ocasio-Cortez, a 28-year-old progressive and former Bernie Sanders volunteer, was outspent 18-1 by Crowley, but triumphed with a grassroots, boots on the ground campaign that offers hope to other leftwing candidates ahead of November’s elections. Read more on Ocasio-Cortez here. In Maryland, meanwhile, the Bernie Sanders-backed leftie Ben Jealous won a crowded Democratic primary. Jealous now faces the daunting task of taking on the incumbent Republican Larry Hogan – who has a 70% approval rating – in November. The Baltimore Sun broke down what Jealous needs to do to win. Hi Donald Collins dictionary notes that in British slang the word “trump” means “to expel intestinal gas through the anus”, and it seems the president will be just as welcome as such a movement when he visits the UK next month. More than 50,000 people are planning to attend a demonstration in Trafalgar Square to protest against Trump’s presence, while activists plan to fly a giant “baby Trump” blimp over London during the president’s visit. Trump is slipping into the country for a “working visit” – a step down from a “state visit” – on 13 July, and will reportedly spend only a little time in London, opting instead for the sanctuary of one of his golf courses. What we’re reading Writing about Anthony Kennedy’s retirement from the supreme court, Jill Abramson says that Trump’s “first court pick, Neil Gorsuch, has formed an unholy alliance with the most rightwing justice, Clarence Thomas [and] the White House will now be hoping that this dynamic duo can become a trio”. Abramson compares the upcoming battle to Ronald Reagan’s thwarted nomination of controversial rightwinger Robert Bork. • This article was amended on 2 July 2018. Ben Jealous won the Democratic primary for Maryland, not Baltimore as originally stated.
12||Jason Cundy likes the sound of his own voice… but not women’sJason Cundy found himself in the rarefied position of making Piers Morgan look reasonable when he brought his tepid take on World Cup commentary to Good Morning Britain this week. The former Chelsea and Tottenham defender and TalkSport presenter was discussing Vicki Sparks’s achievement as the first woman in Britain to commentate on a live World Cup match. He said he found it “a tough listen”, which, funnily enough, was how I felt watching him try to justify an opinion that seemed to be unravelling even as the words tumbled out of his mouth. “For 90 minutes listening to a high-pitched tone isn’t what I want to hear,” he said, looking less and less convinced by the second that he’d made a good call by saying that on national television. The fact that women’s voices are considered the best choice to be AI assistants – helpful, subservient, trustworthy – and unsuitable for positions of authority (one of the many criticisms of Hillary Clinton was that pundits found her “shrill”), shows the depth of the problem here. In sports commentary, the idea of men in a male space seems particularly sacred, and Cundy is by no means an especially grave offender in clinging on to that. Professional women commentating on American football or baseball, for example, have long been open about the public criticism they receive, for sounding like a “nag” or for simply being “annoying”. Often, these comments are couched in the language of “I’m not sexist but…”, a phrase that only ever announces that a big bit of sexism is on its way. In a World Cup where we’ve had a “hottest fans” gallery from an internationally renowned photo agency, and where a reporter had to berate a passerby for forcefully kissing her while she was trying to present, Sparks smashing through this particular barrier was steady progress. To reduce it to “but her voice annoys me” was, at best, daft, and Cundy knew it. He apologised the same day, admitting he had been “an idiot” and regretting “the hurt and anger” he had caused. But his candour was more useful than it was hurtful. He laid out, clearly and plainly, that the reason he didn’t like listening to a woman talking about football was completely subjective. “Listen, it’s nothing to do with her insight, the way she delivers it or her knowledge or her ability to do the job,” he said, handily providing the main objections to his own beliefs, saving us women the hassle of making our annoying lady voices say it out loud. Hannah Gadsby makes light of the darkness, against all odds When the Australian standup Hannah Gadsby first began to perform her show Nanette last year, reviewers, while generally positive, seemed stunned by what they had seen. It was as if they were not quite able to fully digest this unique, sophisticated, invigorating hour or so of devastating comedy. It’s a show that chews on its own tail, with Gadsby declaring early on that she is through with standup, that Nanette will be the last time she attempts to make light of situations that just aren’t funny any more. “In the first runs of it I really put the audience in shock,” she told Vulture. “I was just going, throwing grenades into the audience, and they were stunned and they’d leave.” Now that it’s on Netflix, Nanette has become a phenomenon. “It’s bigger than me. It’s taken on a life of its own,” she said. It is an extraordinary piece of work, staggeringly powerful, devilishly clever, and it is at turns bellyache-funny and utterly flooring.Gadsby talks about her life as a lesbian, as a butch woman, as a “not-normal” in Australian society. She talks about how she used self-deprecation as the fuel for her jokes and she talks about feeling tired of putting herself down. It all builds to a climax more astonishing than any standup show I have ever seen. If that sounds like hyperbole, then, in this case, it’s simply the truth. There is surely at least a part of Nanette that every viewer or audience member will keep. It’s that kind of show, and that is Gadsby’s intention. In this climate of fear, hatred and intolerance, of growing horrors on the global stage, what has remained with me is the way in which Gadsby turns overwhelming fatigue into rage, and rage into constructiveness, connection and love. She wants her story to be heard. For those who haven’t yet listened, it’s the least we can do. Arise Danny Dyer, the king of Brexit reason ‘Can we go back to this whole Brexit thing?” asked Danny Dyer, unprompted, during a discussion about Love Island on ITV’s Good Evening Britain on Thursday, involving Jeremy Corbyn and Pamela Anderson. It was one of those TV moments where you can only tell it’s not satire because no satirist could get away with something so outlandish. Dyer sliced through the hosts’ attempts at good-natured fluff with an incisive indictment of the Brexit process. “No one’s got a clue. It’s like this mad riddle,” he said, with Corbyn in his sights, and demanded the head of David Cameron. “Where is the geezer? I think he should be held accountable.” He then called Cameron a twat for the second time in a minute. In a display of national frustration, the outburst quickly went viral. And not for the first time: Dyer also went viral when he found out he was a direct descendant of Edward III and promised to start wearing a massive ruff. Since Dyer seems to be the only one prepared to ask the difficult questions of elected politicians right now, and since he’s got the heritage, is it time to call for him to take his rightful place at the head of the nation? • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist
2||Sisterhood, song and yoni steaming: women set for UK’s first man-free festivalThere will be no deafening indie music, no boozed-up moshing and definitely no queues for the urinals. There, will, however, be vaginal steaming, feminist debate, and a chance for contemplation in the sacred womb tent. Make way for Women Fest, Britain’s first ever all-women festival, billed as an event of radical participation that aims to explore the “power and magic” that happens when women gather together, and the impact it can have on the wider world. After a year of sexual politics dominated by women’s marches and the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements, the festival hopes to bring together 400 women on a farm outside Frome in Somerset in August. According to its founder, 30-year-old Tiana Jacout, its aim is to give women space, without men, to share experiences and ideas that “will open our minds and help us tackle the everyday battles we may face with the strength of the sisterhood behind us”. With a ticket costing £225 (profits will be shared with the tree-planting charity Tree Sisters), Jacout says the event will turn the tables on conventional festival expectations. “Instead of people saying, I paid for a ticket now I’m going to be entertained, we’re asking them to think about what they can contribute: what’s the gift, knowledge, craft or skill they can share,” she told the Observer. “The festival will celebrate women’s creativity and potential: it’s all about realising what we can do and what we can be, and it’s about sharing our gifts freely with one another to create a new spirit of womanly giving.” One of the main arenas will be the expression stage, an open space where anyone can perform; there will also be a creativity tent, where participants can volunteer to run workshops in skills such as basket weaving and cloth making. In the “women circle” area, festivalgoers will be invited to share their stories, songs and prayers; a space called the “womyn rising tent’” is, according to the festival website, set aside for healing and learning and women will be encouraged to “delve into themselves … to learn and love through discussions and workshops”. The “sacred womb tent” will provide “a sacred space … for contemplation”, while the “embodiment tent” will offer yoga, dance and circus workshops. Masseuses and therapists will be on hand in the healing area, and there will be workshops at which participants can paint their body scars gold, to celebrate surviving suffering. A spa centre will include a swimming lake, sauna and hot tubs – and the opportunity for yoni steaming, the practice of vaginal herbal cleansing made famous by aficionado Gwyneth Paltrow. Some of Jacout’s ideas have filtered down from the hippy movement via her mother, who was a Greenham Common peace protester in the 1980s. After a childhood in west London, Jacout went to live in an ashram in India in her early 20s, before training as an acupuncturist and returning to India to practice. She later spent a year working as a volunteer in the Calais refugee camp, before building a hut in a Somerset wood which became the basis of a small women’s sanctuary, “where we sang songs, cried a lot, grew vegetables and brought our lives back to basics”. Jacout has been planning the festival for the past year, but says its roots date back via the Suffragettes and other female freedom-fighters to the women of the ancient world. “The timing feels right,” she says. “There’s a beautiful wave of female empowerment happening right now, and this is about taking that a stage further. “It feels to me as though most of the problems we’re seeing come from patriarchy and an imbalance in the energies in the world, and this is all about working out how to rediscover our womanly power and put it to better and wider use, in a way that will benefit all of humankind,” she says. All women are welcome at the festival, says Jacout, including transgender women and pre-operative individuals. “We’re also happy to have non-binary people provided they have a vagina; but not non-binary people with a penis because we have to draw the line somewhere.” So far about 150 have signed up, and Jacout says she’s confident she’ll fill the remaining 250 places. The youngest participants will be 13, and Jacout hopes the festival will be an especially inspiring environment for teenage girls.
6||US ambassador to Estonia resigns over Trump policies and provocationsThe US ambassador to Estonia has announced his resignation, citing Donald’s Trump’s disparagement of the European Union and Nato and adding to a steady trickle of career diplomats leaving in protest against the president’s policies. Jim Melville, a 33-year diplomat who has been posted in Tallinn since 2015, was approaching retirement but announced his decision to leave early to friends in a private Facebook posting that was obtained by Foreign Policy. The post refers to Trump’s remarks that have surfaced in the past week. Melville wrote: “A Foreign Service Officer’s DNA is programmed to support policy and we’re schooled right from the start, that if there ever comes a point where one can no longer do so, particularly if one is in a position of leadership, the honorable course is to resign. Having served under six presidents and 11 secretaries of state, I never really thought it would reach that point for me. “For the President to say the EU was ‘set up to take advantage of the United States, to attack our piggy bank’, or that ‘Nato is as bad as Nafta’ is not only factually wrong, but proves to me that it’s time to go.” The state department later confirmed that Melville would leave the foreign service on 29 July. The resignation of a senior diplomat from a critical posting in eastern Europe comes at a time of rising apprehension among many US and European officials about Trump’s looming visit to Europe starting on 11 July. He will attend a Nato summit in Brussels then visit the UK, followed by a meeting with Vladimir Putin in Helsinki. The greatest fear among allies is that the president will publicly lambast them over defence spending and call Nato into question, then make unplanned, unilateral concessions to Putin as he did to Kim Jong-un when he met the North Korean leader earlier this month. In the Singapore summit with Kim, Trump offered to suspend joint military exercises with South Korea, pointing to their cost. Jitters among Nato allies are likely to be heightened by a Washington Post report on Friday that the administration has ordered a review on the costs and effects of a large-scale withdrawal of US troops from Germany, against a backdrop of tensions with Angela Merkel. European diplomats say Trump has become increasingly obsessed with Germany, complaining about its car exports to the US and plans to built the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline in Russia rather than buy more expensive LNG exports from the US. At the recent rancorous G7 summit in Quebec, Trump reportedly threw sweets down on the table in front of Merkel, saying: “Don’t say I never give you anything.” Since Trump took office, there has been a steady outflow of diplomats and other state department employees, who have resigned in protest against his behaviour and policies. The ambassador to Panama, John Feeley, resigned in December over Trump’s failure to criticise white supremacists. The same month, another well-regarded diplomat, Elizabeth Shackelford, left her job, blaming the administration’s abandonment of human rights as a priority and its general disdain for diplomacy.
16||DUP may be unable to block gay marriage bill, party leader saysArlene Foster has indicated her Unionist party may be unable to block a gay marriage bill in Northern Ireland as she attended an Orange Order march in Scotland. The Democratic Unionist party leader said her party did not have enough votes to veto laws supporting equal marriage in the province by tabling a so-called petition of concern at Stormont. She said the DUP had only 28 votes while a petition of concern – a mechanism at Stormont designed to ensure legislation had cross-community support – needed 30 votes to be tabled. Foster, who was first minister of Northern Ireland until the DUP’s power-sharing government with Sinn Fein collapsed last year, insisted she wanted to see greater tolerance and collaboration once power-sharing resumed at Stormont. She was attacked by gay rights activists and Scottish National party politicians last year after it emerged she had written to ministers in Edinburgh in 2015 asking them to bar gay Northern Irish residents from converting civil partnerships to marriages in Scotland. After the Irish republic voted overwhelmingly to back gay marriage in Ireland and Westminster politicians demanded the UK government impose reform on Northern Ireland, Foster has shifted ground. She became the first DUP leader to attend an LGBTQ event in Belfast last week and insisted her party welcomes gay people. She suggested on Saturday the DUP’s objections to gay marriage would be dealt with by negotiation in Stormont when power-sharing restarted. “We don’t have a majority [in Stormont] so even if we did apply that petition of concern there’s no guarantee that would actually go through,” Foster said. “So these are all issues we need to discuss in the [cross-party] talks and indeed in the devolved administration.” Foster’s remarks came as she addressed about 5,000 Orange Order members from Scotland and Northern Ireland in Cowdenbeath before they marched through the town to commemorate the Battle of the Boyne, where the Dutch Protestant King William of Orange defeated the Catholic monarch King James VII of Scotland and II of England and Wales in 1690. Formed in 1795 as a militantly Protestant body which has espoused vehement anti-Catholic, pro-unionist and pro-monarchist views, the Orange Order’s influence in Scotland has faded in recent years. It claims about 50,000 Scottish members and also has seven acknowledged members serving as Labour and Tory councillors in central Scotland. While not a Orange order member, Foster is the first female unionist leader to address an Orange rally in Scotland, but several other Unionist leaders have done so, including Peter Robinson and Jim Molyneaux. “This is my culture, this is who I am,” she said. Disliked by many mainstream politicians for its sectarianism and the support shown for Loyalist paramilitaries among some of its supporters, it set up its own anti-independence campaign during the 2014 Scottish referendum after the official pro-UK campaign Better Together refused to include it in its events. Foster insisted that modern Orangeism and unionism were inclusive and tolerant. She said her party’s widely derided proposals in 2015 to build a road bridge linking Scotland and Northern Ireland had much greater currency now the UK was leaving the EU. “While others want to put up barriers post-Brexit, we want to see bridges built and we want to see that not only in terms of infrastructure but between communities as well.” • This article was amended on 2 July 2018 because Arlene Foster is not the first minister of Northern Ireland, as an earlier version said. Foster held that post until the DUP’s power-sharing government with Sinn Fein collapsed last year.
4||Dele Alli 'fully fit' for England's World Cup date with Colombia – as it happenedBack to the big event ... join Jacob Steinberg for all the action: Thanks for your company, as ever. Do join us again tomorrow. Scotland news: Livingston have appointed former Rangers striker Kenny Miller as the club’s player-manager. The 38-year-old, who has signed a two-year deal, won 69 caps for Scotland between 2001-2013, scoring 18 international goals. Tevez or Crespo? Maradona or Riquelme, or both? You can create your own all-time XIs here: More from Alli, on Gareth Southgate: “As players we support any decision the manager makes. We’ve come here with a big squad and everyone is fighting for their place. It was a great opportunity and I think the boys have done well. I don’t think we lost any momentum. We’re all fighting, we’re all raring to go and we’re all looking forward to the next game. “We have to approach every game like we’re playing the best team in the world. These are top sides. No international game is easy. For us, we’re not focusing on the next game, we’ve got to get through against Colombia. They are a dangerous side and we have got to get through that and not look into the future.” England news: Dele Alli insists he is fully fit. “Yeah, obviously after the injury I was frustrated but I’ve been doing a lot of work to make sure I’m fit and ready to go,” he says. “I’ve always been very confident and you have to stay hungry.” Some team news from Kazan: France: Lloris, Pavard, Varane, Umtiti, Hernández, Kanté, Pogba, Mbappé, Griezmann, Matuidi, Giroud Argentina: Armani, Mercado, Otamendi, Rojo, Tagliafico, Mascherano, E Pérez, Banega, Pavón, Messi, Di María And, much more to follow here: With the mere thought of a penalty shootout sending shivers down the spine, some reassurance from Gareth Southgate himself over how England may or may not cope if and when they face the test from 12 yards in Russia: It was inevitable that, at some point, the conversation with Gareth Southgate would turn to the most harrowing ordeal of his professional life and the reasons why the England manager, after two decades of living with the consequences, is so determined to make sure his team will not fall into the same trap. For all the blow-by-blow action and buildup, join Jacob Steinberg: An explicit reminder, from today’s sports section, that extra-time and possibly the anguish of penalties await from now on in Russia: First up, in less than two hours, is that highly-anticipated meeting between two footballing heavyweights, France v Argentina. Only one of them makes our power rankings top 10, though, predominantly thanks to Kylian Mbappé and Antoine Griezmann: Snowy and Tintin: now, a wonderful France-themed email, courtesy of Lucas Ambielle. “Some of us in France call our central defenders Varane and Umtiti ‘Snowys’,” he says. “They do very well with their clubs only because they both have a Tintin next to them. Piqué is Umtiti’s Tintin and Ramos is Varanes’. However, what is Snowy worth without Tintin? Not much. Problem is our guys are like Snowys without Tintin when they play for France. Far less reliable as when they play for Barça or Real. Let’s see how they’ll perform.” Colombia’s midfielder, Carlos Sánchez – once of Aston Villa – has been talking about facing England on Tuesday. “We’re not the favourites,” he says. “They are the country that invented football and they also have top quality players. But I’m relaxed and sure that we have the right weapons. Both teams have a good chance.” Sánchez endured a dreadful start to the tournament, getting sent off three minutes into their defeat against Japan: As kick-off approaches, time for some more red-hot France v Argentina chat. “Sampaoli won’t be daring but he should be,” argues Mike MacKenzie on email. “I’d drop Di María and put Mascherano back as a CB replacing Otamendi. Bring in Lo Celso and Salvio in MF.” As for Didier Deschamps’s charges, Frank tweets “no one’s been talking much about Paul Pogba. I see him making the difference for France today, if he turns up ...” Thanks for the manning the fort, Tom. I do wish I had spent the last 20 minutes licking my fingers from a John Barnes-themed KFC plate: Mo Salah’s World Cup is getting worse after his Cairo address was leaked on Facebook and a crowd of fans turned up at his house. According to the Associated Press, Salah showed no sign of anger and posed for photos and signed autographs. Photos circulated online showed dozens of fans appearing outside Salah’s home after his arrival with Egypt’s national team from Russia following a disappointing World Cup showing. The state-run Al Ahram newspaper reported the number of fans kept increasing, reaching the hundreds, and police had to intervene to disperse the crowds. Our weekly YouTube roundup features a treasure trove of last-16 clips (and the best surfing video you’ll see this week) – dive in here! Afternoon all - Tom Bryant here taking over from Ben for 20 minutes or so. Here’s an interesting addition to the tiebreaker debate. Former World Cup final referee Arnaldo Cezar Coelho – who was linesman during the so-called “non-aggression” match between West Germany and Austria in 1982 – thinks a corner count would be a better way of separating teams who finish level on points and goals, he told Reuters. “The problem is that a yellow card is subjective ... and some referees tend to be stricter and give more yellow cards than others,” he said. “So, if a team plays in a match with a stricter referee, they will be at a disadvantage. “For me there is another way ... counting corners. It’s a technical criteria and to win corners you have to attack, you have to play football.” Japan’s final group stage match, a 1-0 defeat by Poland, ended in farce as they stopped playing in effect, thereby avoiding picking up bookings or red cards that would have jeopardised their second-place finish. “They wouldn’t have done that if corners had been used,” said Coelho. The biggest result of the day so far? Undoubtedly, the BBC edging out ITV in the battle of their stellar casts, feat. 1½/10 for Mr Evra: Essential half-time lunchtime reading, by Thomas Hitzlsperger: Some early France v Argentina team news: Manchester City’s Benjamin Mendy is not available because of a muscle injury, but Didier Deschamps should be able to call upon Lucas Hernández, with the France coach set to recall the players he gave a breather to against Denmark, including his midfield axis of Paul Pogba, Blaise Matuidi and Corentin Tolisso. Nabil Fekir is among those pushing for a spot in the starting XI, after a couple of impressive cameos. Argentina will most likely be unchanged from that win over Nigeria. With the group stage in Russia done and dusted, we reveal our best XI, from Alireza Beiranvand to Harry Kane, as voted by you: It is all fun and games for the hosts in training today. Russia face Spain in the last 16 on Sunday, with Artem Dzyuba making no bones about the task in-hand. “This might be like an everyday match for the Spanish but for us this is the match of a lifetime,” Dzyuba, who scored two goals in the group stage, said. “We need to die on the pitch, play at 200-300%, and only then will we have a chance.” France’s Presnel Kimpembe has been talking up Argentina’s defensive frailties before kick-off in Kazan. “Although we haven’t played brilliant football since the start of the competition, I prefer to play badly and win to get through stage by stage, than to play well and get knocked out,” the Paris Saint-Germain defender says. “I’d say Argentina’s strength, as everybody knows, is their attack. Their weak point is the defensive line, we know it is possible to breach it as they’ve conceded a goal in every game so far. It will be up to us to be efficient and take advantage.” Artists have been slogging away through the night to depict the so-called Goats in all their glory, on the walls of a hotel in Kazan, the Russian city in which France take on Argentina in few hours’ time. Portugal take on Uruguay tonight. From Reuters: Kazan artists worked through the night on Friday painting a mural of Argentina’s Lionel Messi to match one of Portugal’s Cristiano Ronaldo on a building opposite, saving the blushes of the World Cup host city. The three-storey portrait of Ronaldo was painted on a building behind the Ramada hotel to welcome the five-time Ballon d’Or winner when Portugal played in the capital of Tatarstan in the 2017 Confederations Cup. To the embarrassment of city officials, it turned out that Argentina would be staying at the same hotel ahead of Saturday’s World Cup last 16 clash against France with Messi potentially being able to see the Ronaldo mural from his room. Africa has no representatives in the knockout stages of the World Cup for the first time in 36 years – but no one is really surprised: Lots of talent remains in Africa, of course. But when it comes to football, governments and federations tend to have less money for infrastructure than many European, Asian and American counterparts. In some cases much of the money that is available is siphoned off by parasitic officials. Venal administrators are among the reasons why Cameroon and Ghana, for instance, have been unable to build on glorious feats by players. Transfer nugget: reports in France suggest Nabil Fekir, of longstanding interest to Liverpool, is a target for Manchester United. Lyon-based newspaper Le Progrès say United have expressed their interest in the 24-year-old forward. Liverpool’s deal to sign Fekir broke down before the World Cup, with concerns over his fitness. Or get your World Cup fix, courtesy of The Guardian: And, while you’re here, get your hands on: Thinking about a last-minute jaunt to Russia? France against Argentina and then Portugal pitting their wits against Uruguay, plus so many individual duels. What are we looking forward to most? Mbappé v Messi or Suárez v Ronaldo? What do we reckon? “A different competition is starting now because there’s no margin for error,” says Uruguay’s Matías Vecino, teeing everything up just beautifully. Less than five hours until kick-off ... England have form for being hurt by Premier League alumni. Among the 21 players out training today is Gary Cahill, formerly team-mates with Falcao, the Colombia striker intent on sending Gareth Southgate’s side packing in the last 16 on Tuesday. Falcao’s face didn’t fit at Chelsea but now he’s firing: He never really got up and running, or got a good spell of games back to back to find any sort of form. Obviously the competition was there and I’m sure for him it was difficult but he showed his character to go on and find his goalscoring form again. He’s been banging goals in again ever since. Gary Neville, the former England defender and coach, has questioned the change of “tone” surrounding the team since that slender defeat in Kaliningrad. “It’s the best opportunity we’ve had for 28 years to progress far in a World Cup,” Neville says. “We should enjoy it. Gareth will have known the risks of leaving players out, he will know what people will say if we lose against Colombia on Tuesday. He believes in the plan, he believes that England can go far in this competition.” England are gearing up for that Colombia test on Tuesday night in Moscow, but what can Gareth Southgate’s squad expect from a team regarded as dark horses in some quarters and derided as poor in others, namely by Paul Merson. We know all about Falcao (don’t we?) and James Rodríguez, who will undergo a MRI scan to determine whether he can play any part in the game, but what about their other strengths and weaknesses? David Hytner has more: And, with Davinson Sánchez set to duel with Harry Kane away from Tottenham’s Enfield training base, their WhatsApp group has gone into overdrive, with Kieran Trippier and Dele Alli likely to feature: Argentina have been thoroughly disappointing so far, reaching this stage of the competition – the last 16 – by the skin of their teeth. Arguably their standout player, Éver Banega, has seized the chance to impress, though, having been omitted from the final 23-man squad for the World Cup in Brazil four years ago: England are out training on a cold and drizzling day in Zelenogorsk, but Fabian Delph and Ruben Loftus-Cheek are both absent, the former having been given permission to fly home with his wife, Natalie, due to give birth today. Loftus-Cheek, meanwhile, is doing some gym work alone at the team hotel in Repino as part of his recovery from Thursday’s defeat to Belgium. Brazil’s Neymar, as you’ve never seen him before: Transfer nugget: a little underwhelming maybe, but Leeds United have signed Chelsea’s England Under-21 midfielder Lewis Baker on a season-long loan deal, with the goalkeeper Jamal Blackman likely to join him on a similar basis. Another deal set to go through imminently is David Brooks’s £11m move to Bournemouth from Sheffield United. Keep up-to-date with all the moves here: The perfect way to limber up for a feast of football later today: From the England camp, where the honeymoon’s over and suddenly not everything is a bed of roses, but fortunately, Gareth Southgate already knows as much. “I wasn’t so comfortable with the love-in in the buildup to Belgium, to be honest, so it’s nice that there’s a little bit of an edge back,” Southgate said. Croatia have snuck into second, England’s next opponents Colombia are in fifth and Germany plummet to 25th. At the halfway stage, all 32 teams have been critiqued and rated: It is 16 years to the day that Ronaldo – and his infamous hair island – got the better of Germany to win the 2002 World Cup in Yokohama: A date with Argentina in Kazan gives France the perfect opportunity to turn on the style, given their wealth of, particularly attacking talent. Or will this be another one of those days, a stodgy performance, bogged down by individuals ultimately trying too hard or not hard enough? There has been so much Messi talk that it is easy to forget how big an occasion this is for Kylian Mbappé, Antoine Griezmann and perhaps Ousmane Dembélé. “He’s fast, explosive, needs space, and I think he will have more space than in the first three matches,” Hugo Lloris said of Mbappé. Coming to a living room near you: Straight to that talk of Lionel Messi dictating Jorge Sampaoli’s in-game tactics, with reports that the Argentina coach sought the approval of the Barcelona forward against Nigeria, asking him if it would be OK to bring on Sergio Agüero. “We looked at different options in an important game and had to make a decision,” Sampaoli said. “I was simply communicating this, saying we were going to use a strategy we had rehearsed to use more attacking players. It was a simple exchange I had with one of my players, that is all.” Yesterday was kind of rubbish, a devastating lull as the last 16 readied itself, but today we are back, close to full throttle. There are not four games but a couple of Goats and two likely mouthwatering match-ups. Some, I see, are calling it Super Saturday, which speaks volumes of the magnitude, doesn’t it? We’ll be building up to France v Argentina (3pm BST) and Uruguay v Portugal (7pm), as well as soaking up all the other goings-on from around Russia and beyond. Right, that’s about all you need from me for today. Ben Fisher will be taking over shortly to shepherd you closer to kick-off in that belting last 16 match between France and Argentina. Thanks for your company, I’ll see you here again soon. “Morning Jonathan! It’s me, David Not-That-One Penney,” Morning Dave Penney (not that Dave Penney) great to have you on board again. “We may not have a CAF team which is sad, but Japan to represent Asia is good? And two Scandinavian teams when for the past 15 years they’ve success has been pretty abject is worth celebrating?” Absolutely it is Dave, the more diversity the better. Gokul Kannan is the latest emailer uninterested in the Messi vs. Ronaldo storyline that could eventuate in the quarterfinals. “I still don’t understand the fascination of a Messi vs Ronaldo matchup in this World Cup. They play against each other every year, and we all know how it goes. This will not be something rare to savour. The prospect of club teammates playing against each other is what makes these type of tournaments interesting. Exhibit 1: Rooney vs Ronaldo WC 2006. Exhibit 2: Gerrard vs Suarez WC 2014.” The end of the group stage unfortunately also means the end of African participation in Russia 2018. Paul Doyle takes a look at why it’s been a World Cup to forget for the CAF. Beyond those individual issues one could point to a couple of curious weaknesses that African teams (but not only African teams) displayed during this tournament: flawed defending from set-pieces and a lack of deadly predators. That again raises questions about individuals but also alludes to the wider issue shared by many African countries: incomplete honing of potential. Simon Burnton has trawled through all the group stage stats, sifted through the data and hand picked some choice morsels for your delectation. It does make you wonder how Germany managed to cock things up so spectacularly and how Toni Kroos is particularly unfortunate to be heading home. “I suppose a lot of people would suggest Evita as Argentina’s musical, but the way they’ve sputtered into the round of 16, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang is more like it,” emails Peter Oh. Andrew N is mad as hell and he’s not going to take it any more! “Why oh, why oh, why do we now insist on calling Round 1, the round of 16? Ever since 1994 or whenever that lot got interested in Soccer, when FIFA foolishly took the tournament to the US, this idiotic title has been used for the First [knockout] Round. We appear to still call Round 1, 2, and 3 of the FA Cup, Round 1, 2, or 3. Should we all change this to the round of 80, 40 and 64 respectively? Or should we come up with more literal names for rounds - For the FA Cup, Round 1 would become the round of teams who are involved only care, Round 2 the media become interested in non-league for a fleeting moment round, Round 3 the big boys round or the fingers crossed for a shock as it sells papers round. And for Round 1 of the FWC (an equally annoying abbreviation), the round of the day after the rest day, the round of wild expectations, the round of Ooo they’re playing each other, the round of we can win it now, or my personal favourite ROUND ONE. So endeth the lesson.” As we’re shifting from the World Cup group phase to the knockouts it seems only fair we annoy everyone with crowdsourced opinions about the best and worst XIs of the tournament so far. Here’s your best, which I have to say, restores my faith somewhat in the wisdom of crowds. And from the tops, to the flops. I feel for David de Gea in this list. Yes he made a clanger against Portugal but that’s only one mistake compared to the repeat calamities endured by many other gloveman. Have you suddenly contracted World Cup fever? Has the unfolding draw convinced you to book the holiday of a lifetime? Martha Kelner has all you need to know before you head to the travel agents. You better familiarise yourself with this Aidan. Some suggestions (not great it has to be said) have arrived to bolster the theme of World Cup teams as musical theatre shows. Sweden are Mamma Mia (thanks to Abba), England are Spamalot, and Brazil are Sweeney Todd (courtesy of Neymar’s demon barber). Time for a little snack break. “Hi, Jonathan,” hi Jim Rogers. “What do you think are the chances we get a first time World Cup winner this year? 33% is where I’m at at the moment, but that’s with giving Spain and Brazil at least 20% each despite neither exactly being stellar so far. As for today, I’d like to see Uruguay advance, but the prospect of Messi-Ronaldo is tantalising, even if it would only be the quarters.” Well Jim, Uruguay, France and Argentina are all in the same quarter of the draw competing for one semi-final spot. Brazil are in the opposite quarter of that half of the draw, so the chances of at least one former winner making the final must be pretty high. The other half of the draw is more open but a Spain vs. England semifinal is not out of the question. So, for all the chaos of the group phase my money would still be on a former winner once again prevailing. For what it’s worth, my two wildcard picks would be Croatia and Colombia. While all eyes have been on Ronaldo, one of the highlights of Portugal’s campaign so far has been provided by Ricardo Quaresma. As Barney Ronay points out, the Portuguese winger has made the trivela (striking the ball with the outside of his right boot) his signature move. An entire column about kicking the ball with the outside of your foot: nobody’s going to read that, said every sensible newspaper desk editor ever. But they will, because everyone loves the trivela. The players you’ve loved down the years have loved doing it. The great Serbian midfielder Dragan Stojkovic has YouTube videos dedicated solely to his use of the lofted back-spun trivela pass, a man for whom the entire world was interpreted through the outside of his right foot. Changing tack slightly to the second game of the day, Uruguay vs. Portugal. Sid Lowe is all over this one with yet another clasico subplot to enjoy. The Madrid derby and the clásico recreated. Pepe v Suárez, Godín v Ronaldo. There is plenty of previous. There’s Ronaldo and Godín battling in the area, Ronaldo punching Godín in the back of the head. There’s Suárez catching Pepe with a hand across the face one time and a boot across the shin another, the defender rolling round the turf with hand in the air, calling for the priest to deliver his last rites after both of them. “While I imagine the pundits and fanboys are salivating at the prospect of a Messi vs Ronaldo quarter final, I must say that I am hoping for the exact opposite,” emails Simon Horwell. “France vs Uruguay please. The only entertainment stain on this World Cup - aside from the soul crushing ineptitude of Fox’s coverage here in the US - has been the ad nauseam Messi vs Ronaldo narrative. As if there aren’t 700+ others players to talk about. The sooner both go home, the better.” This is a point I can empathise with but ultimately disagree with. What is the World Cup for if not the grand narratives of our age? Messi and Ronaldo are not just good players, they are transcendent, and belong in conversation with the very best of all time. How often have such worlds collided on the biggest stage? Cruyff and Beckenbauer in ‘74, Maradona and Hodge in ‘86? I am as curmudgeonly as the next ex-pat Yorkshireman but even I don’t begrudge the clash of the titans narrative on this one. Jonathan Wilson has cast his analytical eye over the indomitable Javier Mascherano. Amid the panic, amid the fury, amid the hopelessly ambitious through-balls and dismal crosses, there was still that, the bronca, the spirit of defiance that so often fired Diego Maradona, that has in the past so often propelled Argentina. At least twice, Mascherano gave the ball away then charged back to reclaim it with a tackle. In his refusal to shirk responsibility, he was relentless. “As a kid I lived in France so I’m rooting for France,” emails Kari Tulinius, “but I wouldn’t begrudge Messi going on to the quarters, especially if he met Portugal. Though Uruguay-Argentina would be a heck of a game too. And Uruguay-France would be a meeting of the two most impressive defensive units on this side of the draw. One player that hasn’t been getting enough praise is Raphaël Varane. He’s got a “none shall pass” vibe about him this year. France could Italy their way to the final with a series of 1-0 wins.” Thanks Kari, interesting question in there: would French supporters be happy with ‘Italying’ their way to a World Cup win? Clearly there’s something in the DNA of Italian football that values defensive pragmatism but is it the same elsewhere in the world and in France in particular? Jorge Valdano has been an outstanding addition to The Guardian’s World Cup coverage and the Argentinian’s latest column espouses the glory of drama and emotion in an era of certainty and data. Of course the data helps but in the world of play, like in art, we have to put a limit on it because these are realms of freedom. The big problem is that with every step we take towards “scientific certainties”, players lose a little more freedom. Freedom for what? To think. There’s a reason they’re the protagonists. The Tweet from Michael Nyman started me thinking. Both France and Argentina can be understood through music - well, musical theatre. The story of France in Les Miserables, modern Argentina acting as the backdrop to Evita. Are any other World Cup contenders addressed in this fashion? Has anyone ever done a World Cup of musicals, Grantland-style? The draw dictates this mega head-to-head would be in the quarterfinals, but yes, I can’t see anybody not wanting to watch that particular scene unfold. Speaking of the draw, I’m trying unsuccessfully to link to the wallchart on the site. It is here though, if you’re looking for it. Absolutely not Michael, especially if you are the Michael Nyman. Although as they are now on the same half of the draw your dream can only come true in the semis. Graham Dwyer with the opening email of the day. “Today is like two finals in one day. Can’t wait for Argentina to stuff the French and Uruguay to demolish Portugal.” Very pro-South America for Graham. Is that a common feeling among neutrals? My own personal preference would be France and Portugal. Although for all France’s problems they cruised through the group phase, unlike Argentina. Guardian columnist Marcel Desailly shares his experience of underperforming at a World Cup and questions Argentina’s direction under Jorge Sampaoli. We know Messi is great but we’re confused and sad for him. He is such a pure Barcelona product but with Argentina right now Messi’s in a mess. Something is missing – is it unity, faith? Messi doesn’t seem to fit into the collective. They have so many talented strikers, so many skilful attacking players and yet they don’t seem to know how to get the best out of them. They are really struggling. Is it the system? Is there a certain spirit missing? Despite a surfeit of superstars France have yet to set the tournament alight. Now they face the prospect of having to click into gear in attack while simultaneously combatting one Lionel Messi in defence. No easy feat. Let’s start the day 17 ball rolling with an upbeat Barney Ronay setting the scene for the knockout stages. This has felt like a genuinely epic-scale World Cup, football in a big country, with a vast bloom of interest and history in every city. The weather will now change, with a more staccato feel to the more micro-managed drama of knockout football. Over to you, part two. It won’t be an easy act to follow. Yey! It’s a football day! Remember yesterday, when there was no football to watch? It was horrible, wasn’t it? Well, fear not. Normal life, a functioning circadian rhythm, and conversations about the weather can be shelved for another day because today we will be served more glorious World Cup football. First on the agenda is France vs. Argentina, a pairing that would grace a World Cup final but will instead kick-off the round of 16. Following that blockbuster Uruguay and Portugal will put their credentials to the test in a match with the potential to redefine footballing bastardy. So dig out your remote from the back of the sofa, pile up your salty snackfoods and caffeinated beverages and tuck into a massive plateful of Messi, Ronaldo, Suarez, Pogba and the rest. It’s going to be glorious. And don’t forget to join in. Emails should be sent to jonathan.howcroft.freelance@guardian.co.uk and tweets to @JPHowcroft. It’s what the badger’s would want.
16||Lettuce crops flop as Britain wilts in hot weatherBritain is continuing to feel the effects of the long, hot weather as moor fires keep burning, hosepipe bans are imposed and horticultural crops suffer. The high temperatures have increased the demand for lettuce – a record 18m heads sold last week, 40% more than in the same period last year – but the salad crop is wilting under the high pressure. Dieter Lloyd, the spokesperson for British Leafy Salad Growers, said: “When the mercury hits 30C, lettuces can’t grow.” High temperatures were affecting all farmers in the group’s major salad-growing areas, from Fife and Lancashire, to East Anglia and Sussex. “We may be seeing some gaps on retailers’ shelves in the next two weeks as the heatwave continues,” Lloyd said. However, supermarkets may fill the gaps with lettuce from across the Atlantic. Sourcing salad ingredients from southern Europe was not possible because they were also affected by the high temperatures. Lloyd said it was a similar story for other vegetables, including broccoli and cauliflower. However, perhaps the gravest consequence of the looming lettuce shortage has been the outbreak of groan-worthy tweets. The Lincs FM farming programme presenter Sean Dunderdale said: “First crumpets now I’m hearing there might be a lettuce shortage next week. Is it just the tip of the iceberg?” The Times columnist and Tory peer Daniel Finkelstein quipped: “Wouldn’t have happened if we’d voted Romaine. Even the lettuce leaves.” Temperatures have been above 30C this week across many parts of the UK, with Glasgow notching up its hottest day on record at 31.9C on Thursday. The conditions show no sign of abating, with London and Cardiff heading for 29C and 28C respectively on Saturday, although temperatures in Edinburgh and Newcastle were expected to reach just 19C. Some water companies have asked customers to conserve supplies by not using hosepipes or water sprinklers. The first hosepipe ban began in Northern Ireland at 6pm on Friday. NI Water’s chief executive, Sara Venning, said: “We are asking customers to take heed of the hosepipe ban and stop non-essential water use – using hoses and sprinklers is causing demand to exceed the capacity to supply.” Severn Trent Water asked householders to be “careful with their water” and avoid using garden sprinklers or hoses. Meanwhile, gritters had been deployed in some areas, spreading crushed rock dust on melting asphalt to create a non-stick layer between the roads and vehicles. Sunday’s temperatures are forecast to be well above average in most areas, particularly central southern England. However, a yellow weather warning for heavy showers and thunderstorms has been issued for south-west England and Wales, and it will be cooler across northern Scotland. Monday and Tuesday are forecast to be very warm or hot, and sunny in most areas.
2||Jane Horrocks: ‘Am I happy? I don’t think so, no. Sorry'I’m a happier person when I’m making people laugh. It’s always nice to do comedy, because you’re uplifting people. I go in phases where I end up doing a lot of doom and gloom and then a lot of comedy. I get fed up of one and go back to the other. But comedy makes me feel a lot better, psychologically. If you’re making people laugh, it’s much, much nicer than making people cry. I was rebellious as a teenager. I was of the post-punk era, new romantic, where people did dress strangely, to annoy their parents. It’s very difficult now for the younger generation. There’s very little to rail against, because parents go: “We like that, too! We like festivals! We want to go with you!” I feel like I’m done with Bubble [her character in Absolutely Fabulous]. Pratfalls feel a bit like something I did in my 20s and 30s. It doesn’t quite sit as comfortably, now I’m of an older age. I’d have seen myself as a socialist when I was younger, but I’m indifferent to politics now. I got into it when I was doing Life Is Sweet, because my character was so anti-Thatcher. I went to Socialist Worker meetings. My son is 21 and my daughter’s 19. My biggest pleasure is that my children don’t do what I do, and they don’t do what my partner does. That is a great accolade. My partner is a writer and an actor. I think perhaps if you were with somebody who wasn’t connected in some way with this business, then it would be harder for them to understand the world. Joy Division were massive heroes of mine. Soft Cell, Human League, Gang of Four. I did this show at the Young Vic two years ago [If You Kiss Me, Kiss Me] where I performed the songs of Morrissey, Robert Smith, the Buzzcocks. Northern male bands, that’s who I love. I don’t like seeing plays any more. After 10 minutes, I’ve got the point. I don’t need to sit through the rest of it. If there’s music in a show and then it stops, I think: “Oooh, carry on with the music and stop talking.” Music is what does it for me. People are surprised I’ve still got my accent. I am attached to where I’m from. The strength of the Lancashire people is within me. You get on and do it. There are no airs and graces. My family have never allowed me to get above my station. Am I happy? I don’t think so, no. Sorry. I’m still trying to find it. A few years ago, I was with my sister-in-law and my niece. My mum was going around the table saying: “What’s on your wishlist?” And we all said what we wanted, but my niece said: “Nothing, I don’t wish for anything.” I thought, that’s the secret of happiness. Complete contentment. Swimming with Men is in cinemas nationwide from 6 July
1||One to watch: Oscar #WorldpeaceYou shouldn’t judge an artist by their stage name. British rapper Oscar #Worldpeace (surname unknown) may sound like the leader of an ill-fated Twitter campaign, but it’s clear that the Tottenham-born rapper is also a formidable talent. Growing up in the same north London area as grime stars JME and Skepta, #Worldpeace was surrounded by the frenetic lyricism of that burgeoning scene, as well as his Ghanaian and Jamaican grandparents’ reggae records. Subsequently, his approach to music has been DIY: he got behind the mic in his cousin’s home studio and self-released his assured debut, Recluse, last year. Its engrossing blend of gritty production and nonchalant lyrical delivery caught the ears of his current mentor, Mike Skinner of the Streets, who has since released and remixed #Worldpeace’s tracks No Change and Right Now. The rapper has said that his writing style is based on “what I’m going through, or what is going on today”. His latest EP, IC3 – the British police code for “black male” – addresses everything from police profiling to religious iconography. On I SEE he raps, “please don’t shoot/they running from police” over a plaintive piano, while the reggae-influenced No White God, which starts and ends with the sample of a woman saying: “being black is a responsibility”. Oscar #Worldpeace shoulders this responsibility with incisive music that delves beneath mere appearances into the knotty complexity of lived experience. • Oscar #Worldpeace plays Lovebox festival, Gunnersbury Park, London W3, 13-14 July
14||Who Is Rich? by Matthew Klam review – a hilarious midlife crisisMatthew Klam’s debut novel is energetically voiced by Rich Fischer, an American cartoonist and illustrator whose reputation rests on a single long-ago graphic novel, which had themes of “marital failings, artistic desolation, the inability to meet expectations, grown-up male alienation”. Reading this description two-thirds of the way through Who Is Rich?, we recognise it as a wryly self-referential summary of the book Rich is in. Klam admirers who have been waiting since 2001 for a successor to his much-praised debut story collection Sam the Cat will suspect another nod to the protagonist’s long difficulty in repeating creativity. His hit now out of print, Rich, at 42, lives in horrid contradiction to his name. He has a small contract providing editorial drawings for a venerable magazine now near-bankrupted by digital competition. His wife, Robin, is a former war reporter, who after seeing too many colleagues “stabbed, kidnapped or disappeared” gets sporadic freelance shifts for a natural history TV channel that specialises in tawdrily anthropomorphic documentaries. Their pooled pay is insufficient to sustain two young children and pay the mortgage on a suburban Maryland home. The couple are subsidised by parental or sibling loans and, every year, by the low five-figure stipend Rich receives for running a workshop on “semi-autobiographical comics” at a summer arts conference on the New England coast. During this assignment, in the year before we meet him, Rich slept with a mature art student, Amy Rapazzo. He plans to see her again during the 2012 beachside teach-in on which Who Is Rich? reports. Amy is one answer to the title question. As the wife of a multibillionaire, she is eye-poppingly rich. The other multibillionaire in the book is Marty Azamazian, a tycoon who has asset-stripped and vulgarised the media and music industries, but bankrolls this annual arts fest as a sop to his more cultured husband. These monstrous representatives of the new American plutocracy drive the novel’s howlingly funny dramatisation of the money and culture wars. The poor cartoonist feels “shaky and middle-class” as his lover chats about trusts, fundraisers, private jets and parties at which Coldplay have helicoptered in to play a private gig. As a debt-ridden Democrat, Rich’s main moral doubt about his affair with Amy is that her husband is a Republican Mitt Romney backer, who is committed to outlawing taxation and abortion. Klam’s titular question could also be answered by John Updike’s 1981 Reagan-era novel, Rabbit Is Rich, and this connection feels deliberate. Klam echoes his great predecessor in exploring sex, especially illicit, as a hedge against “the intolerable awareness of death”. The meticulous description of the look and feel of a blade of grass, a glass or a garment also seems to continue Updike’s mission statement of “giving the mundane its beautiful due”. It may be relevant as well that the author of the Rabbit books was a talented cartoonist, while John Cuneo’s punctuating illustrations for Klam’s novel give Fischer features very reminiscent of David Levine’s caricatures of Updike. Rich Fischer’s reputation for being a one-book wonder also recalls two earlier American literary alter egos: Updike’s Henry Bech and Philip Roth’s Nathan Zuckerman. Klam departs, however, from the Updike and Roth generation of chroniclers of masculine libido and ego by questioning the male gaze of his main character. Rich’s tendency to review every pair of breasts he sees, as if running a mammary Amazon star system, will make many readers feel queasy these days, but, within the tone and context of the novel, this trait feels rebuked. Although the viewpoint is solely Rich’s, the monologue voice is often ranting, paranoid or self-indulgent, and Klam contrives to give Robin and Amy an answering voice. Anecdotes that Rich intends to condemn the women often contain details that make it clear he has misunderstood or misrepresented a situation in which he is the villain. As is suggested by critical praise from Curtis Sittenfeld, Lorrie Moore and Jennifer Egan, Rich is not the conventional Am Lit cock of the talk. What is indisputably authentic is the precise detail of modern life. Klam often sets scenes with a riffed list: the hall of a family home contains a warm mess of “baseball caps, straw hats, rain ponchos, scarves, mittens, ear-muffs, gloves”. Another speciality is the single-sentence biography of peripheral characters, such as the rich kid who “transferred to a new college every year, and wrecked his car last winter and spent a month in a body cast”. In these high-stakes times, some may resist a book that delineates a narrow strip of male literary life in pre-Trump America. But the current president’s rise channelled anger at the cash and land grabs of the superrich that Klam brutally skewers, and the novel also deals seriously with the decline of traditional media and the ethics of memoir. Regardless of British qualms about the American takeover of the Man Booker prize, Who Is Rich? feels like another strong transatlantic candidate for 2018. Mark Lawson’s latest novel is The Allegations (Picador). Who is Rich? by Matthew Klam (Fourth Estate, £16.99). To order a copy for £14.44, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&amp;p of £1.99.
19||Jurassic World Evolution review – thrills at risk of extinctionConsidering the tremendous expense involved – the flights to the remote island, the stratospherically expensive group ticket, all those stegosaurus backpacks for the kids – a family of four might reasonably feel put out when, on arrival at Jurassic Park, they’re greeted with the sight of a dead dino sailing through the sky. Yet as every zookeeper knows, the business of running a tourist attraction built around living exhibits involves just as much death and ruin as it does life and birth. Squeezed into the hiking boots of Jurassic Park’s new manager, a dispiriting amount of your time in this movie franchise spin-off is spent ensuring that your irritable dinosaurs do not gore one another to death. And when they do, it’s your job to hoist the carcass on to a helicopter and have it medevacked away, over the cringing heads of your patrons. Only in a video game would the focus of Michael Crichton’s evergreen novels shift from the incalculable wonder of resurrecting dinosaurs to the wearying business of running an attraction in the live entertainments sector. Dinosaurs may be the product, but this game principally simulates the stress familiar to any hopeful entrepreneur who has had to please the whingeing public while keeping a keen eye on the teetering books. It’s testament to the talent of Cambridge-based developer Frontier Developments (founded by David Braben, co-inventor of the Raspberry Pi mini-computer) that the gruelling 60-hour week of the tourism startup manages to be quite so engaging. You begin with a plot of empty, verdant land. Lay a fence and you have your first enclosure, next to which you can incubate eggs, release hatchlings and begin the arduous work of building an attraction. You must ensure your dinosaurs are adequately fed (for the carnivores, this means installing a delicious goat dispenser) and watered, that they have other dinosaurs in proximity with whom they get along (isolation leads to dino-depression) and adequate space. Dinosaurs can contract infectious diseases and must be quarantined while you research the cure, before administering it with a dart to the neck. Your awful guests take up as much of your time as the attractions. They require at least seven different species of dinosaurs to be present in the park in order to feel they’ve got their money’s worth. Their legs get tired, so they prefer a monorail to deposit them from pen to pen. Installing shops and restaurants at regular intervals will not only scratch their consumerist itch, but also generate much-needed funds to spend on sending your R&amp;D teams off to archaeological digs in search of new dinosaur DNA, notoriously found in the bellies of amber-frozen Mesozoic mosquitos. Park expansion must be matched by the appropriate safety precautions. Ranger teams can be hired to repair security fences, and you’ll need emergency shelters to house visitors when a carnivore does break loose, along with snipers armed with tranq-darts; litigation from the families of gobbled patrons makes a major hole in your profits. All the time, your three nagging managers implore you to invest more money in their area of interest: security, science or entertainment. In time, and with care, the startup becomes an empire as you establish new parks on new islands, or take over the failing efforts of others. As with all capitalistic enterprises, what starts out as a thrilling adventure can soon settle into a kind of hollow monotony as you idly bat away minor disasters and maintain your profit margins. Finally, when you have the time and space to zoom in and marvel at the creatures you’ve raised from the microscopic, you may find that, in learning to see dinosaurs as assets rather than miracles, you have entirely lost your capacity for wonder. A perfectly described capitalist adventure, then. Also out this month Lumines Remastered (Switch, PS4, Xbox One) One of the most thrilling moments at the recent E3 video game conference in Los Angeles was the news that Tetsuya Mizuguchi is working on a Tetris-themed music game called Tetris Effect. It’s not the first time the Japanese maestro has made a music-driven game involving sorting blocks. Lumines (2004) similarly asks players to organise and disappear shapes, in order to prevent the pile reaching the top of the screen. The game has lost none of its lustre in the past 14 years, and it’s testament to Mizuguchi’s taste that the beats sound as fresh as ever. The Crew 2 (PS4, Xbox One, PC) Its predecessor boasted that players could drive from America’s east coast to its west. For this sequel the map is similarly massive, but the Fast and the Furious storyline is gone, and in its place the laws of physics have been turned up to create a preposterous playground around which supercars, motorbikes, planes and boats ping and bounce with joyous abandon. Skip the risible dialogue and the endless exhortations to attract more “followers” by performing outrageous stunts in each of these vehicles, and what remains is a taut, largely unbloated trip that renders America utterly inviting for the petrolhead (if not the immigrant).
16||UK heatwave particularly dangerous for homeless peopleCharities have said that the heatwave in the UK is particularly dangerous for homeless people after the Met Office said continued exposure to the scorching heat could pose a potential risk to life and advised people to take extra precautions. With temperatures in some parts of the country expected to hit 30C (86F) on Sunday, charities have called on the public to donate sunscreen and water to people sleeping on the streets. “The summer can be just as dangerous for people sleeping rough as the winter months,” said Debra Ives, the director of operations for Evolve Housing + Support. “People sleeping on the streets are exceptionally vulnerable in the summer due to lack of access to shade, running water and sunscreen, which makes their life unbearable and can be a risk to life. “We’re calling on the public to donate things like sun cream, water, and sun hats, to help those at risk this summer. People can either offer them directly, or donate them to a shelter or charity.” Her calls were echoed by Crisis. “Rough sleeping is incredibly dangerous at any time of year, but as temperatures continue to soar, dehydration and heat exhaustion pose particular risks,” said Matthew Downie, the director of policy at Crisis. “People living on the streets may spend nights on the move in order to stay safe, which means they often sleep during the daytime, so offering to help someone to find shade could save them from severe sunburn. “Ultimately though, no one should be facing these dangers when we know that homelessness can be ended, so we’re also asking people to join our campaign to end homelessness for good, email their local MPs asking them to pledge their support to end homelessness and help us ensure that in the future, no one has to face these conditions again.” In some parts of the country, homeless people have struggled to access free water, while many are unable to access public toilets, which are often inside shopping centres patrolled by security guards. Water fountains are often few and far between. Outreach workers in Birmingham have given out bottles of water to the city’s homeless, some of whom had reportedly not drunk water for hours. “They were so desperate, they were fighting over the bottles of water,” Tracey Patterson, the founder of Birmingham Homeless Support, told the BBC. It is advised that people drink at least two litres of water a day during hot conditions. “If I go into a shop or cafe and try and ask for a glass of water, they always say no,” Sarah, a homeless woman, told the BBC. “If people think you’re homeless, they just won’t help you. If someone who didn’t look homeless went in and asked for water, they’d get it. It’s so frustrating. “Security guards are always on the lookout for you. They think you’re scum. They’ll make sure you’re not in their place for too long, or just boot you out straight away so it’s hard to find shade for a long time. “Even in parks and that there’s always someone to tell you to move on.” Charities have said that to avoid being robbed or beaten up, rough sleepers often spend nights on the move and sleep during the day, making them more vulnerable to extreme sunburn.
13||Roman wall painting resurfaces after almost 200 yearsAn “ancient” Roman wall painting once owned by the 18th-century collector, connoisseur, wit and gossip Horace Walpole has resurfaced almost 200 years after his treasures were dispersed at auction. Walpole believed his panel of Roman plaster, painted with delicate swags of leaves and flowers, a relief-moulded, garlanded head, and a banquet scene with a sprawled river god, was the real deal. He placed it over the door to his private library in the cottage to which he retreated when his famous house, Strawberry Hill in west London, was over-run with visitors. “I keep an inn at the sign of the gothic castle,” Walpole once grumbled to a friend. Like many of his treasures, the painting was not quite what Walpole had hoped. Although it is expected to attract far more than the seven guineas it fetched in 1842, it has a low estimate of £15,000 for the auction at Sotheby’s on 3 July, and it would be even lower without the Walpole connection. Florent Heintz, the head of the ancient sculpture department at Sotheby’s, first saw the panel when it was brought into the New York office on behalf of an American collector. Heintz could see at a glance that most of it was 18th-century over-painting, done by one of the ingenious workshops in Rome which churned out antiquities for gullible Grand Tour collectors. It was so heavily restored that it was of minimal interest and he turned it down. Then he met Silvia Davoli, an art historian who is tracking Walpole’s lost collection to reunite the treasures for an exhibition at Strawberry Hill next winter. She and Heintz, who has a photographic memory and spends his spare time poring over old sale and exhibition catalogues, traced a marble sarcophagus on lions’ feet which once stood in Walpole’s garden and is now in the collection of the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. When Davoli sent Heintz a 1745 engraving of the Roman painting made for Conyers Middleton, an English collector, who sold it to Walpole, he instantly recognised the spurned panel. “There was a delicate conversation with the owner,” he said, “when I had to phone and say: ‘Actually, I may have been too hasty.’” Under raking light, x-ray and other tests, the panel proved to be as genuinely ancient Roman as a snow globe Colosseum. The plaster was genuine but extensively repaired, the leaves and flowers were painted in oils over the faint marks of the original decoration, and the entire lower scene had been added. Indeed, Heintz tracked an engraving of a genuine Roman tomb painting discovered in the early 18th century, which shows half of the scene that was almost certainly copied on to the Walpole panel. He concedes that it’s an interesting early Grand Tour souvenir, since the trade was at its height much later in the century. Walpole collected genuine masterpieces for his father, Robert, the first prime minister, at Houghton Hall in Norfolk, but as a youngest son he never had enough money to collect on that scale himself. He filled Strawberry Hill with wonders he believed were once owned by kings, cardinals and emperors, such as a comb that he believed Pope Gregory gave to Saint Bertha. The wall panel is now precious to Heintz and Davoli, not for the surviving scraps of real ancient Roman paint, but because Walpole once owned it.
5||More than 700 anti-Trump protests planned across all 50 statesOrganizers of demonstrations expected to take place across all 50 states on Saturday are calling for Americans outraged by Donald Trump’s immigration policies and the prospect of a supreme court swinging sharply right to put aside party differences and protest with one voice. “This is an all hands on deck, stop the madness moment. It’s not a red or blue thing,” the national protest organizer, Ai-jen Poo, told the Guardian. More than 750 events are planned across the country on 30 June, under the slogan “Families belong together”, to protest against the separation of more than 2,000 children from their parents in recent weeks after they crossed the border without authorisation under the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” crackdown. Poo said the protests were primarily for people who had been horrified at the news of the separations and detentions, but she said the cause would widen into a show of opposition against Trump’s travel ban, which targets five Muslim-majority countries and was upheld by the supreme court this week, as well as the threat of Trump nominating a hard-right conservative for the supreme court seat vacated by Justice Anthony Kennedy. “What you are seeing is the downright refusal to accept this administration’s policies,” she said. With the Fourth of July holiday approaching “this is a time when we reflect on where we are as a country and, right now, what we are going to do to take it back as the multiracial democracy we know and deserve”, she added. Most children have not yet been reunited with their parents despite the president halting the summary separation policy and a judge this week ordering the administration to reunite families. The largest demonstration is planned for Washington DC, with many thousands expected to gather close to the White House, including Poo, who is a union leader and the director of the national domestic workers alliance, the Hamilton musical creator, Lin-Manuel Miranda, and other figures such as the actor and activist America Ferrera. There will be a rally addressed by a mother who was separated from her child by the border patrol. Mass protests are also expected in New York, Los Angeles, Seattle and other big cities. “But the beautiful thing about this day is that there are 10 events in Indiana, [vice-president] Mike Pence’s home state, protests in Lubbock, Texas, events in Alabama, rural Pennsylvania and many places like that,” Poo said. She dubbed the administration’s immigration policy “zero humanity” and “a moral atrocity” and said the main thrusts of Saturday’s events were to demand that families be reunited, call for an end to “zero tolerance” and an end to immigration detention, even where families are kept together. Beyond the issue of family separations, the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, announced earlier this month that domestic or gang violence, which is rife in many parts of Central America and Mexico, will no longer be regarded as valid reasons for seeking asylum in the US. The union and the progressive advocacy body MoveOn are the principal organizers of Saturday’s events, along with more than 150 smaller groups across the country. The Women’s March is also an event partner, and its organizer Linda Sarsour is taking part in the planned event in LA, fresh from rallying a mass sit-in over immigration at a US Senate building in Washington on Thursday, at which about 600 women were arrested. “We need a combination of direct action, mass mobilization and electoral power,” she told the Guardian. Sarsour said plans for the demonstrations on Saturday had been given new impetus by the news last week that the supreme court had upheld Trump’s travel ban. That news was quickly followed by the announcement that Anthony Kennedy will retire, and is set to be replaced by a conservative, which presages heightened threats to legal abortion and to workers, gay rights and immigration rights. “I think news of the Kennedy retirement really shook people up,” she said. Asked if she thought many Trump voters might regret their choice as Republican politics shift further right, she said: “Absolutely.” “There’s an element of the GOP who are pro-choice women, and moderates who support marriage equality and who realize that on immigration issues, the supreme court will take us back years. The travel ban is rooted in Islamophobia, which the president himself spread during the election campaign,” she said. She urged maximum “grassroots energy” at Saturday’s protests, and throughout the summer and fall. “This administration is not to be trusted,” she said.
14||All the Pieces Matter review – the inside story of The WireWhile shooting a scene for The Wire in the Baltimore city morgue, cinematographer Uta Briesewitz noticed a large pile of photographs of African American men. They were, she said, “beautiful young men, and all dead. One had a bullet to the head. Another had two bullet holes to the chest. They were already cleaned up, so you just saw these black holes there. It was not messy. It was not bloody. All these men looked like they were sleeping. This was when it really hit home for me, what a tragedy this all is. It hit me really hard.” Initially, the 60 episodes of The Wire from 2002 to 2008 were largely ignored by critics and award-givers alike. But for years now the series has been regarded as one of the greatest TV shows ever made. Its creator was the one-time Baltimore crime reporter David Simon. He worked with Ed Burns, a former Baltimore detective whose takedown of a drug kingpin using a wiretap was the basis of The Wire, and a team of writers that included the novelists Dennis Lehane, Richard Price and George Pelecanos. Together with actors including Michael B Jordan, Idris Elba and Dominic West they crafted an immensely powerful series that was characterised by its remarkable realism and outstanding writing. Despite its naturalism, none of the dialogue was improvised. According to Wendell Pierce (who played Detective William “Bunk” Moreland), “they were on us about the words, man. Every piece is important. ‘All the pieces matter’. That was the mantra.” Jonathan Abrams has talked to nearly everyone involved in making the show and this oral history is essential reading for any fan. President Obama said The Wire was his favourite show and the gun-slinging Omar Little (Michael K Williams) was the character he liked most. Complex, novelistic and moving, it was a highly original police drama. But as Lehane says, Simon “never saw it as a cop show”. As well as exposing the failure of the war on drugs and highlighting the plight of its forgotten casualties, his theme was political: the destruction of the working class and its replacement by an underclass. Like Brecht, Simon was not interested in heroes or villains, but in showing people the deeper social and economic causes of their suffering. He wanted to say to them: “This is the world. This is how it works.” • All the Pieces Matter is published by No Exit. To order a copy for £11.04 (RRP £12.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.
8||Denis Shapovalov: ‘I’ve always tried to model my game on Roger and Rafa’It is 45 years since a blond-haired Swede first took Wimbledon by storm, the arrival of Björn Borg sending fans at Wimbledon into the kind of frenzy not seen since the Beatles. It may be a stretch to say the arrival of another blond will have a similar effect at this year’s event but, when Denis Shapovalov strides through the gates of the All England Club, Wimbledon may just be seeing a future star of the sport. Left-handed, with a good serve, brutal forehand and a dazzling one-handed backhand he often hits in mid-air, Shapovalov has already attracted a legion of fans. Junior champion at Wimbledon two years ago, the 19-year-old Canadian has a bit of everything: he is part Federer, part Nadal, part McEnroe, even part Borg, at least in the hair department. Shapovalov spent time with both Borg and John McEnroe in the Laver Cup team exhibition event last September. Did Borg offer any tips on dealing with teenage mobs? “No, not yet,” says Shapovalov, laughing as he relaxed in Eastbourne, where he played his final warm-up event. “Maybe if I had a couple more chats with him he might. But of course, there are some similarities, especially with the flow [hair].” It was also at the Laver Cup that Shapovalov spent some quality time with Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal. “Getting to know these guys, and obviously Roger in particular, it’s pretty crazy for me,” he says. “They’re not just unbelievable tennis players. They’re really nice people, too. Roger’s always given me time. He’s always stopped and said hello, spent time talking to me. For a guy like him maybe it’s nothing but for a player like me it’s huge.” Shapovalov is part of the Next Gen, a group of players which includes Sascha Zverev, Stefanos Tsitsipas and Hyeon Chung, each of whom has already made an impact. While the generation ahead of them – players such as Grigor Dimitrov, Milos Raonic and Kei Nishikori – have all been bruised by defeats by Federer, Nadal, Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray, Shapovalov is free from the mental scarring. Instead, by studying them, and now playing them, he is constantly learning. “I’ve always tried to model my game on Roger’s, trying to be aggressive, trying to be coming in, playing quick, and I’ve always tried to copy Rafa with my fighting spirit,” he said. “I’ve definitely tried to learn a lot from them and I keep trying to learn a lot from them. On the clay courts I was watching a lot of videos of Rafa, trying to see what he does as a leftie to hurt players. And on the grass I’ve been trying to watch a little bit of Rog, how he plays and why he’s so comfortable and so good on the surface.” This time last year the Canadian had to qualify for a Challenger event in Surbiton. A win over Nadal in Montreal in August then catapulted him into the public eye and he rode the momentum to the last 16 of the US Open. He ended 2017 ranked 51 and is now the No 28 seed at Wimbledon – and could face Murray in the second round. “It’s definitely crazy how fast I’ve come up,” Shapovalov says. “A couple of weeks and my whole life changed. It was overwhelming last year, more so than this year. Last year it was just a couple of weeks and all of a sudden I was playing these high-level tournaments with all these guys. [Now] I really feel like I belong.” For a new kid on the block Shapovalov is humble and almost unnaturally mature (not forgetting he was defaulted when he struck a ball that hit the umpire in the eye during a Davis Cup tie against GB as a 17-year-old). Beaten in the first round in his first two grass-court events of the summer, “Shapo” knows his results are likely to be up and down for a while. But he seems to have been born for the big stage and he understands his role. “At the end of the day it’s a show,” he says. “We make money because they come to watch us. So I try to get them [the fans] into the matches and get them going sometimes.” When Shapovalov first played on grass, at the pre-Wimbledon junior event in Roehampton in 2015, he did not even have any grass-court shoes. The following year he won junior Wimbledon. In the main draw of a grand slam event for only the fifth time he will not get carried away. “I would love to go deep but it’s tough to set any expectations,” he says. “It’s my second time at Wimbledon as a pro, so it’s not like I’m expecting anything crazy. I’m just going to try to take it one match at a time and hopefully I can go far. But if I don’t, there will be next year. I’m so young and there are so many chances.”
4||This is England’s time to deliver – and with Gareth Southgate they can do itI made my debut for Aston Villa on 13 January 2001 and, to be frank, it could have been in better circumstances. We were 3-0 down to Liverpool at home when John Gregory decided to beckon me from the bench. I came on with six minutes to go, into a lost cause, and in front of an understandably disgruntled crowd. Nevertheless, it remains a good memory given it was my first taste of English football, and Premier League football in particular. I also came into a Villa side full of strong personalties such as Paul Merson, David Ginola and Dion Dublin. It was a big occasion and something I was ready for because of the support I had been given before that moment, with few more supportive than someone else who featured for Villa on that Saturday afternoon – Gareth Southgate. I didn’t get to play much with Gareth at Villa as the start of my time there came as his was ending – he left that summer to join Middlesbrough – and that was a great shame as he was somebody I came to greatly admire. He is a smart guy, a humble guy, a guy who treated the responsibility of being a professional footballer with upmost respect, setting a standard for those around him, including myself. I looked up to Gareth and he was often the person I would go to for advice. I could talk to him about anything and he always listened and did his best to help. And he stood out – Gareth was not your average footballer and increasingly he is coming across as not your average England manager. From the outside, at least, it has often felt that England’s undoing at major tournaments is their lack of togetherness and the fear many players have felt going into high-pressurised games. Having been an England player himself, Gareth will be aware of this and it appears he has gone out of his way to avoid the same mistakes now he is in charge. The current side seem to be enjoying their football having been given the backing of their manager to express themselves and, just as importantly, they seem fully united. Hence why I can understand Gareth’s decision to make so many changes for the game against Belgium. As he said himself, England are a squad of players and he wants everyone to feel involved, and he made sure of that in Kaliningrad. It made for a bizarre game, with neither side exactly busting a gut to win, but for both sides the job was done before kick-off so they could afford to experiment. From England’s point of view, it was perhaps a good thing given the incredibly hot conditions they had faced in Nizhny Novgorod against Panama. That would have taken a lot of the players involved so this was a chance for most of them to rest. They should now be fully refreshed before facing Colombia on Tuesday. It won’t be easy against a team who showed in their win against Poland that they can be a dangerous attacking force. Equally, they were not so impressive in their other group games, against Japan and Senegal, and with James Rodríguez likely to be out with an injury, England should fancy their chance of progressing. What’s for sure is that this is England’s time to deliver. They failed spectacularly to do that against Iceland at the last European Championship but there is a big difference now – the manager. He clearly trusts his players to perform and, in turn, that has led to one of the most exciting and expansive England sides I have seen for a very long time. The system no doubt helps, with England having an overload in midfield that allows them to dominate possession and territory. What looks at times like a 3-3-2-2 formation is certainly innovative and again shows what a unique, thoughtful manager Gareth is. His thoughtful side can also be seen in how good England have been from set pieces at this World Cup. They’ve clearly been working on that aspect of their game with Gareth saying publicly how he feels set-piece deliveries could ultimately make the difference in games of tight margins. And he is right – before the last World Cup Joachim Löw initially didn’t want to practise free-kicks and corners extensively but he was encouraged by his assistant, and doing so ultimately contributed to Germany becoming world champions in Brazil. Can England become world champions this time around? It cannot be ruled out in what has been a really unpredictable tournament. I tipped Germany to win it, which obviously won’t happen now, and from the sides left I fancy Brazil to go all the way. But no single team has really stood out and, as such, this could be England’s moment. If it is, a huge part of that will be down to the manager. I for one wish him the very best.
4||BBC getting the better of ITV in battle of the World Cup punditsBBC Main host: Gary Lineker The former England forward is very much the Galaxy Caramel of broadcasting – smooth and satisfying, if not a bit rich for some people’s taste – and he’s been in typically fine form at this World Cup, with an early dig at Alan Shearer’s likeness to Gianni Infantino setting the tone for Lineker’s relaxed and cheeky approach to hosting. Rating: 8½/10 Secondary host: Mark Chapman The hope pre-tournament was that Chapman would be sporting a full-on beard in Russia. It suits him and facial hair on a man is always a good thing. Sadly that’s not proved to be the case but ‘Chappers’ has still very much brought his A-game to proceedings; a consistently engaging and masterful presence on the BBC’s live and highlights coverage. Britain’s best broadcaster. Rating: 9/10 Main pundit: Alan Shearer An ultra-assured veteran of these occasions who has come armed not only with firm opinions but also anecdotes, as seen with his telling, ahead of Spain versus Portugal, of the Peruvian family who had saved for two years in order to watch their nation perform at this World Cup. Bravo Big Al, bravo. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit: Jermaine Jenas It’s been the usual mix of hard opinions and thoughtful analysis from the 35-year-old, who has also delivered the put-down of the tournament so far: arguing with Phil Neville over the merits of Uruguay’s Rodrigo Bentancur, Jenas snapped back with “no need to tell me how to play centre-midfield, Phil”. Brutal. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit (Neville): Phil Neville I want to like Neville but he makes it difficult. First there’s the ear-piercing loud voice, then the curious opinions (like saying no team had impressed him two days after Spain and Portugal’s sensational tussle) and, to top it all off, the propensity to whisper while on commentary duties. Is Phil in witness protection? Who knows, but, whatever the case, it’s unsettling. Rating: 5½/10 Main pundit (other): Rio Ferdinand An increasingly assured and strident presence whose only false step has been the weird voice he put on while praising Jesse Lingard during England’s 6-1 victory over Panama. Otherwise, sound. Rating: 7½/10 Main pundit (other): Frank Lampard One of the most articulate and thoughtful voices on the punditry circuit and brings calms to what occasionally can become an over-heated studio, particularly when England are playing. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit (other): Matthew Upson The former West Ham defender is having an impressive tournament on the back of nailing the basics – knowing his stuff and expressing it well. He also often looks startled, which is endearing. Rating: 7/10 Main pundit (other): Danny Murphy Putting a shift in and generally doing it well, although the former England midfielder could do with cheering up a bit and not talking so much when on co-commentary duties. Less is more Danny. Rating: 6/10 International voice: Cesc Fàbregas The 31-year-old’s decision to dress like a pilot for Spain versus Portugal was a bold one but having backed it up with sharp, clear analysis he flew and has continued to do so. Rating: 8/10 International voice: Didier Drogba The former Chelsea forward has improved after a pretty terrible start, needing as he was to be rescued by his fellow pundits during Australia versus France, but he remains a largely limited, ineffectual voice. Rating: 5½/10 International voice: Pablo Zabaleta A relative late comer to proceedings but, unlike his national team, the Argentinian hit the ground running and performed consistently well up until his recent departure. Such was the 33-year-old’s assured manner that he even turned getting Drogba and Neville to drink Mate, a popular South American drink, into a lovely, amusing moment. Rating: 8/10 Female voice: Alex Scott Research done, statistics gathered and analysis delivered with assurance and a smile as broad as Red Square, the former England international has proven to be a strong addition to Team BBC. Rating: 7/10 Main commentator: Guy Mowbray It’s a big responsibility being the voice of the BBC’s England’s coverage and Mowbray is very much the man to pull it off, bringing as he does a growling swagger to proceedings. Mowbray’s also good for a nice line, as seen at half-time of England’s 6-1 victory over Panama: “One, two, three, four, five, what a time to be alive.” Rating: 8/10 Secondary commentator: Steve Wilson The Blur to Mowbray’s Oasis: less epic but still very good. Wilson has been on hand to perfectly capture two standout fixtures – Spain versus Portugal and Argentina versus Croatia – and has arguably delivered the line of the tournament so far as 10-man Colombia chased an equaliser against Japan: “If necessity is the mother of invention we should see plenty of that from Colombia.” Rating: 8/10 Co-commentator: Martin Keown As ever with Keown, you come for the breathless analysis and stay for the made-up nicknames. He was at it right from the off in Russia, calling Diego Godin the “professor of defending” during Uruguay’s 1-0 victory over Egypt on day two of the tournament. Truly, a one-off. Rating: 6/10 Co-commentator: Mark Lawrenson Going into this World Cup I found myself curiously excited by the prospect of ‘Lawro’s’ dripping sarcasm and withering put-downs and, boy, there’s been plenty to be excited by. The former Liverpool defender was in particularly fine form during Australia versus France, with “dislocated shoelace” a phrase that will live with me forever. His outrage over VAR during Iran versus Portugal was also glorious. Rating: 7/10 Total: 125/170 ITV Main host: Mark Pougatch ITV stuck Pougatch on a roof at Euro 2016; for this World Cup they’ve stuck him in a garish, green-screen mess of a studio and, as such, you have to wonder: are they testing the poor bugger? If so the 50-year-old deserves credit for continuing to helm proceedings with consistent excellence. Rating: 8/10 Secondary host: Jacqui Oatley The hardest working person in punditry showbiz, combining live and highlights hosting with at-venue duties, and always with ultra-professionalism. Oatley has received criticism for her handling of ‘Evragate’ and arguably should have come down firmer on the former Manchester United defender when he twice patronoised Eni Aluko during Costa Rica versus Serbia. Rating: 7½/10 Main pundit: Slaven Bilic Another tournament and another stunning display from the former Croatia defender. Nobody else combines gripping enthusiasm with bang-on analysis quite like Bilic, with the 49-year-old also on hand to deliver killer lines, none better than “to be fair, I don’t care” during a VAR-related debate post-Brazil versus Switzerland. His calming down of Martin O’Neill during Russia versus Uruguay was also great. A punditry superstar. Rating: 9½/10 Main pundit: Roy Keane Some say Keane is knowingly playing up to his persona of bitter, angry Irishman. I don’t buy that - what we have here is a bona fide grump bordering on full-on psychopath, encapsulated by his take on Carlos Queiroz’s time at Manchester United ahead of Spain versus Iran: “I should have ripped his head off ... excellent coach, though”. Terrifying and mesmerising in equal measure. Rating: 7/10 Main pundit (Neville): Gary Neville ITV’s big punditry coup has largely paid off with the former England assistant coach successfully bringing his mix of crisp analysis and amusing bluntness to the terrestrial stage. Saying that, there is a sense of opportunity wasted watching Neville do his thing without touchscreen and Jamie Carragher in tow. Imagine Batman without Alfred and Robin – it’s just not the same. Rating: 7½/10 Main pundit (other): Lee Dixon An experienced voice who has performed with assurance in the studio and on co-comms duties. I particularly enjoyed him claiming Roy Keane never liked any of his team-mates while knowing full well the former midfielder was sat next to Gary Neville in the ITV studio during Germany versus Sweden. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit (other): Ryan Giggs The Welshman knows what he’s talking about but sadly has the delivery of a tranquilliser gun, seen by his telling of a horrifically boring anecdote during Iran versus Morocco. I wish I could remember what it was about but I fell asleep halfway through. Rating: 5½/10 Main pundit (other): Ian Wright Loud shirts and jokes about men going to the woods - ‘Wrighty’ has been in full-on ‘Wrighty’ mode during this World Cup. The analysis is decent enough and we may get a full-on strop when England go out, which could be fun. Rating: 6½/10 Main pundit (other): Mark Clattenburg A useful and informed voice in a tournament dominated by discussions over VAR. The former referee is also far more Geordie than I thought, which has come as a pleasant surprise. Rating: 7/10 International voice: Patrice Evra Great players don’t always make great pundits and sometimes great players make truly terrible pundits, as has been the case with Evra. From his jaw-dropping patronising of Eni Aluko to the slouching posture and lazy delivery that suggests he thinks he’s doing us a favour, the Frenchman stunk out Russia. Rating: 1½/10 International voice: Henrik Larsson A voice so rich and comforting it could end wars, and with it has come some decent analysis. But overall the former Sweden striker has been nothing more than fine. Rating: 6½/10 International voice: Martin O’Neill Arrived late and arrived hard. The Republic of Ireland manager has been his usual mix of frantic, heart-on-sleeve emotions and off-the-fence analysis. A very good addition to Team ITV. Rating: 8/10 Female voice: Eni Aluko The former Chelsea forward has been excellent – consistently informed, opinionated and articulate. She also displayed the appropriate level of grace and simmering fury during Evra’s show of hand-clapping arrogance. Rating: 8/10 Main commentator: Clive Tyldesley Like Mowbray, Tyldesley brings a swaggering assurance to major tournaments. But the 63-year-old is also capable of some right clangers, as seen with a reference to Joseph Stalin after eight minutes – eight minutes – of the opening game. Oh, Clive. Rating: 7½/10 Secondary commentator: Jon Champion The veteran broadcaster has emerged from Tyldesley’s shadow to be the voice of ITV’s summer of football, with the double-act he has formed with Ally McCoist a genuine delight. Champion has been Champion in Russia and, all being equal, would be a genuine contender for the final. Rating: 8/10 Co-commentator: Glenn Hoddle I really like Hoddle. I know that goes against public opinion but I’ve always found him to be good for the type of tactical analysis you simply don’t get elsewhere. Yes he can go on a bit, but I’ll take that all day long if it means getting a better understanding of Costa Rica’s 3-4-2-1 formation. Rating: 7/10 Co-commentator: Ally McCoist Scotland are at the World Cup, after all, and they’re having a very good tournament. The former Rangers striker has brought not only jolliness to ITV’s commentary box but also some beautifully random history lessons, as seen by his telling of Ivan the Terrible’s storming of Kazan in 1552 during Poland versus Colombia. As mentioned, he’s also formed a cracking partnership with Champion. Rating: 8/10 Total: 121/170
20||In search of America's best hot dog: 14 supermarket varieties, taste-testedLife is full of tough choices. For instance: are you a burger person, or a hot dog person? While I tend to lean burger, there are times when only a hot dog will do: at the baseball game; on a New York City street corner; walking home tipsy as bacon-wrapped sausages perfume the night. But no occasion is more perfect than the Fourth of July. It’s estimated Americans will eat 150m hot dogs on Independence Day alone, according to the National Hot Dog and Sausage Council. Boiled or grilled, with mustard or ketchup, sauerkraut or relish – a frank in a bun is the best way to celebrate the holiday. As with many American traditions, the hot dog’s origins lie in the immigrant story. Most agree it began with the frankfurter, brought by 19th-century Germans along with their love of all things sausage. Today’s supermarket aisles are stuffed with choices, making grocery shopping a daunting task. As a fellow shopper lamented just days ago, while I loaded my arms with cold meat for this contest: “Which damn hot dog do I buy? Nothing’s worse than biting into a bad hot dog.” Which is why we decided to face down the ultimate challenge: 14 American supermarket varieties pitted side by side, so you can shop with confidence. The ground rules In pursuit of authenticity, we opted for a backyard barbecue, cooking on a charcoal grill. The tasting would be blind – judges would try the anonymous hot dog unadorned, and then, if they wished, dress it up with their favorite condiments. Each judge would score the hot dog on a scale of zero to 10, the final score being the average of all scores. We opted to try 11 meat and three vegetarian/vegan-friendly varieties. And yes, we know processed meat is killing us, but we felt it killed the fun to disallow hot dogs that contain sodium nitrate and other preservatives (still, we do feature plenty of organic options). The judges We needed an expert. Luckily, Tim Milojevich, 37, the owner of Barrio restaurant and a longtime San Francisco chef, was on hand to help. Milojevich worked as a professional sausage and pastrami maker for several years, and he knew a hell of a lot more than most of us. Let’s just say he added the word “snap” (the pleasing resistance of a good sausage casing) and “emulsification” (how well the liquids and fat bind to lock in juiciness) to our hot dog vocabulary. And what’s a cookout without the kids’ opinion? Our neighbors Kaylee, 12, and Genisse, 11, assured me 14 hot dogs was no challenge as they helped lay pickles on the table. Mix in hungry friends and family, and we were good to go. The results, in the order we tried them Ball Park beef franks – $4.99 for eight* This whimsical brand dates back to 1950s Detroit. First off the grill, it didn’t disappoint. “Classic” was a word that came up. Tried plain, it was very salty, making us realize just how much work that bun does. And there was no denying this tasted highly processed, if delicious. “Definitely grocery-store,” commented one eater. Average score: 7.2 Tim’s score: 7 365 organic uncured grass-fed beef hot dogs – $5.99 for six Whole Foods’ own-brand, organic grass-fed beef dogs seemed promising, but didn’t quite deliver. “It’s OK,” said Kaylee, looking a little let down. “Do we have any more of the first one?” Most agreed that this had a milder, less smoky flavor but was lacking in juiciness, and that the casing had an odd way of separating from the meat itself. Average score: 4.87 Tim’s score: 3 Trader Joe’s all-natural uncured all-beef hot dogs – $5.49 for eight The checkout lady at Trader Joe’s assured me we were in for a treat, and the spice mix – mustard, pepper, nutmeg, allspice and paprika – promised big flavor. She was right: this was a pretty darn tasty dog, plump and with a pleasant hint of sweetness. “Almost too sweet,” noted Tim, who gave it high marks for “emulsification”, that sought-after juicy texture. Average score: 7.4 Tim’s score: 7 Oscar Mayer classic beef uncured franks – $4.99 for 10 Would this classic deliver? One taster definitely thought so. “10 out of 10. Beefy smoky flavor, and juice that seems like broth!” There were definitely a lot of sevens and eights here, with Tim dubbing it “our juiciest so far”. The only downside: it felt a bit too skinny. “Leaves me wanting a bigger mouthful,” said one. Average score: 7.2 Tim’s score: 7.5 Tofurky original sausage beer brats – $4.39 for four I hoped our veggie options might fool judges in a blind tasting, but as soon as I began cutting into these hefty brats my hopes were dashed. They overcooked quickly, and the outer casing was tough while the inner flesh was distinctly bread-y. “Bland and bad texture” was the general consensus. “No snap,” Tim lamented. Average score: 1.75 Tim’s score: 1.5 Nathan’s Famous skinless beef franks – $5.99 for eight This Coney Island stalwart claims to be the world’s most famous hot dog. But when it came to taste, it slightly split the room. While I found it delightfully greasy and meaty, with a good, crisp skin, Tim described it as “more water than meat”. The expert was in the minority, though, with most deeming this a solid option. Average score: 7.1 Tim’s score: 4 Hebrew National beef franks – $4.99 for six This kosher dog was among the few we tried containing sodium nitrate (Caspers and Nathan’s did, too), so bear that in mind. But ploughing on undaunted, we found these pretty tasty, if not slightly too salty. The skin didn’t crisp as nicely as others, but one taster complimented its “satisfying pop”. It also went down well with the kids. “This one is gooood!” smiled Kaylee. Average score: 7.1 Tim’s score: 6.5 Fork in the Road Mighty Good dogs with pasture-raised beef – $7.99 for five With its family farming backstory, Fork in the Road looked to be the most wholesome dog in the pack. Just picture those cows “free to thrive in their natural environment” before being squeezed into natural sheep casings. While it was delicious, the top quality ingredients didn’t necessarily translate into mind-blowing flavor. “Slightly sweet and salty. Decent flavor,” said Tim. For a higher welfare alternative, though, a solid choice. Average score: 7.4 Tim’s score: 5 Light Life Jumbo Smart Dogs meatless veggie hot dogs – $4.39 for five These have been commended on veggie blogs as shockingly realistic, and the spongy, reddish flesh was certainly more convincing than the tofurky’s. Then things started to fall apart. “Non-natural taste,” noted Tim of its slightly chemically flavor. Not one for the kids, either. “Nooo!” whined Ginesse, putting a zero on the score sheet. “Points for trying” was the nicest another could muster. Average score: 1.7 Tim’s score: 0.5 Caspers Famous hot dogs – $7.99 for six This was our only pork-beef mix of the night, and people could taste the difference. “Pork rules!” crowed a happy taster. The combo was a winner with the kids, who scored it 100 out of 10. But for our sharp-palated chef, it was nothing special. “Non-assertive and mild. Not memorable” was Tim’s verdict, leaving this somewhere in the middle. Average score: 7.1 Tim’s score: 4.5 Field Roast frankfurters (vegetarian) – $5.69 for six This was the top veggie dog of the night. One taster appreciated the carrot-y undertones, while I picked up notes of sweet potato. But while zesty seasonings helped things along, we were still left craving something juicier, and, well, meatier. It seems the greasy, salty, trashy world of hot dogs may be one realm where veggies can’t compete. Average score: 3.1 Tim’s score: 2.5 Wellshire Premium all-natural uncured beef franks – $7.99 for eight This won the New York Times’ hot dog taste test, and it definitely found some fans here. The beefy-ness was there, as was the right amount of salt. One taster mistook it for her favorite hot dog, Hebrew National, which we viewed as a compliment. Tim called it “meaty and well-balanced”, awarding it a score to tie Oscar Mayer for his highest of the night. Average score: 7.4 Tim’s score: 7.5 Applegate: The Great Organic Uncured beef hot dog – $5.99 for six This chunky dog, made with grass-fed beef, got points for its high-quality ingredients. While some found it rich, one described it as “gamey”, Tim deemed it “slightly too sweet”, and noted that the casing gaped around the meat. I picked up a tang that was, confusingly, both pleasant and weird. Texture-wise, it was a little tough. Average score: 5.6 Tim’s score: 4.5 Applegate: The Great Organic Uncured chicken hot dog – $5.99 for six To shake things up, we tried Applegate’s chicken option, too (they also do turkey and a pork-beef mix). Sadly, these chicken dogs, once off the flame, deflated like a rooster’s drooping comb. One taster called it “spammy”. “Bland”, wrote another, while the most withering comment read: “Chicken?! I guess if you need that.” Average score: 5.3 Tim’s score: 5 The winners Trader Joe’s, Wellshire Premium, Oscar Mayer A respectable show Fork in the Road, Ball Park, Nathan’s Famous, Hebrew National, Caspers, Field Roast, Applegate Beef Not so hot Whole Foods 365, Tofurkey, Light Life, Applegate Chicken * All hot dogs purchased at Safeway, Whole Foods and Trader Joe’s in Oakland, California. Prices may vary around the country What do you think we should taste-test next? Send your thoughts to charlotte.simmonds@theguardian.com
12||Here's what America would look like if Roe v Wade were overturnedThe Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. There’s enough news this week to break your heart, and all of it is important – but in the interest of brevity, I’ll choose one thing. Roe v Wade is in absolute danger of being overturned, thanks to Justice Anthony Kennedy’s retirement. The right is planning on it, and we have to move forward knowing the consequences should such a horror happen. If the supreme court overturns the decision, nearly half the states in the country will outlaw abortion – maybe more. Women will die from illegal abortions – as they did before – and most of those women will the poorest, youngest, and most vulnerable among us. (As has been pointed out for years: a “pro-life” world has a lot of dead women in it.) Women will be imprisoned for trying to end their pregnancies. Doctors and nurses will be, too. The tangible and troubling effects will be immediate. And then there’s the simple message the decision will send to women: you don’t matter. You don’t get a choice about what happens to your body, your family, or your future. You will be forced to be pregnant, whether you like it or not. This is not the future I want for my daughter – and it’s not the present I want for myself or any woman. Now is the time to plan, and to fight. Glass half full Turns out there’s still good news in the world: A man who tried to use a “shoe camera” to take pictures up women’s skirts had the contraption explode on his foot. What I’m RTing Who I’m reading Dylan Matthews on what Kennedy’s retirement from the supreme court will mean for the issues we care about; Alissa Quart’s new book, Squeezed: Why Our Families Can’t Afford America; and the Texas Tribune on how toddlers at the border are being ordered to appear in court alone. What I’m writing Trump officials don’t have the right to eat in peace – not while there are kids in cages. How outraged I am It’s not that I’m outraged this week as much as I am deeply, soul-crushingly sad. Sad for the families of those killed Capital Gazette, sad for the journalists who have to work in fear, sad for all of us as we enter another week when families still have not been reunited with their children. That said, I’m glad that I’m sad – because the only other alternative is apathy, and none of us can afford that right now. How I’m making it through this week Remembering that there are amazing people in the world. This woman took puppies to a local nursing home and it just about broke my heart open.
14||Juno Dawson on Bingley: 'We possess a realism you don’t get down south'I spent a lot of time trying to deny where I was from. To this day, mostly for ease, I sometimes tell people I’m “from Leeds”. I’m not from Leeds. I am from Bingley, a small market town about 10 minutes drive from Bradford, West Yorkshire. Bingley is notable for the thermal underwear manufacturer Damart, the Five Rise Locks and Girls Aloud’s Kimberley Walsh. But in the mid 90s, the region was also famous for race riots. I was a pre-teen and, of course, the talk of predominantly white Bingley was overwhelmingly negative towards the Pakistani community of the Manningham area of Bradford, who had taken to the streets in clashes with the police. I and some school friends started to question the racist messages we’d been fed our entire lives. The attitude I’d grown up around was, at best, one of suspicion, and at worst outright racism. As the riots tore through Bradford I failed to accept that all Pakistani youths were feral, violent rioters. Not least because there was a handful of Pakistani students at our suburban school who seemed increasingly vulnerable. Rioting flared up again in 2001, when I was 16. It started when the then home secretary David Blunkett banned the National Front from marching through Bradford. The far right group congregated in a pub and an Asian youth was stabbed to death. From this flashpoint, the deeply segregated white and Pakistani areas of the city clashed in riots that saw 300 police officers injured. What young, queer, liberal person would want to associate themselves with white supremacy? I went to great lengths at university to distance myself from the shame of these events, hence “I’m from Leeds”. But then I grew up and moved to Brighton, then London, and then Brighton again. I have lived in the south east since 2003. I have learned there is, as I think any northerner will tell you, a fundamental difference between us and southerners. We possess a certain realism, a wry pessimism you don’t get down south. Perhaps it’s because, living so far from London, we recognise the opportunities and advantages we miss out on simply because we weren’t born within the commuter belt. If you think the government invests in the north as it does the south, you’re dreaming. But my roots set me in good stead for life as an author. Publishing is so posh, so white and so ridiculous – advances and book deals whipped out of thin air, based on nothing more than hopes and crossed fingers – that my scepticism has served me well. And that’s because I’ll always be from Bingley.
5||Inside Tuscan: the other no-fly list Canada didn't tell you aboutIn 2005, Rahinah Ibrahim, a Malaysian professor studying for a PhD in architecture in the US, was arrested in San Francisco while trying to board a plane. She was interrogated about ties to a terrorist group, her student visa was revoked, and her daughter, an American citizen, was forbidden to fly into the US. After the ordeal, Ibrahim successfully sued to have her name removed from the US no-fly list, one of the first persons in America to do so. But her Orwellian nightmare wasn’t over. It turned out that the FBI had also added her to a security screening list called Tuscan, which is shared with the Canadian government, and it wasn’t until 2014 that she finally had her name scrubbed from that. The lawsuit, however, served as a smoking gun – a rare mention of a database that Canadian government officials have downplayed to the point of secrecy. Last week, the Guardian reported that Canada uses Tuscan, a vast repository of at least 680,000 names – 40% of which have “no recognized terrorist group affiliation” – to screen all travellers coming into Canada from anywhere in the world. Tuscan is generated and maintained entirely by the US, but if you’re included on the list you could be refused entry to Canada, or have your Canadian visa or immigration application denied. And, unlike Canada’s official no-fly list, Tuscan offers no clear process to remove your name if you think you have been added in error. Tuscan stands for “Tipoff US/Canada”, and dates back to 1997. Despite the fact that it has existed for two decades, there is scant mention of the program, or exactly what it does, by either government. An equivalent agreement with Australia, known as Tactics, is similarly cloaked in secrecy. The revelations have put pressure on Justin Trudeau’s Liberal government to explain Tuscan’s significance. “It’s a sovereign Canadian decision what we do with that information,” Ralph Goodale, the security minister, said when questioned about it on television last week. “It is a source of data that is consulted to see if there are any alarm bells that should be going off.” The privacy commissioner, however, has raised concerns with Goodale that Tuscan infringes on civil liberties. Others are accusing Trudeau’s administration of hypocrisy for championing the transparency of its official no-fly list even while quietly relying on Tuscan. “Fine, Canada remains sovereign and gets to decide if it wants to use the information,” says Josh Paterson, executive director of the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association. “But if it is using the information, and a Canadian never knows about it, can’t challenge and has no redress for it, doesn’t know where that report came from … then that is a significant problem for their human rights and due process rights.” ‘We’re not in control of the data’ The American database, according to the briefing notes obtained by the Guardian, is populated by information on individuals “known or suspected of being involved in terrorist activity”. Adding a name to the list can be as simple as filling out a form. Taking a name off, even if added in error, can be a lengthy court process that has been rarely successful. Canada can file a written request to the US to remove a name from the list – but the Americans are not obliged to comply. Given the US record of adding people in error and of confusing similar names, civil liberty groups say they are concerned. “It’s hard to imagine how this is going to be exceptionally solid from a privacy perspective,” says Brenda McPhail, director of the privacy, technology and surveillance project at the Canadian Civil Liberties Association. “We’re not in control of the data.” McPhail says she has heard from Arab and Muslim Canadians who have experienced difficult in travelling despite having confirmed they are not on the no-fly list. “In hindsight, it sounds like they’re on [Tuscan],” she says. The privacy commissioner warned Goodale that the appeal process was insufficient and raised issue with the length of retention of sensitive information, according to documents obtained by the Canadian Press. A memo in response reportedly promised to “address the outstanding concerns that you have raised”. There is also a fear that, because the FBI officers of the Terrorist Screening Center update files directly, without external checks, faulty information could permeate widely. As the judge in Ibrahim’s case noted, “once derogatory information is posted to the [Terrorism Screening Database], it can propagate extensively through the government’s interlocking complex of databases, like a bad credit report that will never go away”. Derogatory indicators Despite the concerns, Trudeau has been working since 2016 to expand Tuscan behind closed doors, a process that has continued with the Trump administration. When the Tuscan agreement was first signed, in 1997, it was a very different program than it is now. The US database was managed through the state department and was primarily concerned with consular information; the original Tuscan and Tactics agreements were merely ways to export that list to Canadian and Australian counterparts. Following 9/11, the US government began to consolidate its immigration and national security databases. As the final report of the 9/11 Commission noted, Tuscan was part of a program “which included a number of databases containing such derogatory information on individuals as prior visa refusals and federal arrest warrants”. Even then it was not, itself, grounds to arrest someone or deny their immigration or visa application. That soon changed with the creation of the Terrorist Screening Centre, housed within the FBI, which moved the data to a new Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment (Tide) – which is now the the master list for the US government and its intelligence agencies. Tide comprises more than a million names. The records are reviewed and, if approved, added to the Terrorist Screening Centre database, which in turn populates a variety of other lists, including the US no-fly list; the “selectee list”, which includes those who do not meet the threshold for the no-fly list; Tactics and Tuscan. The memos obtained by the Guardian detail how border guards and immigration officials “utilize Tuscan information” to vet travellers, in Canada and abroad, and “to intercept and potentially apprehend or refuse entry to known or suspected terrorists”. Should a Canadian border guard get a hit, the Tuscan policy instructs them to delay the traveller until they can obtain more information from the screening centre. From there, the FBI can send on their passport details, citizenship and a unique identifying number in order to confirm their identity. Once their identity is confirmed, the FBI can provide “derogatory indicators”, which Canada can use to search and question the traveller. From Obama to Trump Tuscan became a priority for Trudeau after being elected prime minister in 2015, when he quickly set off to improve relations with Canada’s closest ally on a visit to Washington. There, he and Barack Obama extolled the virtues of improved border information-sharing. Obama told reporters at a joint press conference in the Rose Garden in March of 2016: “Today, we agreed to share more information – including with respect to our no-fly lists and full implementation of our entry/exit system – even as we uphold the privacy and civil liberties of our respective citizens.” The project – later dubbed the “Beyond the Border Action Plan” – committed both countries to “share information and intelligence in support of law enforcement and national security, respecting each country’s respective constitutional and legal frameworks”. Publicly, the Trudeau government said it would share entry and exit data for US citizens with the Americans: basic information on who crossed which border and when. Canada would also share its no-fly list with the US. Neither government mentioned Tuscan, but soon afterwards, Goodale authorized officials to begin formal negotiations with their American counterparts to update and expand it. The negotiations sought to vastly increase the information flow both ways. The FBI’s Terrorist Screening Center and the Canadian Border Service Agency (CBSA) would share more data on individuals, including details of interviews or searches conducted at the border. It would also empower the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, Canada’s main spy agency, and Immigration Canada to pass on information to the TSC when there is a match on Tuscan. The election of Donald Trump caught Canada’s security officials by surprise, and Trump’s executive order barring travellers from several Muslim-majority countries threw Ottawa into crisis mode. For days, it was unclear if the ban would apply to Canadian citizens or green card holders, sowing confusion at the airports and borders. Nevertheless, Ottawa pushed ahead with its plans to update Tuscan under the Trump administration, with one June 2017 memo reporting that the “implementation of changes would take place into fall 2017”. A government spokesperson says both governments are continuing to “refine details” before the new program comes online. Paterson of the BC Civil Liberties Association says the deal smacks of hypocrisy. He notes that Goodale has embarked on a public consultation on national security, promising transparency and a review of the official no-fly list – even while staying silent about Tuscan, which has been functioning all along as a second, unofficial no-fly list. “It feels very much like the conversations we’ve been having with the government have been for show,” he says. “A distraction.”
16||Salisbury to host Armed Forces Day after Skripal attack responseSalisbury will host next year’s national Armed Forces Day, Theresa May has announced, as a tribute to how the city dealt with the aftermath of the nerve agent attack in March. The prime minister is attending this year’s event on Saturday in Llandudno, north Wales, where she is expected to hail the military’s work in dealing with the poisoning of the Russian former double agent Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia. “The military response to the nerve agent attack [in Salisbury] has been remarkable,” she will say. “By holding Armed Forces Day there next year, we are also celebrating the tremendous resilience and great spirit of Salisbury and showing clearly it is open for business. It’s a great city, enriched by military history and a wonderful place to visit.” Thousands of people lined Llandudno promenade to greet May and Princess Anne as they entered Venue Cymru. May applauded and Anne saluted military personnel and their brass bands as they marched past to mark the start of the event. Jeremy Corbyn is expected to praise veterans and service personnel, and say the UK should do more to recognise their sacrifices through better pay and public services. “Every day we must remember what you do for our safety and security,” the Labour leader will say in a video message. “This work means you spend so much time away from your families and friends. And for all your sacrifices and all that you have done for us, we must do so much more for you. “Labour strongly supports the armed forces covenant by which this country promises that those who have served, and their families, are treated fairly. Whether it’s healthcare, housing or pay, we must do more to ensure that our duty to you matches your service to us.” There are more than 5,000 members of the British armed forces deployed in 30 countries.
2||How to create a container water gardenJapanese temple gardens are world-renowned for good reason, but although all that perfectly raked gravel and artful pruning can be incredibly moving, I’m not sure it transfers well to a different setting. Or, to put it another way, I had no desire to come home and recreate any of it. The street gardens of Japan, however, are another thing; I want every one of them. At any opportunity, by the front door, in a sliver of a front garden, outside a restaurant or corner shop, there’s a gathering of pots, holding everything from herbs to miniature azalea, bonsai and houseplants out for the summer. My favourites are the container water gardens, often no bigger than a bucket. Container ponds offer just what a large pond might – a slice of the sky and a mirrored surface to change the beat between plants – and yet can be squeezed into the smallest of spaces. I came home inspired. My mother donated a large iron cauldron-like thing, which, because it sits on top of the soil rather than sinks into it, reflects a floating sky among the foliage and introduces a very different sense of space. Now I’m on the hunt for more, because one of my favourite gardens in Japan consisted of many container ponds grouped together to create something both playful and serene. Each contained just a single plant, an Equisetum scirpoides. This is a relative of mare’s tail that requires boggy conditions and no more than an inch of water over the top of it. It grows to 20cm high, and is perfectly happy in a sunny or shady spot. A number contained miniature water lilies, and one, made of stone, had nothing in the water but the edges were covered in moss and the miniature spleenwort Asplenium trichomanes. As so often in Japanese gardens, it was hard to tell if this was nature’s hand at work or the gardener’s, but it was quite delightful. There are a number of water lilies suitable for container ponds: Nymphaea ‘Pygmaea Alba’ is a lovely pure white form; ‘Perry’s Baby Red’ is bright reddish pink; and ‘Helva’ is a double yellow form. All grow no more than 30cm wide and love the sun. Another choice for a sunny spot could be the beautiful kaffir lily, Hesperantha coccinea (formerly Schizostylis coccinea), which thrives in wet mud, be it a stream edge, bog garden or pot. If you only have a shady spot, the British native cotton grass, Eriophorum angustifolium has white cotton-wool seed heads over a grass‑like foliage.
2||Gardens: what to do this weekPlant this True blue-flowered garden plants are rare, but anchusas have achingly blue blooms in late spring and early summer. A. azurea ‘Loddon Royalist’ offers the most intense blue of all; ‘Dropmore’ and ‘Feltham Pride’ are paler but have their own charms. Grow these short-lived perennials in full sun in fertile soil. Height and spread 1m x 50cm. Visit this Sweet peas come in a dizzying array of types: modern and heritage, striped and bicolour; some even change colour as they age. It’s sweet pea week at Easton Walled Gardens in Grantham, Lincolnshire, from 1 to 8 July: just the place to select your favourite varieties; visiteaston.co.uk. Sow this Now is the perfect time to sow biennials such as foxgloves and honesty directly in the garden: they’ll grow this year and flower next. Prepare the ground by digging it over, removing weeds and raking until it’s like breadcrumbs, then water before sowing and cover with a sprinkle of dry soil.
1||The cult of XXXTentacion: how fans pay tribute to an abusive rapperDeath is indiscriminate not just in its inevitability, but in its propensity for bleaching some of our darkest stains. Frank Sinatra’s baritone, natty fashion sense, and world-famous blue eyes charmed women – while his alleged links to organized crime and a violent temper showcased a different side. Marvin Gaye was a smooth soul singer blessed with a distinctive, effortless voice – who mistreated his partners, going so far as to hold a knife to the throat of his second wife, Jan. Ike Turner, James Brown – abusive yet widely revered. But they were men of a more patriarchal, and thus more permissive, time. In the #MeToo era, the premature death of XXXTentacion, born Jahseh Onfroy, shot and killed in a robbery gone wrong, tugs at our traditional postmortem strictures. The 20-year-old Florida rapper’s soul-baring lyrics earned him scores of teenage supporters and the approbation of Kendrick Lamar, Kanye West and Nicki Minaj – but he stomped a gay juvenile hall cellmate to near-death in a homophobic attack and, before his murder, was awaiting trial for allegedly beating, torturing and imprisoning his pregnant ex-girlfriend. How do you commemorate a gifted abuser in 2018? If you’re his most dedicated fans, with a teenaged mixture of sorrow, denial, vulnerability, brutishness and shocking callousness. During the nine days between Onfroy’s murder and his formal memorial held at the BT&amp;T Center in Sunrise, Florida, a series of impromptu ceremonies were held across the country. In Atlanta, Lil Yachty presided over a candlelight vigil. In Los Angeles, his former manager, Adam “Adam22” Grandmaison, himself an accused rapist (an allegation he denies), hosted a gathering at his BMX shop. What began as an afternoon of misty-eyed testaments to the importance of XXXTentacion’s music ended with an evening of police shooting pepper balls and rubber bullets to disperse a crowd of hundreds blocking streets and marching to chants of “Long live X!” And, in Florida, Geneva Ayala, Onfroy’s former girlfriend who he was accused of beating, threatening and imprisoning, briefly attempted to attend a vigil. According to Ayala’s Instagram, the tokens she left for Onfroy – flowers, a globe, a sign and candles – were set on fire and an anonymous woman, furious that Ayala had “snitched” on Onfroy, attempted to fight her. She left after 25 minutes, understandably distraught and in tears. Shortly thereafter Ayala tweeted: “[…] just please stop tagging me in disrespectful threads and arguments […] i lost someone close to me. leave me alone.” And, five minutes later: “it’s disgusting that people are speaking for me […] i didn’t lose my life. he did […] like how do you think that makes me feel? everyone expecting me to be relieved or happy?! no, i’m broken.” Through no fault of her own, Ayala has become the trampled turf upon which a pitched battle is being fought. For Onfroy’s hardcore fans, she’s the temptress who caused him immense grief; they’ve harassed her online and in person to the point that, tired of photo-happy gawkers and would-be stalkers attempting to follow her home, she quit her job at Dunkin’ Donuts. For those sympathetic to a woman who, while pregnant, was literally tortured, she’s the proxy through which they can extract a modicum of karmic justice. A day after the publication of a Miami New Times article which documented Onfroy and Ayala’s relationship in exacting detail, a GoFundMe campaign to pay for eye surgery necessitated by his final, most savage beating gained $12,000 in new donations. And the day after Onfroy’s death the campaign stood at $32,000 – $7,000 more than she asked for. The clash over Onfroy’s artistic legacy cuts along similar lines. Music journalists are leery of both the XXXTentacion hagiography and his oeuvre, and discussions of Onfroy tend to treat his history of violence as a necessary critical vector. (It is, in my estimation.) But Onfroy’s legacy feels critic-proof – his devout followers seem to use negative press from morally inconsistent, tut-tutting outlets to bolster his status as a misunderstood prophet. On 19 June, the day after his murder, his song SAD! broke Taylor Swift’s single-day record for Spotify streams. (Ironically, a month earlier, Spotify removed XXXTentacion’s music from their official playlists before a Lamar-led backlash caused them to reverse direction.) His listeners have catapulted nine of his songs on to the Billboard Hot 100 with “SAD!” sitting atop the chart, making him the first posthumous artist to achieve that since the Notorious BIG in 1997. While Sacha “Son Raw” Orenstein, a Montreal-based DJ, freelancer and fan of XXXTentacion’s music, thinks the behavior of Onfroy’s fans is “beyond the pale”, he has a low estimation of the music press’s coverage of the deceased. “X was an extremely charismatic artist that touched a lot of vulnerable young people in a genuine way. He was also someone who caused a lot of harm to those around him,” Orenstein tells me via direct message. “But adults don’t get to decide if the latter invalidates the former for his fans, particularly when our own heroes have extremely checkered histories of violence … I do feel the press’ good intentions when it came to reporting his misdeeds crossed a line into a campaign to make an example out of him, and today that further fuels his martyrdom.” Rebecca Haithcoat, a former assistant editor at LA Weekly, is similarly repulsed by the boyish cult of XXXTentacion and, like Orenstein, expressed misgivings about what she perceives as music journalism’s morally absolutist tendencies. “The internet breeds this black and white [mentality]: you’ve either gotta be all-in or all-out, and if you have any empathy of abusers – I just don’t get down like that,” she says. “It’s like Chris Brown: he got beat the fuck up and his mom got beat the fuck up, and he saw it as a kid. Inside all of us are wounds from childhood we don’t know how to heal, and someone like [Onfroy] didn’t seem to have the resources [to cope].” A struggle to cope with vexing emotions, either through youthful immaturity, an unwillingness to seek help, or the plain, saddening unavailability of mental health resources – or some combination of the three – appears be a unifying factor in XXXTentacion fandom. Onfroy was a cruel, pathological abuser – but a cruel, pathological abuser whose struggles aligned closely with those of many of his listeners. “Do you feel like X became a mentor for kids without involved parents or constructive outlets for their energies?” I ask Kuei Kuei of Adelaide, Australia, a 17-year-old who, through his popular XXXTentacion fan page @badvibesforeverofficial, regularly communicated with the late rapper. “I’d agree with that,” he answers. “Kids at my school, they listen to X’s music as an escape route to not have to go to these facilities. They feel more personally attached.” When I ask Kuei how he’s coping with Onfroy’s death, he tells me that he has been consoling distraught fans. “I have a lot of these kids messaging me, telling me that they’re really upset about X’s death. I’m trying to make sure they’re good, because they’re suicidal. If I’m grieving, and they’re grieving, I don’t really see the positive in [doing] that – I should be trying to inspire them to stay positive and spread their love.” This ad hoc online system of mutual support among XXXTentacion devotees has salutary and deleterious effects. A shared love for Onfroy helped connect alienated young people, but these relationships have metastasized into feedback loops which provide either positive emotional reinforcement or the negative motivations needed to stalk an abused teenager. For now, these self-reinforcing systems are in place. But on 27 June, in Sunrise, Florida, Onfroy’s memorial was attended by thousands, including PnB Rock, Ugly God, Denzel Curry, Lil Yachty and Lil Uzi Vert, who’s called on other celebrities to donate to a fund supporting Onfroy’s family. (A day later, Drake’s Scorpion was released which, in a verse by Jay-Z, included a line referring to Onfroy: “Y’all killed X and let Zimmerman live, streets is done.”) Ludicrous conspiracies that Onfroy’s death was a hoax, and that he would rise from his open casket with a “Gotcha!” were proved wrong – he lay in a mostly empty hockey arena in a Florida suburb, dressed in a denim jacket and protected by security guards. Mourners sang, hugged, cried and, when it was over, tweeted and ’grammed. In life, he was sorrowful, vulnerable, a brute and shockingly callous, and he was never fully held to account for his actions. In death, his darkest stains will not be bleached.
21||The dirty little secret behind 'clean energy' wood pelletsIt is touted as a smart way for Europe to reach its renewable energy goals. But try telling Lisa Sanchez thousands of miles away in America that burning wood chips is a form of clean energy. The bucolic charm of her rural home in the Piney Woods forest region of east Texas is undercut by the big German Pellets manufacturing plant just beyond the bottom of her garden. The German-owned plant is capable of producing 578,000 tons of wood pellets a year, which are destined to cross the Atlantic to satisfy a vibrant market for the product there. Sanchez moved to the eight-acre property in Woodville, a hundred miles north-east of Houston, in 2014. As she sat by her pool on a sunny evening last week, two horses grazing in her field, it was easy to understand why she and her husband Tony swallowed their doubts about the location. “The plant wasn’t loud, it was more peaceful than I thought it was going to be,” she said. But within a year, “I started having a lot of respiratory problems, I was getting sick all the time.” From being in excellent health, she added, “I have emergency inhalers, I was on all kinds of things. I have asthma now.” Opening her windows and doors to let in the breeze was an unwise move, she said: the air felt more sooty than fresh. Burning forest biomass – essentially, wood – has been promoted by industry as a cleaner, more renewable energy alternative to coal and gas. American companies such as Enviva have developed a growing export industry for trees diced into wood pellets, with export volumes increasing from almost nothing in the early 2000s to 4.6m tons of pellets in 2015 – almost all of which goes to Europe to displace coal in power plants there. The wood pellets industry claims that it uses tree branches and waste wood, but environmental groups say there is strong evidence that vast swaths of valuable, untouched forest have been felled in states including North Carolina and Florida to feed the growing sector. UK-based researchers found last year that burning wood is a “disaster” for climate change because older trees release large amounts of carbon when they are burned and aren’t always replaced with replanted forests. Even when trees are replaced, it can take up to 100 years to cultivate a wooded area that soaks up as much carbon as was previously released. And the fuel burned in shipping wood pellets to Europe is also a significant source of emissions. “Philosophically it looks good but practically it looks pretty bad in many cases,” said William Schlesinger, a biogeochemist and member of the US Environmental Protection Agency advisory board. “When you cut down existing trees and burn them, you immediately put carbon dioxide in the air. None of the companies can guarantee they can regrow untouched forest to capture the same amount of carbon released. The whole renewable forest industry is kind of a hoax in terms of its benefit as climate mitigation.” Schlesinger added, however, that burning wood can result in lower emissions than coal if managed and certified properly and could be used as a “bridge fuel” as solar and wind energy continues to expand. Scott Pruitt, the administrator of the EPA , recently announced that wood pellets will be classified as renewable energy similar to solar or wind power. This has caused alarm among some experts, including those on the EPA’s own scientific board, which is still working on its own advice on the environmental impact of burning wood to generate energy. “Pruitt announcing that before we weighed in was appalling – frankly it was insulting to our existence,” said Schlesinger. “If you burn young trees and regrow them, it might not be too bad. If you venture into older trees or forests that have never been cut before, that can be very bad.” Some communities living near wood pellet mills have also protested about the fumes that waft over their homes. Woodville, though, with fewer than 3,000 residents – about a quarter below the poverty line – values jobs. Sanchez once went to a local environmental meeting and was the only person who showed up. “It’s like they’re saying ‘it’s closed, why worry about it?’” the 57-year-old said, the facility’s shiny metal silos just visible above a row of trees behind her. The plant’s bright red walls stand out from the main road, along with the company’s slogan on a giant sign: “Energy that grows back”. All was quiet: operations at the plant, which started production in 2013, are currently suspended. German Pellets filed for insolvency in 2016 but environmental campaigners fear their Texas plants will reopen soon despite a string of safety problems. Last year a fire in a silo and a separate fatal accident at a German Pellets Texas storage facility prompted lawsuits. There was an explosion and fire at the Woodville plant in 2014. And the Sierra Club environmental group accuses the facility of far exceeding permitted levels of emissions, with regulators willing to raise pollution limits. The Texas commission on environmental quality and German Pellets did not respond to requests for comment, but a TCEQ spokeswoman told the Texas Observer that it ensures violations are corrected. An analysis by the Environmental Integrity Project found that at least eight of the 15 largest US wood pellet facilities have had fires or explosions since 2014, while 21 mills exporting to Europe emit excessive greenhouse gases and pollutants. The Sierra Club describes the Texas facilities as a “monument to Europe’s climate sins”. Back in her garden, Sanchez is not anti-industry but believes that regulations need to be tightened. She cannot prove the plant made her sick but thinks it is no coincidence that her health is much improved since it ceased production. “I feel much better, I breathe a lot better, even the air doesn’t seem to be as heavy to me,” she said.
12||The supreme court has taken a sledgehammer to the New DealOf the three decisions the US supreme court handed down this week, the gay wedding cake case and travel ban cases were the latest battles in the culture wars that Republicans long have waged. The Janus decision declaring that public sector employees cannot be required to pay fees to the unions that represent them went beyond culture to the very meaning of the American government and how Republicans define it. Since the 1930s, when then president Franklin Delano Roosevelt promised to break the hold of moneyed men on the government and broker “a new deal for the American people”, a cabal of reactionaries resolved to destroy the new government Democrats created. Roosevelt’s New Deal regulated business, protected social welfare and promoted national infrastructure on the principle that the role of government was not simply to protect the property of the wealthy, but rather was to promote equality of opportunity for all. The popularity of both Roosevelt and his agenda showed that Americans recognized that the government must rein in the runaway capitalism that had brought the nation to its knees. But not everyone was on board. A group of reactionary Republicans sided not with the cosmopolitan eastern Republicans who came around to the New Deal but with Ohio senator Robert Taft, a proud representative of small-town, traditional America who maintained that the New Deal undermined liberty and snaked socialism into the nation. They hated government rules and laws that protected their workers, and the need for new taxes to pay for bureaucrats and welfare programs. Above all, they rejected the idea that workers should have a say equal to theirs in what the government did. They loathed the Wagner Act, which empowered workers to unionize and bargain collectively. The “completely one-sided” Wagner Act, they complained, enabled labor leaders to challenge business leaders. In 1947, when Republicans regained control of Congress, their first step in their quest to roll back the New Deal was to weaken the political power of unions. The Taft-Hartley Act outlawed closed union shops and weakened union political activism. It passed over then president Harry Truman’s veto. Taft-Hartley seemed destined to be the last gasp of reaction in the face of the overwhelming popularity of the newly active government. Republicans rejected Taft as their standard-bearer in 1952, turning instead to Dwight Eisenhower, who launched the “Middle Way”, his version of the New Deal. The Middle Way included the largest public works project in American history: the Interstate Highway system, which updated American roads for a driving generation with leisure time on their hands, but expanded the federal government’s purview. But Eisenhower’s policies extended some opportunities to people of color, and race gave the Taft Republicans a wedge to begin razing the activist state. Equality of opportunity for African Americans could only be achieved through the use of state power, and that would cost tax dollars. Equal rights, Taft Republicans insisted, simply redistributed wealth from hardworking white taxpayers to undeserving people of color. Using this formula, the reactionaries split the liberal consensus and, in 1980, put Ronald Reagan into the White House. True to their ideology, Reagan announced in his inaugural address that “government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem”. His administration began destroying the New Deal state and slashing taxes. The process accelerated when the House speaker, Newt Gingrich, purged Eisenhower Republicans – people he called “Rinos” (Republicans in Name Only) – and replaced legislative aides with lobbyists. And now, Donald Trump is achieving their dream. But this scheme has created a crisis in American democracy. New Deal-era programs are as popular now as they were in the 1950s, and voters have come to recognize that Republican policies have hurt them. After the American people did not condemn the Democratic president Bill Clinton as Republicans expected, the Republican party has maintained control by gaming the system. Since 2000, Republican policies have suppressed Democratic voting; since 2010, Republican gerrymandering has given the Republicans a heavy systematic advantage in Congress; and the last two Republican presidents have won the White House while losing the popular vote to their opponents. Movement conservatives have always known their program appealed to only a minority of Americans, and from the start they have worked to pack the courts with allies. Reagan named more than 375 federal judges, and while Trump has let vacancies eat holes throughout the government, he has concentrated on filling judicial vacancies. That strategy is now paying off. While the Janus ruling strikes at the power of public unions, the other, limited decisions reinforce the cultural parameters of the 1920s: traditional religion and the president’s power to determine immigration, a power rooted in a law from 1924. FDR promised “to restore America to its own people”, and the coffin seems to have closed on that principle. But perhaps not. Reactionaries tried this strategy before, in the 1890s. When congressmen working with industrialists dismantled that era’s popular government, they, too, could retain power only by gaming the system, suppressing votes and packing the courts. By 1900, it seemed they had won, thanks to a pro-business supreme court that strengthened the power of business owners, crippled labor unions, and declared the income tax unconstitutional. But all of those decisions – Plessy v Ferguson, Lochner v New York, in re Debs and Pollock v Farmers Loan – were overturned in a progressive backlash to their extremes, and now lie ignominiously in the ash heap of history. Heather Cox Richardson is professor of history at Boston College
2||How Piet Oudolf’s gardens tame the wildPiet Oudolf’s landscapes are as peopled as they are planted. Folks flock to them, whether it’s the High Line in New York, the meadows at Hauser &amp; Wirth’s art gallery in Somerset, or the Olympic Park in Stratford, to name a few. Many of his gardens may be in hip locations or attached to big-name architects, but the reason people return again and again is his planting. His designs offer up something wild and alive. The plant combinations are dynamic and playful: you are as likely to go and admire decaying seed heads in winter as you are spring blossom. They rip up the flowerbed rule book and roll out, often over vast spaces. “I like to escape some of the rules around gardening – to provide thought and spontaneity, and pleasure.” In many ways, he needs little introduction: there are Oudolf meadows up and down the country, from Scampston Hall and RHS Wisley to Trentham Gardens, all showcasing his complex, highly naturalistic schemes. Some of his earliest work can be found in public parks in Sweden and the Lurie Garden in Chicago. Next month, Oudolf will be exhibiting at the Royal Horticultural Society’s Hampton Court flower show, where he is creating a walk-through feature – complete with favourites astilbe, schizachyrium and monarda – and receiving the inaugural RHS Horticultural Heroes accolade. “England was the first country to appreciate my work and my approach to gardening,” he says. His naturalistic, perennial meadow style exerts such an influence that you now see it in local pocket parks, on roundabouts and in amenity schemes all over the place. Not long ago, the dominant amenity planting style was seasonal bedding, petunias, pelargoniums and pansies – brightly coloured, but sterile, devoid of wildlife and lacking spontaneity. The New Perennial Movement, of which Oudolf is often seen as the figurehead, changed all that, with herbaceous plantings and meadows made up of robust perennials and grasses. “Every time I do a private job, I think, ‘This is beautiful and great, but who is going to see it? Two people and their guests.’ My only interest is sharing my work with lots of people,” he says. He uses a sophisticated palette of plants that are chosen for the rhythm they create over the seasons; they have to look as good in decay as they do in the first unfurling of spring. If eupatoriums and sanguisorba feel mainstream, it’s because Oudolf introduced them to a wider audience. He has even bred his own strains including Gaura lindheimeri ‘Whirling Butterflies’ and Salvia verticillata ‘Purple Rain’. This makes for a landscape that you need to return to again and again to see how this gyrating descent and retreat of shades, textures and hues shifts over the seasons. If his gardens look breathtaking at the height of summer, by autumn and winter they are often heart-rending, as the yellows, purples and reds fade touchingly to subtler shades of brown, tan, blond and eventually black. There’s something emotional about these landscapes. In the 1980s, Oudolf, along with his wife, Anja, started a nursery to support Piet’s design studio at their home in Hummelo, a tiny village in the eastern part of the Netherlands. Here they experimented with a wide range of perennials, looking for robustness, but also beauty in decay, how a plant looks before and after flowering, whether their seed heads withstood winter, what sort of management they would need, and how they would compete with their bedfellows. Garden enthusiasts and designers from around the world flocked to buy plants and see his naturalistic plant combinations at work. “In our first catalogue, there were plants that people had always thought of as wild – and we were selling them,” he says. “They may have been wild, but they were also attractive and well-behaved.” Now in his 70s, Oudolf shows no sign of slowing down. He’s even tackling food-growing, creating an edible meadow around Noma’s new restaurant in Denmark. “It’s an adventure,” he says. “We’ve sown a crop of barley and put some edibles in between. We’re just finding our way – next year it’s going to be much more bold.” When I think of Oudolf’s work, I think about the parallels it has with those medieval Dutch flowering paintings that reminded the viewer of the fragility of life – including the odd worm, moth, torn or fallen petal. Even the most beautiful of flowers is to be pollinated, and will eventually rot. Oudolf’s love of seed heads and wind-dried winter stems is a similar reminder, often of the transience of such earthly pleasure. • The RHS Hampton Court Palace flower show runs 3-8 July (rhs.org.uk) How to get the Oudolf look Sanguisorba canadensis A robust plant with white cylindrical flower heads that appear in late summer. Classic Oudolf. Calamagrostis x acutiflora ‘Karl Foerster’ In Oudolf’s words, ‘indispensable for the winter garden’. Molinia caerulea ‘Purple Moor Grass’ Fits in anywhere; slim, transparent and will pull a whole scheme together as long as you plant enough. Thalictrum flavum subsp glaucum Forms huge clumps of waxy blue-grey foliage and clusters of yellow flowers; it does like to flop, though. Steal an Oudolf trick and grow it behind a shrub it can drape itself over. Cephalaria gigantea A huge plant, not really for a small garden, though it could be used in, say, a front garden as a stand alone. It has pale yellow scabious flowering on lightly branched stem and grows to 2.5m tall. Eupatorium purpureum subsp maculatum ‘Atropurpureum’ Gigantic purple-pink umbels on red stems, loved by late summer butterflies. Grows up to 2.5m tall.
8||Tom Daley and Dustin Lance Black announce birth of their sonThe Olympic diver Tom Daley and his husband, Dustin Lance Black, have become parents to a baby boy. The couple announced the birth of Robert Ray in a brief statement printed in the Times newspaper on Saturday that read: “Black-Daley: On 27 June 2018 to Thomas Robert Daley and Dustin Lance Black, a son, Robert Ray.” The couple shared photographs and messages on their Instagram and Twitter accounts. Daley tweeted: When the couple revealed they were expecting a child through a surrogate in the US in February, Daley said he wanted to be as good a dad as his father, who was also called Robert and died in 2011. Daley, the three-times world champion diver, spoke of how the prospect of fatherhood altered his mindset as he competed at the Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast in April. “It’s been such a crazy experience. It changes your outlook on life,” he said. “Even on a plane. I’m never scared of flying – and as soon as there was any turbulence I was like, ‘oh my God,’ because there’s more than my life I have to care about now. The fear of what might happen and the excitement. There’s so many emotions that come with being an expectant father.” Daley and Black made their engagement public in 2015 with an announcement that said: “The engagement is announced between Tom, the son of Robert and Debra Daley of Plymouth, and Lance, son of Jeff Bisch of Philadelphia and Anne Bisch of Lake Providence.” Daley met Black in 2013 and came out as gay later that year. They became engaged in October 2015 and were married last May. Black, 44, is a film director and producer. He won an Oscar in 2009 for best original screenplay for Milk, a film based on the life of gay rights activist and politician Harvey Milk.
14||Seamus Heaney’s family on life with the great poet: ‘He was always just Dad at home'In 2011, when Seamus Heaney announced that he would donate his papers to the National Library of Ireland (NLI), it was a source of much pride, and a little relief, for the library. There had been some speculation that the archive would go to Harvard, where Heaney had taught for many years. When the day came for the papers to be delivered, “I think the director of the library presumed there’d be a van and minions”, recalls Heaney’s son Michael. “But there was Dad carrying the boxes. He’d put them in the back of the family car and brought them round himself. It was all done very casually, but there was also a weird sense of momentousness, so much so that it felt right for us to have a drink to mark the occasion with my brother, Christopher, afterwards.” The episode is emblematic of Heaney’s status in Ireland as a figure who is not only hugely revered for his creativity and intellect, but also loved for being approachable and down to earth. Two years later, when Heaney died unexpectedly aged 74, his family learned just how much he had meant to people, and not just in Ireland. “I was utterly taken aback by the response,” says his widow, Marie. “And I wondered whether he would have been, too. But there he was, above the fold on the front page of the New York Times, with a story about Obama and Syria down the side. It was something extraordinary to experience alongside our shock and our grief.” Heaney’s funeral was shown live on Irish TV and the cortege was given police outriders. Mourners ranged from the Irish taoiseach and president to Bono and Shane MacGowan. “It was in effect a state funeral without the military,” Marie says. All over the country there were books of condolence and the family received thousands of letters and cards. “They all had some personal connection that they wanted to share,” recalls their daughter, Catherine. “People still come up and tell me stories about meeting him and how much it meant to them.” Nearly five years on from Heaney’s death, the family have gathered to discuss two major events that will commemorate his life and work: an exhibition of the NLI Heaney archive in a new cultural space in the grand 18th-century Bank of Ireland building in Dublin, and the publication of a new anthology of his work, 100 Poems (Faber). Surprisingly, there isn’t a single-volume selection of Heaney’s poetry. He had expressed a desire for a “really focused collection”, and an idea for 75 poems for his 75th birthday was mooted. Now the family have completed the job for him, choosing a selection that runs from “Digging”, the 1965 poem by which the son and grandson of farmers boldly announced his intention to set out on a literary career – “I’ve no spade to follow men like them. // Between my finger and my thumb / The squat pen rests. / I’ll dig with it” – to a poem written for his granddaughter just 10 days before he died. Catherine took on the coordinating task “using a very unpoetic spreadsheet”, and 70 or so poems quickly selected themselves. “I cannot tell you how many readings I attended,” says Marie. “And while he never gave exactly the same one, there was certainly a core of poems that he returned to.” Aside from his best known work, all the family have poems written for them, from love poems to Marie to one recounting the morning Catherine was born; a “slapped palpable girl” presented to the poet. Many other less obvious poems also meant a great deal to him, and can cast a new light. “‘Helmet’, for instance, is a lovely poem”, says Catherine, “if not one that everyone would necessarily know. But it was an actual physical object in our house, which also links to 9/11 as a salute to the firemen.” The haiku “1.1.87” – which reads in its entirety: “Dangerous pavements. / But I face the ice this year / With my father’s stick.” – is in, “because we all remember the time when Dad did his knee in. He slipped on ice while in Harvard in late 1986, and for a while it was a big part of his, and our, lives. But later in the year his father died, and it was after that he wrote the poem.” While the Heaney children grew up with his work, by a quirk of the curriculum they didn’t study him at school. It was only when in the US for a semester that Catherine had the bizarre experience of having to answer an exam question about a poem written by her father about her grandmother. Heaney wasn’t particularly hands on with his own children’s school work, but did his bit for the grandchildren. Christopher remembers him reading a Dr Seuss book. “He was really working to make it come alive, but also mouthing over to me as he read: ‘Damn bad rhyming.’ He also wanted to get his red pen out for some of Julia Donaldson’s metre.” But he did give Catherine a few pointers about his beloved Latin before she started secondary school. The family laugh at his habitual use of Latin, and pig Latin, phrases around the house, with “sanctus fumus” (holy smoke) a particular favourite. And so it was no surprise that his last communication to Marie was a text from hospital, minutes before he died, saying “noli timere” (don’t be afraid). Michael recounted the story in his funeral address, and not long afterwards a large mural by the graffiti artist Maser appeared on the gable end of a house in Dublin. A new Maser artwork – an installation that picks up on the ideas of flight, uplift and birds in Heaney’s poetry, will greet visitors to the exhibition. NLI director Sandra Collins says that when Heaney donated his papers he indicated he would welcome an exhibition. However, “he specifically said that he didn’t want to ‘put out Yeats’, who already has a longstanding exhibition,” says Collins. The new Bank of Ireland space, to be opened next week by the Irish president, allows for the literary titans’ work to be displayed for at least the next 10 years in their own venues. The Heaney show will be free to the public and is expected to receive 100,000 visitors a year. “He threw nothing away and his papers are already our most consulted archive.” The exhibition combines archive exhibits and multimedia features. Visitors will hear Heaney reading “Digging” while looking at the original New Statesman proof of the poem, and the letter from Faber confirming publication of his debut collection in 1966, Death of a Naturalist. It then progresses through broadly chronological themes. “Excavation” recalls the soil, the bog and peat of Heaney’s rural upbringing, as well as the Iron Age “bog bodies” that prompted some of his best known poems. In the “Creativity” section sits his desk from the attic office that overlooked Dublin Bay and Howth Head. Heaney described it as just “a slab of board on two filing cabinets”, explaining that he “liked the makeshift nature of the arrangement. I always had a superstitious fear of setting up a too well-designed writing place and then finding that the writing had absconded.” Manuscripts in this section include the poem “Trout”, which was literally written on the back of an envelope. The section on “Conscience” sets Heaney against the backdrop of the Northern Ireland Troubles, as well as his other engagements with social justice and global politics such as “From the Republic of Conscience”, written for Amnesty, and “The Cure at Troy”, which was written with Nelson Mandela in mind. This section also reflects Heaney’s struggles with the ethical question of how does a poet properly live and write, and how to speak about things without being a spokesperson. It was a fine line to tread and Marie confirms that he “really was torn a lot of the time. He was a nationalist by birth, and by inclination, but that nationalism was being hijacked in a way he detested. He got stick from both sides, and was threatened.” The last section of the exhibition is about Heaney as a public figure, especially after the Nobel prize in 1995, and one of the closing exhibits is a video of Croke Park stadium, where two days after his death an 80,000 crowd for an All-Ireland Gaelic football semi-final broke into spontaneous applause to mark his memory. “It is hard to think of another creative and cultural figure who had that sense of belonging to a country,” says Katherine McSharry of the NLI. “We were all very aware other people thought they knew him as much as we did,” Catherine says. “That was the way he moved through the world. He was very approachable and friendly and genuinely focused on the person he was talking to at the time. And he managed to balance the two pretty well in that he was always just Dad at home. But in hindsight we realise how many pieces he must have cut himself up into in order to do his civic duty, his poetic duty, his family duty and everything else.” Always an enthusiastic and expansive letter writer – and then a dogged user of fax to the extent that Faber kept an old machine in their rights department solely to receive communications from him – his writing tone changed as time went on. “They became more business-like,” says Christopher, “more and more began with an apology for his slow reply and ended with him saying he was writing from an airport lounge or was going to catch a plane the next day.” Marie says that he always said he was “more of a jet-sitter than a jet-setter, but I would sometimes be quite angry about the demands made on him. I saw how he was sort of frightened to go on holiday because he knew he would face sacks of mail when he came home. I felt he could have spent a lot more time at his poetry. That said, he did a prodigious amount as it was, not to mention the criticism and teaching.” And the way his work has entered the culture remains a remarkable testimony. The Heaneys are not the only family with strong associations to these poems. There seem to be few Irish weddings at which “Scaffolding” is not read, and few funerals that don’t feature “Postscript”. Every Irish child will know “Mid-Term Break”, written by Heaney about being taken out of school when news came of the death of his three-year-old brother. “For years he didn’t read it in public,” says Marie. “Maybe because his parents were still alive. But towards the end he introduced it and I once remember him say he was going to read it, and seeing a man in the audience reach over to hold his wife’s hand. I assume they too had lost a child. There are countless examples of how the poetry has entered the everyday lives of people and some of the ways the work connects is very touching indeed.” Although he was 74 when he died, there is still a sense that his life was somehow cut short. “So it did comfort me,” says Marie, “when I heard that Auden had once said that no true artist died before they have said what they had to say. And I think he did manage to say what he had to say.” She is also aware that Heaney’s affable and benign presence was a part of the work’s appeal, sometimes giving poetry that could be quite dark a more celebratory tone. “But now in his absence the poems will have to stand alone,” she reflects. “And that is exactly what he would have liked.” • Seamus Heaney: 100 Poems is published by Faber. To order a copy for £9.34 (RRP £10.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99. • Listen Now Again is at the Bank of Ireland Cultural and Heritage Centre, College Green, Dublin from 6 July.
9||'It's nothing like a broken leg': why I'm done with the mental health conversationI am bleeding from the wrists in a toilet cubicle of the building I have therapy in, with my junior doctor psychiatrist peering over the top of the door, her lanyards clanking against the lock. Her shift finished half an hour earlier. An hour later she calls the police, because I have refused to go to A&amp;E or to let her look at me. Four policemen arrive. They are all ridiculously handsome. One of them is called Austin. Austin doesn’t have a Taser like all the others and when I question this, Austin says he hasn’t done his Taser training and all the others laugh. I feel bad for Austin. I want to go home but I am not allowed. I am crying. The police ask me to tip out the contents of my jacket. Tampons fall out, with four sad coffee loyalty cards, each with a single stamp. Then I make a break for it because, seriously now, I just want to go home. The four officers surround me at the building entrance. One officer who has done his Taser training threatens to section me if I do not stop struggling. As if you can just section me, I say. You can’t just say someone is sectioned and then they are sectioned. That is not how it works. It turns out this is exactly how it works. I am put in handcuffs. Three other police turn up in a van – seven now. A woman searches me, running gloved hands along my calves. It is cold. It is dark. I am scared. I ask to call someone. A police officer says, now is not a good time. I say: I feel like this is totally a good time. I am bundled into the van. As if in a TV drama, my psychiatrist reappears in the gap between the doors before they clang shut. The hospital is 10 minutes away but I end up in the van for 40 minutes, backed up behind ambulances. I’m offered water when I arrive, but they don’t want the cuffs taken off, so the lead officer holds a cup up to my lips. All of my possessions are taken away from me. I am kept in a small room in A&amp;E for 22 hours, before being found a bed in an inpatient unit. *** I have experienced mental illness since the age of 13, and have been in the psychiatric system for a decade. In year 8, I spent so much time absent from school that a social worker was called. At 16, I dropped out of A-levels with incapacitating depression and barely left the house for nine months – the empty days stretching out while friends clubbed and kissed. I was put on antidepressants and at 18 decided to move to Russia, alone, in a manic whirlwind, and had the time of my life. At 20, I moved to Oxford and was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. I was told I would have it for life. I moved again at 23, and there is now no hospital in north London I have not been treated in. In the last few years I have observed a transformation in the way we talk about mental health, watched as depression and anxiety went from unspoken things to ubiquitous hashtags. It seems as though every week is now some kind of Mental Health Awareness Week, in which we should wear a specific colour (although this year no one could agree on which: half wore green, half yellow). In the last few years I have lost count of the times mental illness has been compared to a broken leg. Mental illness is nothing like a broken leg. In fairness, I have never broken my leg. Maybe having a broken leg does cause you to lash out at friends, undergo a sudden, terrifying shift in politics and personality, or lead to time slipping away like a Dali clock. Maybe a broken leg makes you doubt what you see in the mirror, or makes you high enough to mistake car bonnets for stepping stones (difficult, with a broken leg) and a thousand other things. Oh, I know how it’s meant. The lack of stigma should be the same as telling people why your limb is in a cast. But you can’t just put someone with a broken leg and an insane person side by side and expect people not to be able to tell the difference, like the Winklevoss twins or, can we be truly honest, Joanna Newsom songs. In recent years the discussion around mental health has hit the mainstream. I call it the Conversation. The Conversation is dominated by positivity and the memeification of a battle won. It isn’t a bad thing that we are all talking more about mental health; it would be silly to argue otherwise. But this does not mean it is not infuriating to come home from a secure hospital, suicidal, to a bunch of celebrity awareness-raising selfies and thousands of people saying that all you need to do is ask for help – when you’ve been asking for help and not getting it. There is a poster in my local pharmacy that exclaims, “Mental health can be complex – getting help doesn’t have to be!” Each time I see it, I want to scream. The Conversation tends to focus on depression and anxiety, or post-traumatic stress disorder. It is less comfortable with the mental illnesses deemed more unpalatable – people who act erratically, hallucinate, have violent episodes or interpersonal instability. I don’t want to pretend that this stigma is merely a hurdle to be overcome. Stigma exists from a place of real fear, and a lack of understanding of the behavioural changes that can accompany mental illness. Episodes of illness can be frightening, frustrating, tiring and annoying for both the unwell individual and those around them. The key isn’t to deny this, but to educate. Instagram slogans do not make it clear what depersonalisation is, for instance, and that it won’t be solved by a picture of someone walking on a beach. It’s good that Lynx deodorant teamed up with the male mental health Campaign Against Living Miserably, but is “Find Your Magic” not the most patronising slogan of all time? *** I am extremely lucky to work for an organisation, the Guardian, that has been supportive from the first day. But if any employer, however enlightened, had only taken in the mainstream Conversation, I wonder whether they would have been adequately prepared. In my four years working here, I have written acclaimed pieces, been nominated for and won awards, and (I hope) earned the respect of some of my most admired colleagues. I have also been in and out of hospital; been sent home during a manic episode; sent 3,000-word emails to editors (my God, I’m sorry); and, during one period of relentless sleeplessness, been in the office around the clock, the sun setting and rising, taking two-hour naps in a first-aid room. So I am a newspaper journalist – for now. But I don’t know how long for because the illness might grip itself around me so tightly that it cuts off everything I love and hold dear, and my ability to lead a normal life. *** I was once invited to a conference the health secretary Jeremy Hunt was addressing, which I mentioned to one of the interim therapists I was seeing. “Should I egg Jeremy Hunt?” I asked her. “Well, if you do,” she replied, “make sure you bloody hit him.” When junior doctors slept overnight outside the Department of Health’s headquarters in protest in 2016, I went to visit them. Like the rest of the population, I instinctively love the NHS, from the junior doctors to the consultants to the community psychiatric nurses. But, really, if you asked me right now? I hate the NHS. I hate the thin film of skin on its bones. It is incompetent and ailing. I used to blame the system. Mostly it is the system: those never-ending cuts and closures; the bureaucracy; the constant snafus of communication; the government’s contempt for staff. But sometimes, that system gets inside the staff, too. It is there when you are asked the same questions by 20 professionals, in a time of great distress, and then reprimanded for anger when you snap the 21st time. It is there when you are asked to fill out a form to assess a service, after being told you won’t receive that service until two birthdays in the future. It’s the offer of a Valium in an inpatient ward to calm you down upon hearing that they don’t have your regular medicine, and it’s the amazement at the response when you turn down the Valium and request that, given you’re in a hospital with a pharmacy attached, someone source your normal medication. It’s being told by doctors for more than a decade that this medication is imperative. And then being told by a doctor that that medication is wrong, and if he had his way there would be no medication for mental illness at all – and not recognising that this might be an alarming thing to hear. The waiting. The offers of therapies that aren’t suitable because there is nothing else. (Throwing a ball of wool to one another in a circle might be helpful for some people, but it absolutely wasn’t for me. I knew it wouldn’t be. But I gave it a go.) The being matched with a therapist who, through no fault of her own, is unsuitable (you have friends in common) but who you don’t ask to change because you know there isn’t another. The 10-minute GP slots that take weeks to secure. Even when everyone is doing their job well, and many do, the treatment of mental illness is a slog. The trial and error of finding a productive medication, or multiple medications. Multisyllabic names in packets with go-faster stripes. The implicit paradox of becoming ill and necessarily hospitalised, meaning being removed from all the things that normally help. The expense of prescription charges for lifelong conditions that (aside from in Scotland, where all prescriptions are free) are not exempt, though some physical illnesses are. The fact that, if doctors only ever see you at your worst, or in crisis, they are not getting the whole picture, which is crucial with mental illness. How do I explain that, sometimes, I doubt the professionals know what they are doing? Or that sometimes, when I am ill – and this goes against the grain of the Conversational rules – I doubt bipolar disorder is even a thing. (Or emotionally unstable personality disorder, or body dysmorphic disorder, or adult ADHD, all terms I’ve heard used about me.) How do I explain that it is never as simple as having this, or that? How do I tell you that it is horrible being an inpatient, because there will be people there who are crazier than you, and you do not want to be around those people? Sometimes the situation will be reversed. When I am well, I sometimes think I will be fine for life, and want to abandon all my medication. And when I am not well, I think maybe I really am just a fuck-up, and should not be dealt with sympathetically. We don’t talk about self-stigma because, as part of the empowering new Conversation, this is also not allowed. How do I tell you the worst part of me desperately wants you to get help but also doesn’t – because already there is not enough help and too few beds, and there is not enough to go round. *** I am no longer under the care of a named professional to review my medication. After the sectioning and the 22-hour wait, there was a hospitalisation out of borough. Upon leaving the inpatient ward, there was a two-week stay at a crisis house (which helped), then that was it. I was ill enough to be sectioned, but well enough to have therapy discontinued. I was put on an 18-month waiting list for therapy. I called iCope, an NHS digital therapy service, but because I was on a waiting list, I was ineligible. It took me about 16 weeks to get back to work – much longer than it should have done – because I had to clamber from a well without ropes. I would run into GP surgeries, suicidal; the receptionist said he would “pass the message on”. I sat in the consulting room, sweater over my head and howling. Since I was sectioned, I have been hospitalised twice, once after a suicide attempt. I am still on a waiting list, a different one: this one is two years long. My friends and family simply do not understand the delay, cannot believe it when I tell them about the system. So, clearly, the Conversation isn’t as illuminating as it thinks it is. *** I will admit that I am not well. That writing this, right now, I am not well. This will colour the writing. But it is part of why I want to write, because another part of the problem is that we write about it when we are out the other side, better. And I understand: it’s ugly up close; you can see right into the burst vessels of the thing. (Also, on a practical level, it is difficult to write when one is unwell.) But then what we end up with has the substance of secondary sources. When we do see it in its rawness – Sinéad O’Connor releasing a Facebook video in utter despair – who among us does not wince? The primary danger used to be glamorising. It was cool to be a bit mad. It meant you were a genius or a creative. It wasn’t just that certain mental illnesses were acceptable, but certain mental illnesses were acceptable in certain types of people: if you had a special skill or talent or architect-set cheekbones. All of this remains true. Sure, Robert Lowell, great poet. Madness excused. Amy Winehouse, voice of a goddamn goddess. We’ll allow. Kathy, 54, works at Morrisons. Not so much. White woman who has recourse to a national newspaper (called Hannah). Perhaps. Black man who comes from a cultural background where mental illness isn’t recognised and whose symptoms might be put down to the racist trope of aggression in people of colour. Nah, mate. But now there is also a new danger. It is “normalising”. This is meant to be a positive – as in, “What is normal, anyway?!” Which is a fair question, but I don’t think it’s the woman who crept into my inpatient room, stole the newspapers I had, found me in the lounge and ripped them up slowly in front of my eyes. I don’t think it’s me, sitting in a tiny, airless hospital room, carving my name into the wall with a ballpoint pen, with three guards for company, one of whom later tries to add me on Facebook. We should normalise the importance of good mental health and wellbeing, of course. Normalise how important it is to look after oneself – eat well, socialise, exercise – and how beneficial it can and should be to talk and ask for help. But don’t conflate poor mental health with mental illness, even if one can lead to the other. One can have a mental illness and good mental health, and vice versa. Don’t pathologise normal processes such as grief, or the profound sadness of a relationship breakdown, or the stress of moving house. Conversely, don’t tell me it is normal when I go from being the type of person who will offer children piggyback rides up the steepness of north London to glaring at a crying baby on a bus. Or that it is normal to blow thousands of pounds on sporadically moving house without terminating a current lease, or to send friends bizarre, pugilistic texts in the night. The truth is: enough awareness has been raised. We – the public, the health professionals, the politicians – need to make our words and actions count for more. First, the Conversation needs to be more inclusive when it comes to rarer conditions, and to people whose voices are less loud. Second, we need to recognise that posting “stars can’t shine without darkness” on social media might piss someone off in the midst of desperation and that, actually, anxiety can be a normal reaction and is different from general anxiety disorder, a serious condition. That feeling down is not the same as depression. Then, action. Donate to Mind; volunteer as a Samaritan. Vote for politicians who aren’t going to decimate our National Health Service or who support policies that lead to greater incidences of mental health problems (because it’s not just physical; society and environment plays its part). What does the government need to do? Hire more staff, and then more. Enough staff to provide a service that meets individual needs. That means better working conditions and pay, and not piling all funding into a single type of therapy or care path. Clinical commissioning groups need to spend money earmarked for mental health on mental health. Prescription charges for long-term conditions should be reviewed. Funding and research must be increased. *** When I am well, I am happy and popular. It is tough to type these words when I feel none of it. And sometimes when I am most well I am… boring. Boring is how I want to be all of the time. This is what I have been working towards, for 12 years now. When friends decades older tell me off for saying that I am old, at 28, what I mean is: I haven’t achieved all the things I could have done without this illness. I should have written a book by now. I should have done so many things! All the time, I feel I am playing catch-up. Always. I worry, and most of the literature tells me, that I will have this problem for life. That it will go on, after the hashtags and the documentaries and the book deals and Princes Harry and William – while the NHS circles closer to the drain. Maybe it’s cute now, in my 20s. But it won’t be cute later, when I am older and wearing tracksuits from 20 years ago and not in an ironic hipster way but because I no longer wash or engage with the world, and it’s like: my God, did you not get yourself together already? When I left appointments and saw the long-term patients, walking around in hospital-issue pyjamas, dead-eyed (the kind of image of the mentally ill that has become anathema to refer to as part of the conversation, but which in some cases is accurate), four emotions rushed in: empathy, sympathy, recognition, terror. It’s one of those things you can’t really talk about with authenticity unless you’ve seen it, not really: the aurora borealis, Prince playing live and the inpatient wards. Maybe my prognosis will look up, maybe I’ll leave it all behind. I’ve noticed a recent thing is for people to declare themselves “proud” of their mental illness. I guess I don’t understand this. It does not define me. It’s not something that, when stable, I feel ashamed of, or that I hide. But I am not proud of it. I’d rather I didn’t have it – so I wasn’t exhausted, so I wasn’t bitter about it – despite the fact that I know some people, in all parts of the world, are infinitely worse off. I want it gone, so that I am not dealing with it all the time, or worrying about others having to deal with it all the time. So I don’t have to read another article, or poster, about how I just need to ask for help. So that when a campaigner on Twitter says, “To anyone feeling ashamed of being depressed: there is nothing to be ashamed of. It’s illness. Like asthma or measles”, I don’t have to grit my teeth and say, actually, I am not OK, and mental illness couldn’t be less like measles. So that when someone else moans about being bored with everyone talking about mental health, and a different campaigner replies, “People with mental illness aren’t bored with it!” I don’t have to say, no, I am: I am bored with this Conversation. Because more than talking about it, I want to get better. I want to live. • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. You can contact the mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.uk. Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
2||The secret to… coping when you dislike a parent-in-lawDraw a line. Letting yourself be wound up constantly over the same things, from passive-aggressive digs to outright bad manners, is boring and stressful, so decide to take charge and change things. Counter passive-aggression with teasing and apparent affection. If your mother-in-law offers to iron your husband’s shirts so “the poor dear doesn’t have to”, tell her she’s a darling and make her a cup of tea. Emotional blackmail either needs the brisk response you give a sulky toddler, or ignoring completely. “If Aunty Mary isn’t being invited to the christening, I don’t think I’ll come, either,” needs, “That’s a shame. Never mind, you’ll enjoy the photos.” Never admit to hearing, “This could be my last birthday/Christmas/summer holiday” from a robustly healthy but domineering parent-in-law as this never ends well for you. Don’t make your partner choose between you. You’ve come from two different families and you’ll keep some traditions while starting your own, but play the smart game. If you don’t want to do Sunday lunch every week at her parents, interrupt the ritual gently with something else you both want to do. Go some Sundays and make up for those you miss with little-and-often visits instead, where you’re in and out in a cheerful blur. Get them on side. Ask advice on anything they’re good at, from DIY to cooking to inspired gifts for your partner. Ignore what irritates you most and try to find something – anything! – that you can connect on. Take the long view. The in-laws will be around indefinitely so it might be in your best interests to overwhelm them with kindness and chat. Even the most irritating in-laws can make helpful grandparents, should that time arise.
20||Meera Sodha’s vegan recipe for jersey royal and green bean istooBlack pepper, once a highly prized spice for which kingdoms fell and men died, originates in India’s Malabar coast, where it’s one of the main spices of the local cuisine. When used as more than just a seasoning, as in this istoo (a corruption of the word ‘stew’), pepper adds a gentle, rounded heat, unlike the sharp hit you get from fresh chillies. The result is one of the most gentle-natured and elegant curries I’ve come across in all my travels across India. Jersey royal and green bean istoo with tamarind shallots Prep 15 min Cook 50 min Serves 4 For the tamarind shallots 1½ tsp rapeseed oil ½ tsp mustard seeds 5 curry leaves 8 shallots, peeled and cut lengthways into quarters 200g vine tomatoes (ie, 2 medium ones), chopped 1 green chilli, very finely chopped 1-1½ tsp tamarind paste ½ tsp salt ¼ tsp ground turmeric For the potato istoo 2 tbsp rapeseed oil 10 curry leaves 4cm cinnamon stick, broken in two 1 medium white onion, peeled and sliced 2cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and finely grated 4 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 1 green finger chilli, slit 650g small jersey royal potatoes, quartered 1 tsp each salt and black pepper 1 x 400ml tin coconut milk 250g green beans, tailed and halved For the shallots, heat the oil in a large frying pan on a medium flame. Once hot, add the mustard seeds and curry leaves and, when the seeds pop and the leaves crackle, lay in the shallots cut side down and leave to cook for five minutes, until browned. Now stir the shallots, encouraging the “petals” to break loose, and cook for another five minutes or so, until soft enough to cut with a wooden spoon. Add the tomatoes, chilli and two tablespoons of water, and cook until the tomatoes go jammy and break down into a paste (you may need to add more water). Add the tamarind, salt and turmeric, cook for two minutes, then take off the heat and set aside. In a casserole dish for which you have a lid, heat the oil for the istoo on a medium flame and, once hot, add the curry leaves, cinnamon and onion. Cook for eight to 10 minutes, until the onion is as soft as possible without colouring, then stir in the ginger, garlic and chilli, and cook for two minutes. Add the potatoes, salt and pepper, stir in the coconut milk, then fill the empty tin with 100ml water, swirl it around and add to the casserole – you want just to cover the potatoes, so add more water, if need be. Bring to a boil on a medium heat, then turn down the heat and simmer for 10 minutes. Add the beans, cover with the lid and simmer until both the beans and potatoes are tender – around five to six minutes (longer, if you prefer your beans soft). Gently reheat the shallots, transfer, with the curry, to big bowls, and serve with basmati rice or appams.
4||Colombia scouting report: assessing England’s last-16 opponentsThe weaknesses Vulnerable to an aggressive press The biggest take-away for England’s scouts from Colombia’s 1-0 win over Senegal in the final group game would have come from the first half. Playing in a 4-4-2 formation, Senegal pressed high and Colombia were forced on to the back foot; knocked from their rhythm. They like to play out from the back but when their defenders are harassed, the team can appear likewise. Colombia did not touch the ball in the Senegal penalty box during the opening half. The difference to their second group match against Poland was marked. In that game, the Poles sat off them and Colombia expressed themselves. Give this team enough rope and they will tie you in knots. An error in the central defenders When Davinson Sánchez stretched into a 17th-minute tackle on the Senegal forward, Sadio Mané, Colombia were plunged into trauma. The referee, Milorad Mazic, awarded a penalty and it went to VAR. Cue a tense wait before, to Colombian relief, Mazic overturned his decision. Sánchez could be feted for a well-timed challenge. On the other hand, it is not always good to see a centre-half having to dive into a last-ditch slide tackle. Mané had found the space off Sánchez’s shoulder and the 22-year-old’s critics will say it was fresh evidence of him switching off. Sánchez’s concentration levels remain suspect. In the Japan game, it was his error when dealing with a routine ball over the top that led to the chance that caused his teammate, Carlos Sánchez, to be shown a red card. The other centre-half, Yerry Mina, brings physical presence but not pace over the first five yards. He takes a while to lengthen his stride and get up to speed. Mina was beaten with alarming ease by Mané and England will relish the opportunity to run at him. Rodríguez’s fitness Colombia rely on their star player James Rodríguez in creative terms but what happens if they have to make do without him? The scar on the Senegal win was the loss of the attacking midfielder to injury after 31 minutes and the alarm was plain in José Pekerman’s post-match address. “I am extremely concerned,” the manager said. “It is a topic that could overshadow everything.” Rodríguez had carried a calf problem into the tournament – it restricted him to a substitute’s cameo against Japan – and he felt fatigue towards the end of the Poland game. “We didn’t think it could be an injury,” Pekerman said. But the poster boy of Colombia’s run to the 2014 World Cup quarter-finals was in obvious discomfort well before he went down and could not continue. Rodríguez has played off the left here, with licence to drift inside, but without him against Senegal, the team could not control the ball and get passes to Juan Cuadrado and the striker Radamel Falcao. Colombia are a different prospect without him. The strengths Quintero’s set pieces Juan Quintero hauled Colombia back into the Japan tie with a cleverly executed free-kick. Having predicted that the defensive wall would jump, he drilled his shot underneath it to catch out the goalkeeper, Eiji Kawashima. But it has been the consistent quality of Quintero’s indirect set pieces that have been such a positive feature of Colombia’s campaign so far. The ping and curl he gets on the ball is a testament to his technique. It was from his corner that Mina headed the winner against Senegal and England will need to be alert to the defender’s towering aerial threat. Mina also scored with a header against Poland, having stayed up after a set piece. “What happened with the corner against Senegal was not a coincidence,” Pekerman said. “We worked it very well. We had the right moves to throw Senegal off balance.” Collective never-say-die spirit At the end of the first half against Senegal, the Colombia players gathered in the middle of the pitch for a discussion before heading back to the dressing room together. There was plenty to talk about as they had been outplayed. But they emerged with renewed purpose, established a foothold and found a way to win. Against Japan, following the disaster of Carlos Sánchez’s third-minute dismissal, they had also rallied to get back into it although, on that occasion, the game would end in defeat. There is a steel about Pekerman’s team and there is little doubt that their excellent showing at the last World Cup has helped to harden their mentality. Cuadrado can blow extremely hot The winger – known to English fans due to his disappointing spell at Chelsea – can frustrate and there is the feeling that he is a confidence player, sometimes stifled when things do not go his way. But when his tail is up, he can wreak havoc – as he demonstrated against Poland. With Quintero’s unerring distribution from the No 10 position, Colombia like to effect quick transitions and isolate Cuadrado against the left-back. His duel with Ashley Young promises to be pivotal. It should be noted that most of Colombia’s pace comes from wide areas, with Quintero a strolling presence and Carlos Sánchez not noted for his ability to break at pace. Mateus Uribe, the other deeper-lying midfielder, is a box-to-box player.
5||Jamaica to boost security after murders of returning expatsPolice in Jamaica have pledged extra security for returning residents after the murder of five British and Canadian retirees on the Caribbean island. The Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF) said it would appoint a specialist liaison officer in each police division to monitor cases of returnees being targeted amid a pattern of violent incidents. The statement came hours after the Guardian reported a warning from senior Jamaican police officials that expats who returned to the island were seen as soft targets and were at “extreme risk” of being killed. Gayle and Charlie Anderson, aged 71 and 74, had recently retired to Jamaica from Manchester when they were fatally stabbed and their bodies burned in a firebomb attack at their home in Mount Pleasant. The double murder in the Portland parish last Saturday followed the killing in April of 63-year-old Birmingham charity worker Delroy Walker and two Canadian pensioners in January. Selvin Hay, Jamaica’s deputy commissioner of police and head of crime, said on Saturday: “Our focus on the safety and protection of our returning residents is unequivocal. We take all reported incidents of crimes against them seriously and will further our work with our partners in government and non-government organisations to ensure communities are safe spaces for all who live, work or visit.” The JCF said it would review all serious unsolved crimes against the approximately 30,000 returning residents on the island. As part of additional security measures, the force said it would establish a point of contact for the Jamaican diaspora in Britain, the US and Canada to raise concerns. A service would also be set up for police to conduct background checks on workers who returning residents may wish to employ. The force said: “The JCF is offering assurance to returning residents that their safety and security remains a high priority of the organisation, strategies and support systems are currently being bolstered for their protection. “This comes against the background of the recent incidents against returning residents and the concerns expressed by members of the diaspora to the commissioner, whilst in recent meetings in the United Kingdom.” The targeting of returning residents is not new, with criminals viewing them as wealthy and often naive about security in a country with one of the highest murder rates in the western hemisphere. Percival Latouche, the president of the Jamaica Association for the Resettlement of Returning Residents, said he believed more than 200 British, American and Canadian expats had been murdered in the country since 2000 and he had attended 165 funerals in that time. A Guardian analysis of government data has found that at least 85 British, American and Canadian nationals have been murdered in Jamaica since 2012. Of those, at least 30 were British and eight were murdered last year, the highest annual murder toll of Britons on the island in at least five years. In an average year, there are twice as many murders in Jamaica than in Britain, which has 20 times the population of the former. Last year, Jamaica recorded 1,616 murders, the highest in six years and equivalent to 31 a week, as the homicide rate rose by 20% in just 12 months. So far in 2018 there have been more than 600 killings, mainly linked to gang activity. Only 44% of homicides result in arrests.
12||What clip best sums up the Trump era? An old Mitchell and Webb sketch about WW2Every era gets the art it deserves. So Reaganism got Top Gun, in all its shallow, flashy and unexpectedly enduring glory. The Clinton era produced Jerry Maguire, a movie that seemed so smart in its time, but now just looks platitudinous, yet I find myself falling for its shallow charms again every time it’s on TV. Similarly, Blair had Damien Hirst and Oasis, all of whom seemed seminal in their time, but now just look embarrassingly of their time. The Bush era produced the first of Michael Bay’s Transformers, a crazy mess, the reverberations from which American cinema is still suffering. Clearly Obama, the sui generis politician, produced the sui generis show, Hamilton, a glorious celebration of multicultural America, and one so good that the first thing Trump did after being elected president was attempt to go to war with it: soon after the 2016 election, the audience at the Broadway show booed the newly elected vice-president, who was in the audience. “Apologize!” tweeted the enraged president. Spoiler: the show did not apologise. I always enjoy it when Trump talks about how he’s going to triumph over this foreign or that far-flung country. It’s like, dude, you couldn’t even get the better of a musical in your own hometown. Which leads us, inexorably, to the Trump era. Only a year and a half in, and something has emerged that is so clearly the zeitgeist made real, the mood made into matter. It’s not a movie, nor a book, nor a play. No, it’s a medium far more fitting for our ADHD, 280 characters or fewer, “I only read the headlines” era: it’s the 12-year-old “Are We The Baddies?” meme from That Mitchell And Webb Look. This comes from a sketch in which Robert Webb and David Mitchell play SS officers, fighting loyally on the field. Except Mitchell suddenly has an epiphany: “Hans,” he asks Webb, “are we the baddies?” Despite its age, this meme has had an online resurgence in the past two years, so clearly does it relate to the present day. So, given Trump is himself a throwback that some of us had thought had been consigned to the dustbin of pop culture history, it feels appropriate that his time is represented by a 12-year-old meme. Everyone in the UK and US today has grown up with the certainty that, whatever our countries’ flaws, we are, broadly speaking, the good guys. We are the ones who fought the Nazis, who bring democracy to fascism, light to darkness. But now we look around, post-Trump, post-Brexit, and we are suddenly living in countries led by mantras spouted by Nigel Farage and Fox News. Are we the baddies? But this meme is not just about our own self-realisation. Now that we are almost halfway through this presidency, our politicians and media figures are starting to let their roots show, and this meme is about them. The Trump administration’s sadistic family separation policy may have been suspended on 20 June, but reports continue to emerge of families torn up, of thousands of toddlers and children still separated from their parents. But then, as Fox News host Brian Kilmeade pointed out last week, “Like it or not, these aren’t our kids. Show them compassion, but it’s not like he is doing this to the people of Idaho or Texas.” I mean, if it were Texan kids in cages, that would be bad – but Guatemalan five-year-olds: who cares? After a public backlash, Kilmeade insisted he has “compassion for all children”. All children are equal, it’s just that children from Idaho or Texas are more equal than others. It reminds me of when cut-price Bond villain Arron Banks was asked about the spike in racist crimes post-Brexit, and replied with the timeless quote, “Yawn”. It’s easy to be blase and say that the Republicans, far-right Tories, Fox News and Daily Mail have always been awful, but only someone with no knowledge of the early 20th century could fail to see the parallels between then and now: the dehumanisation of immigrants, the casual cruelties against the most vulnerable members of society, the nationalism promoted by politicians and their mouthpieces as being for “the people”, when it only benefits the wealthy members of the far right. In 1940, Nazi propaganda described concentration camps as being like youth camps; today, Fox News presenter Laura Ingraham describes migrant juvenile detention centres as being “essentially summer camps”. In 1942, Jews were led into showers and gassed to death; in 2018, migrant toddlers are taken away from their parents by US officials who say they need a bath, only to ship them out to a “summer camp” thousands of miles away. Trump himself famously described a neo-Nazi rally in 2017 as being full of “very fine people”, yet we continue to be surprised by what he does. He once looked like a joke: a reality TV presenter who couldn’t even get the better of a musical. But the hate he encourages is easier to spread than butter, and we don’t even notice it until it’s too late. Are we the baddies?
14||What it is like to win the Booker prize, by Margaret Atwood, Hilary Mantel, Peter Carey and moreHilary Mantel: ‘You could spend years floating around showing off’ Wolf Hall (2009) and Bring Up the Bodies (2012) It’s a measure of the status of the prize that you wake up in a different world. Wolf Hall and Bring Up the Bodies had way outsold my previous books even before the shortlist. But after the wins, overseas deals multiplied rapidly and the effect bounced along to my backlist. So your previous career is recast, and all your work re-evaluated – both in a marketing sense, and a literary sense. The prize has been nothing but good to me, but I can see that it might be destabilising. Big opportunities open up. It would be possible to spend years floating around the world showing off, and to become a professional winner instead of a professional writer. I imagine also that panic could strike. Luckily for me, I was held safe, because I was committed to a trilogy. So neither in 2009 or in 2012 did I have to ask myself, “What do I do now?” Having been a judge as well as a contender, I know about the vast burden of reading, the chancy and nervous nature of the process, and how much depends on the dynamics of the final meeting. It may be skill that gets you to the shortlist stage, but we winners should remember that we have had a bit of luck, too. It’s important to get back to your desk, sit down in a spirit of humility, and – if you aim to flourish after the prize – learn all over again how to fail. Julian Barnes: ‘I felt a general soppy warmth towards everyone’ The Sense of an Ending (2011) I’ve always believed that literary prizes should be for the encouragement of the young, and the consolation of the old. In the middle stretch, you should just get on with it. So winning the Man Booker in my mid-60s was indeed a consolation – also a relief (I’d been shortlisted in each of the preceding three decades), but mainly a simple pleasure. I knew there was no danger of it changing the way I might write, and little (I hoped) of it going to my head. My old friend Ian McEwan warned me a few days afterwards: “By the way, you’ll find that from now on you’re no longer ‘the novelist Julian Barnes’ – you’ve been transformed into ‘the Booker prize-winning novelist Julian Barnes’.” This has indeed proved the case, but it’s hardly much of a burden. The highlights of that evening in 2011? A kind friend assuring me as I sat down to dinner: “We’ll love you just as much if you don’t win.” (And me asking her jauntily two hours later, “So do you love me more now?”) My (female, British) publisher jumping into my lap a few milliseconds after the announcement. My (male, American) publisher instantly tapping into his iPhone instructions to up the print run for the forthcoming American edition. Then a general soppy warmth towards everyone in the Guildhall: the judges, my fellow shortlistees, waiters, interviewers – even the journalist overheard before the press conference boasting to a chum that “I’m going to ambush him with The Martin Amis Question”. Nothing could shake my absurd, if logical, good humour. I was overfamiliar with the downside of not winning the Booker, and could see no downside at all to finally winning it. Margaret Atwood: ‘I had a contest with Beryl Bainbridge – who could be nominated most without winning’ The Blind Assassin (2000) It was an evening with especially good flower arrangements in 2000, the year I won. I’d been nominated for The Handmaid’s Tale (too feminist), Cat’s Eye (too provincial) and Alias Grace (too colonial), and it seemed that I was in the Beryl Bainbridge category – always a bridesmaid but never a bride. In fact she and I had a contest going, who could be nominated the most without winning? When I actually did win, my first thought was “My new shoes are too tight”, because now I would have to walk in them to get photographed and so forth. I probably shouldn’t have said that my earliest literary influence was Beatrix Potter – however true – but as I wasn’t expecting to win, I had no speech prepared. I was of course thrilled and grateful, but also I was simply relieved: I would not have to return to Canada to a reproachful but gleeful media chorus of “Atwood Fails to Win Booker”, as if it were a horse race. It’s much more like Best Pumpkin in Show: the pumpkin does nothing. Howard Jacobson: ‘I lost friends when I won’ The Finkler Question (2010) If there’s such a thing as a Man Booker experience I’ve drunk deep on it. Overlooked, infuriated, longlisted, shortlisted, victorious, overjoyed. I lost friends when I won. Not for winning but for reneging, as they saw it, on my earlier infuriation. Naive of them. If you are angry with a prize that doesn’t seem to value the sort of novels you write you are bound to change your tune when it does. I got lucky with the judges – three women and two men of rare discernment and a sense of humour. Of course I thought myself deserving, but justice is no more than the dice rolling in your favour. Losing had been equally arbitrary. Winning opened doors I thought were shut forever. Overnight, offers came in from foreign publishers, even publishers in Israel who until then had largely ignored my work on the grounds, they told my agent, that it was too Jewish. How Jewish is too Jewish? There’s an argument that the fathers of the novel are Homer and the Old Testament, the Old Testament being responsible for the jokes. That being the case, all novels are Jewish in the disputatious, dialogic sense. If I didn’t expect The Finkler Question to win – and my mother was so convinced it wouldn’t I suspect she went to William Hill and bet against it – that was because I feared it was too overtly Jewish. Which goes to show you never know. Thus my only advice to aspirants to the prize: don’t try to write a Man Booker book. Leave it to the dice. And remember to be graceful in victory. We need all the help we can get. Anne Enright: ‘I thought the camera was on Ian McEwan’ The Gathering (2007) One of the most useful things said to me after the Man Booker came from my medical sister, who looked at me with a cool, diagnostic eye and said, “I usually advise people not to make any major decisions until six months after a life changing event.” I didn’t know my life had changed, I just knew that it was hard to get back to the desk. This was not part of the fantasy of the night, of course. I saw the cameraman lining up a shot on me and thought he was aiming at Ian McEwan, who was sitting over my left shoulder. When the announcement came, I expected a name, but the chairman of the judges read out the title of a book, and it took me a long second to realise that I had written this book. I told all this to a local audience in Dublin the other day and they just loved it: the fantasy of being the chosen one is incredibly strong. But if I am proud, it is of one fact: The Gathering is not just one of the minority of books written by a woman to claim the prize, it is also one of the very few to have a female narrator – perhaps five out of the 50 – and I am happy to have beaten those odds. Peter Carey: ‘Nothing prepared me for the apocalyptic flashbulbs’ Oscar and Lucinda (1988) and True History of the Kelly Gang (2001) When I was shortlisted for Illywhacker in 1985 I had never read in public in my life. I was terrified that I would win and therefore have to make a speech. For two days I calmed myself by imagining Doris Lessing or Keri Hulme would win. That worked, for my nerves, and for Keri Hulme as well. When, three years later, I was shortlisted for Oscar and Lucinda I was a different man, not quite ready to punch the air or throw myself on the floor, but confident I would not lose my voice if called on to speak. What I said is fortunately forgotten but I accepted the nice cheque and slipped it in my rented tux. It was only after this, when I had the money in my pocket, that I discovered there was something ahead, more overwhelming than a speech. Oscar and Lucinda had been my fourth publication. I had already done many interviews, I thought. I had been photographed more than was decent. But nothing in my previous life prepared me for what followed. I mean my body had known nothing like these apocalyptic flashbulbs, relentless probes, strobes, questions left, right and over there. I was over the moon. I said I was. I was proud. I said that, too. Others were proud, my whole country even. What did I feel? What did I think? Was I happy? In those hours of media triumph and celebration, while my publishing life changed for ever, the cruellest trick of all was how numb I felt. I had to wait three days, for a stranger to hail me in the arrivals hall of Sydney airport, to really feel the thrill: “Good on you, mate. Well done.” Marlon James: ‘I had to be marched back to my seat’ A Brief History of Seven Killings (2015) I really didn’t think I was going to win. So much so that I didn’t even write a speech. I was so convinced another book was the winner that right before the announcement I set off to the bathroom, only to be met by two near panicking members of the dinner staff who had run after me. They marched me right back to my seat. The journalist beside me knew I had won and tried to impress on me that I really should write a speech, to which I politely but firmly said no. I was stunned when Michael Wood called my name. You really do slip outside yourself for a second, the way you do with any extreme experience, whether fear, pain, joy or heartbreak. I bumbled through a speech where I think I mentioned my father way too much, and then told people all the reasons why my book was not easy. I wonder if “not easy” referred more to the writing of it than the reading of it. Hilary Mantel wrote a brilliant and hilarious article about not winning awards, which I had read at least three times, mostly in an attempt to get accustomed to not winning. I watched clips of Maggie Smith playing an actor who did not win the Academy award. Because honestly, I never win anything. You try not to be bitter about it, but who are we fooling? “It was an honour to be nominated” can sound as hollow as you think it would. Except that it’s not hollow. No disrespect to the winners at all, but my most surprising reading experiences have come from the shortlist (Monica Ali, for example) and the longlist, (Timothy Mo, for example). So I had come to a quite beautiful moment of acceptance that I was about to join some truly esteemed company. But then I won. Pat Barker: ‘It’s more like an Oscar than a literary prize’ The Ghost Road (1995) Does the winning author ever know the result before it’s officially announced? Not in my year, though there was a clue: the cameras seemed to be focusing more on the winning table. I remember saying to my publisher, “I think we’ve done it!” After that, my memories are a blur of radio and TV interviews and a bank of cameras with flashing blue lights and voices calling out of the darkness, “Look this way!” “Over here!” You feel like a rabbit caught in the headlights. Winning the Booker changes everything. In its power to transform a career it’s more like winning an Oscar than another literary prize. I was always aware of the luck element. A different set of judges might well have chosen another book. The question is, how do you react to your sudden (though shortlived!) fame? Embrace it, wallow in it or run away from it as fast as you can? I ran. As soon as I could, I went home and settled down to being the unsuccessful author of the next book. Though even that wasn’t easy. You’re always aware that the next book will receive more critical scrutiny than any previous book has done and that can be inhibiting. But even sitting in front of a blank screen tearing my hair out I was always grateful to have won. In recent years I’ve become more aware of a downside to the Booker prize-winning label. Too many intelligent, enthusiastic readers take it as a sign the book will be above their heads, and yet many of these books – the shortlisted as much as the winners – are brilliantly accessible. “Give it a go,” you want to say, “You never know, you might be missing a good read.” John Banville: ‘The notion I might win made everyone try not to laugh’ The Sea (2005) On the day of the award in 2005, I flew into London from Philadelphia at 6am. I had long before arranged to be in America at that time, as no one, especially myself, had the slightest expectation that my novel would even reach the shortlist. When it did get on, it became imperative that I attend the award dinner, in the fear that if they knew I would not be coming the jury would take offence – though even the notion that I might win made everyone put on a straight face and try not to laugh. I came back to the UK alone, with a return flight to New York arranged for the next day at 10.30am – bad taste for a loser to hang about any longer than necessary. But what, I wondered, could I possibly do with this day, a whole day, on my own in London? I determined that I must not drink – I had made a great mistake in that regard when I was on the shortlist in 1989 – so I simply strolled about the city in the October sunshine, looking in the shop windows at all the things I would no more be able to afford tomorrow than I was today. As the afternoon grew late, and the dreaded dinner hour approached, I found myself in St James’s Park, standing by the little lake there, idly watching five pure white waterbirds fighting with a duck over a crust of bread. The duck won. I took it for an omen, and went off to put on my black tie. Penelope Lively: ‘The prize is nicely unpredictable – it may be you’ Moon Tiger (1987) At lunchtime, on the day of the Booker dinner, my husband said: “I don’t think you’re going to win, but, just in case, perhaps you’d better think of something to say.” Wise words, as it turned out. I wasn’t the favourite, so the advice I would give to anyone shortlisted would be the same: the Booker is nicely unpredictable, so it may turn out to be you, even if they are all saying that is unlikely. And remember, anyway, that there is no such thing as a best book, merely one on which a group of people have been able to reach agreement. Life after the Man Booker meant a couple of years and more when it was difficult to do what I wanted to do, which was get on with some writing. There was much book-related travel, too much time in airports, too many events. All that is 30 years ago now, and in a way I am quite grateful for the travel: it means that one of the satisfactions of old age is the thought that I shall never see Heathrow again. I have had all the travel I want or need. Once the searchlight is turned on others, your take on the Man Booker is that of any reader – the revelation of books you might not otherwise have come across, and will now read. That is the value of the shortlist (longlist, too) – a swathe of books are highlighted for readers. For me, though, there are also the ones that got away that should have won. Two, to my mind: Adam Thorpe’s Ulverton and Carol Shields’s The Stone Diaries. Ben Okri: ‘The hunger and the dreams are still there’ The Famished Road (1991) You take a young poet and novelist flaming with hunger and obscurity and dreams, you put him through the rigours of the short-story form, you unleash him on a novel he had been secretly writing for years, and you gift him with a strange magical night at the Guildhall in October 1991, and what do you get? You first get shock, surprise, retreat, delight, celebration, partying, making up for the hunger years, excessive travel, an explosion of readership, the opening up of the magic casement of African writing, a very English lingering backlash, many beautiful friendships, an initial stunned hiatus in writing followed by a steady, quiet harvest, opportunities for constant literary and spiritual growth, much conflicting criticism, an ebb and flow of fortunes, some smouldering resentment, the curious compliment of being plagiarised, publication in many languages, undue expectation followed by a rush to declare disappointment, many St Sebastian-like arrows patiently and humorously borne, love and kindness directed at me from ever renewing sources, and an abiding, never faltering gratitude for the fact that regardless of how my books are received or not received the flame and the hunger and the dreams are still there, enriched by that destiny-altering night at the Guildhall in 1991. DBC Pierre: ‘I bet a tenner on myself as if I were a horse’ Vernon God Little (2003) For a participant, one thing the Man Booker prize is strange for is that your days of feverish writing can be two or more years behind you. There’s an extreme Doppler shift: you didn’t write the book with a view to later competing with others. You suddenly find yourself not only in competition but given odds at the bookies (I put a tenner on myself as if I were a horse – you just have to). As if runners ran a race against themselves, and judges were convened years later in a different place; or you worked up the strength to lob a bowling ball up an alley over the horizon, and by the time you got over the rise you saw that agents and publishers had kept the thing rolling on. The night itself is numbing. The shortlist is the realistic prize. I don’t know how possible it is to find a single winner among artworks. From the perspective of the dinner table on the night you quickly realise the show’s set up for TV. I remember being told to expect one of five roving cameras in my face as the winner was announced. Those are the cameras that catch your reaction when someone else wins. Only five of them, as the winner will go to the stage. I spotted the cameras early. Watched them wait for the announcement; and lived a very long split-second as I realised none were coming to me • The Golden Man Booker winner will be announced at the Man Booker 50 festival at the Southbank Centre, London SE1, 6–8 July. The longlist for this year’s prize is announced 24 July.
9||NHS wields the axe on 17 'unnecessary procedures'Hundreds of thousands of NHS patients will be refused operations judged futile as part of cost-cutting measures in the health service. Procedures including injections for back pain, surgery to help snorers and knee arthroscopies for arthritis form part of an initial list of 17 operations that will be discontinued completely or highly restricted by NHS England as many of these problems get better without treatment. The health service hopes the measures will save £200m a year by reducing risky or unnecessary procedures. It will tell patients they have a responsibility to the NHS not to request useless treatment. Varicose vein surgery and tonsil removal also feature on the list of routine operations to be axed as part of NHS England’s drive to cease outdated and ineffective treatments. The routine procedures are performed about 350,000 times a year and cost more than £400m. NHS bosses hope to stop at least 100,000 operations, saving £200m. Steve Powis, the medical director of NHS England, told the Times (£): “I’m confident there is more to be done”, adding that the list of 17 operations formed “the first stage” of rooting out futile treatments that are believed to cost taxpayers £2bn a year. “We are also going to ask ‘Are there other procedures and treatments we should add to the list?’,” Powis said. Additions could include general anaesthetics for hip and shoulder dislocations and brain scans for patients with migraines. “We have to spend taxpayers’ money wisely,” he said. “Therefore, if we are spending money on procedures that are not effective, that is money we could spend on new treatments that are clinically effective and would provide benefits to patients. It’s absolutely correct that, in getting more efficient, one component of that is to make sure we are not undertaking unnecessary procedures.” The news comes as the government prepares to raise taxes and ditch an increase to the personal income tax allowance to pay for NHS funding plans. According to proposals, £20.5bn of extra funding would be set aside for the health service by 2023. In a speech at the Royal Free hospital in London a fortnight ago, Theresa May said tax rises were inevitable. “As a country, taxpayers will need to contribute a bit more,” she said. “But we will do that in a fair and balanced way. And we want to listen to people about how we do that, and the chancellor will bring forward the full set of proposals before the spending review.” 17 treatments NHS England may axe Four procedures will only be offered at the request of a patient: Snoring surgery Dilation and curettage for heavy menstrual bleeding Knee arthroscopies for osteoarthritis Injections for non-specific back pain A further 13 treatments will only be offered when certain conditions are met: Breast reduction Removal of benign skin lesions Grommets for glue ear Tonsillectomy Haemorrhoid surgery Hysterectomy for heavy menstrual bleeding Removal of lesions on eyelids Removal of bone spurs for shoulder pain Carpal tunnel syndrome release Dupuytren’s contracture release Excision of small, non cancerous lumps on the wrist called ganglia Trigger finger release Varicose vein surgery
20||How to make the most of cauliflower leavesThe once-neglected cauliflower has been lifted to new heights in recent years, and now features regularly on restaurant menus, where it’s treated like a delicacy: chargrilled as “steaks”, pulverised into rich purees or shaved for delicate salads. But it’s only now, with the alarm around food waste growing louder by the week, that we are discovering how remarkably tasty its leaves are. This is yet another use for this versatile vegetable, and a flavourful treat that we’ve all been missing out on. Cauliflower thrives in the British climate and – whether it’s a fractal romanesco, a purple graffiti or traditional white curd – all come wrapped in a cage of rib-like leaves. So seek out one with good foliage and save yourself the cash you’d spend on other greens. Use cauliflower leaves as a side dish instead of spinach, kale or chard, or as an ingredient in their own right, stir-fried with ginger and honey or fermented into a zero-waste cauliflower leaf and floret kimchi. Or, for a show-stopping drinks snack or side dish, just roast them. Roast cauliflower leaves Detach the leaves and stalk from a cauliflower head (save the head for another use). Strip the leaves from the largest, thickest stems and leave smaller leaves intact. Cut the thickest, fibrous stems into 3cm-long pieces. Toss everything in olive oil and a little salt, then roast in a 200C/390F/gas 6 oven for 20-30 minutes, until crisp and slightly charred. If you’re cooking the head, too, serve the leaves alongside; otherwise, they’re perfectly happy by themselves. • Tom Hunt is a chef, writer, sustainability campaigner and founder of Poco Tapas Bar in Bristol.
4||World Cup 2018 power rankings: Brazil and Croatia lead the way1) Brazil It is hard to shake the feeling that Brazil are the best-balanced side at this World Cup. Neymar has pranced and preened, particularly in the first two games, and they were slow to get going but there was an ominous feel to their win over Serbia and they look capable of raising things further. Philippe Coutinho has been a considerably bigger influence than their Ligue 1-based star turn so far; if Mexico are disposed of then a mouthwatering quarter-final with Belgium is likely. 2) Croatia Given that manner in which they sailed through the most difficult group, Croatia are arguably the team of the tournament so far. They have rarely been spectacular but look composed, organised and unflustered, with their biggest stars stepping up in the thumping win over Argentina. A meeting with Spain in the last eight looks likely and Zlatko Dalic’s side cannot be ruled out of doing something special. 3) Belgium Whether or not they really wanted to, Belgium’s second string glided past England and of the pre-tournament favourites they have arguably had the best time of things in the group stage. Romelu Lukaku and Eden Hazard got their eyes in during the cakewalks against Panama and Tunisia; Japan should be obliging opponents in the round of 16 and this generation of players may never have a better chance to prove half a decade of hype correct. 4) Uruguay So far, so straightforward for Uruguay, who would have expected little else from a weak Group A. They have not exactly sparkled although there were suggestions against Russia that they are gathering a head of steam and it will have done Edinson Cavani no harm to join Luis Suárez on the scoresheet. Now Oscar Tábarez needs to get more out of a midfield that is yet to gel satisfactorily. 5) Colombia The second-half evisceration of Poland was one of the tournament’s most exciting displays so far and there is no doubt that, at full throttle, Colombia can take anybody apart. Senegal showed that they can run into trouble when denied space, though, and there are doubts about their defence’s capability to cope with speed. Much may depend on James Rodríguez’s injury, which left José Pekerman visibly concerned on Thursday. 6) Mexico That whirlwind of a showing against Germany now looks a little harder to judge in the light of subsequent events. Mexico are capable of playing sublime football at a lightning tempo and boast an enviable array of technicians; Sweden found it all too easy to batter them into submission though and Brazil are very unlikely to give them carte blanche to operate as they would prefer. 7) Spain They are just about keeping it together but Spain are yet to find a blend that looks capable of going all the way. How much influence Fernando Hierro can actually wield on a team he inherited at the last moment is questionable; attacking balance has largely been lacking, save for a scintillating half-hour spell against Portugal, while they have been rattled by lesser opponents with surprising ease. There is always the suspicion they will come good but Spain look rudderless. 8) France It can sometimes feel hard to forgive France’s lack of fluency given the thrilling riches at their disposal and that was a feeling heightened after the Anschluss-esque tie with Denmark. But they came through a relatively testing group unbeaten and, if nothing else, Kylian Mbappé has made an excellent start to his first World Cup. Can Didier Deschamps finally cajole something extra against another disjointed giant in the form of Argentina? 9) Sweden By now everybody should know better than to underestimate Sweden, who were on nobody’s radar at the outset but outlasted everyone to top Group F. Their 3-0 win over Mexico was, even allowing for a no-show from their opponents, one of the best tactical displays of the tournament so far; they used their power and aggression to superb effect but have a dash of quality too and will feel quietly confident now. 10) England Is it coming home? From a Russian vantage point a couple of wins against meagre opponents seem to have sparked inordinate optimism back home although we have to be fair: this is a pleasant, likeable England team with a manager who is more tuned in to the various demands of wearing the shirt than any in memory. They will, it seems, have to do things the hard way now but perhaps it does no harm for Gareth Southgate’s side to be genuine unknown-quantity material. 11) Switzerland Those “Eagle” celebrations contrived by Granit Xhaka and Xherdan Shaqiri may have dominated the headlines but this is the slickest, most impressive Switzerland side in recent memory and the draw has opened up nicely for them. They will need to regain some of the momentum they lost in cruising to a draw with Costa Rica, but the intensity they mustered against Serbia and in drawing with Brazil suggested they could come through from nowhere. 12) Argentina This is probably the worst Argentina team of the past two decades and that is more the pity given that, if they had the talent in midfield and defence to match their attacking riches, their possibilities would be limitless. They are mightily fortunate to have got this far but they do have Lionel Messi and, as he confirmed with that luscious finish against Nigeria, that is enough to keep people watching and believing. 13) Portugal Little has happened to dissuade anyone from the time-honoured notion that Portugal are overly reliant on Ronaldo although, judging by his performance in the first two games, that does not necessarily have to matter. They were outplayed by Morocco, though, and came within inches of an astonishing exit against Iran; surely one of Uruguay, France, Argentina, Mexico and Brazil will have too much to block the European champions from reaching the business end. 14) Denmark Their highlights reel from the last fortnight is hardly extensive but Denmark have been expertly drilled by Åge Hareide and, while Peru won the popular vote in Group C, are in the last 16 on merit. Two flourishes from Christian Eriksen – a fine assist against the Peruvians and a super goal in the draw with Australia – were a reminder that they have a world-class talent in their midst and Croatia will not fancy facing them. 15) Russia Excitement around the host nation’s chances peaked after resounding wins over Saudi Arabia and Egypt but was quickly dampened by Uruguay. Russia are clearly a better side than many people had supposed but it would take some audacity to predict they have anything to trouble Spain. They have probably hit their ceiling but several careers have been enhanced and their relative success has added a welcome extra dimension to the tournament, too. 16) Japan Good, lucky or a little bit of both? Japan looked the weakest of Group H’s contenders at the outset but here they are and fortune has favoured them ever since Carlos Sánchez’s early dismissal in their opener with Colombia. Their own manager disgusted himself by shutting up shop towards the end of then defeat to Poland; they squeaked through but it is hard to see what this team has in its armoury to take it further. 17) Iran Mehdi Taremi may never forget the injury-time miss that, moments after Iran had been given a VAR-aided lifeline against Portugal, would have improbably won them both the match and Group G. He had also fluffed an opportunity to equalise against Spain; Iran looked extremely useful in most departments and would have been a fascinating prospect in the round of 16. 18) Senegal Aliou Cissé’s team could hardly have been unluckier not to get through the group stage and will, in the end, reflect on a lack of discipline late on against Japan. They were punished by a soft Keisuke Honda equaliser and, just as tellingly, the two late yellow cards that ultimately tipped Group H against them. It was a shame, as they are a rounded and entertaining side that deserved better. 19) Peru Partly through the free-flowing nature of their football and partly through the remarkable support they received from their travelling fans, Peru felt like the greatest loss to the tournament at this juncture. It would probably have all been different if Christian Cueva had scored a spot kick against Denmark in the first game; in the end wastefulness scuppered them and by the time they discovered a clinical edge against Australia it was too late. 20) Nigeria A curate’s egg of a group stage from Nigeria, who came away feeling aggrieved to have lost against Argentina but might not have had anything to mourn if they had turned up for their opening tie with Croatia. They played some scintillating counterattacking football in spells, notably during the second half of the win over Iceland, but it was not enough and Gernot Rohr will hope this was valuable experience for what he says is his real target: Qatar 2022. 21) Morocco Hervé Renard’s team played with a verve and invention that caused many to swoon but, similarly to Peru, fell short where it mattered. The manner of their defeat to Iran was devastating and they deserved far more against Portugal, too. That made the draw with Spain even more of a frustration; they should have been in a position where it counted for more. 22) South Korea Before the match with Germany it seemed fair to assume South Korea’s tournament would fizzle out without a single moment to commit to memory. They proved everyone wrong and could have scored more than twice in an exciting counterattacking display; the shame was that they could not quite get it together in close contests with Sweden and Mexico. 23) Serbia Serbia’s campaign brought a familiar mix of brilliance and frustration, garnished with the kind of political controversy that tends to overshadow so much of their football. In fairness it was hardly their players’ fault that Xhaka and Shaqiri caused such a storm; they could have done more, though, to see out a draw instead of throwing it away at the death. After that the die was cast. 24) Iceland This was a bridge too far for Iceland in the end although they were hardly outclassed in Group D and took the fight to added time in the final game. The early draw with Argentina was their high point; what really undid them was a sloppy second half against Nigeria and now, with Heimir Hallgrímsson taking time to consider his future, the job to replicate their recent success may not be easy. 25) Germany Where to begin? By the latter stages of the defeat to South Korea – and in fact well before everything completely unravelled – Germany’s performance bore more than a passing resemblance to the fare offered up by England against Iceland at Euro 2016. There were attacks and shots on goal but no obvious structure, plan or, uncharacteristically, confidence. What an ignominious way to relinquish their grip on the trophy. 26) Poland They salvaged some pride against a Japan side that was totally unfussed by the end, but Poland were supposed to be much better than this. Instead they were deservedly beaten by Senegal and dismantled comprehensively by Colombia; Robert Lewandowski was invisible, not aided by an inadequate supporting cast, and a world-class striker’s chance to make an impact on this stage while near his peak has passed. 27) Tunisia If they had held out for a tiny bit longer against England then, as it happened, Nabil Maaloul’s team would have added some genuine interest to the denouement of Group G. It ended up being a sterile final day although they did at least pick up a win against Panama; their cause had already been lost through a porous display in the defeat to Belgium. 28) Australia In some ways this World Cup arrived at exactly the wrong time for Australia, who were caught between permanent managers and needed a near-miracle from Bert van Marwijk if anything was to come of their campaign. They played well against both France and Denmark but, when everything came down to a meeting with already-eliminated Peru, ended up falling well short. Quality was particularly lacking in a shot-shy attack. 29) Costa Rica When they cut loose against Switzerland, Costa Rica looked a genuinely exciting attacking proposition. But it was too late by then, even if their defence had done a similarly eye-catching job in frustrating Brazil for 91 of the 98 minutes, and recriminations will focus on a tight opening defeat to Serbia. Oscar Ramírez’s cautious tactics drew criticism and, after watching them on Wednesday, you could see why. 30) Saudi Arabia Such a shocking opening-night show against Russia suggested Saudi Arabia were firmly on course for three hidings. As it happened they then played well against Uruguay and dramatically overcame a broken Egypt to give their summer a more positive hue; that capitulation against a moderate host team will be the abiding memory, though. 31) Egypt A campaign that brought so much joy and anticipation back home ended up being little short of disastrous. The constant focus on Mohamed Salah’s fitness – he played twice and scored twice but was clearly not 100% – hardly helped and nor did the fact that he was bundled into photo opportunities with Chechnya’s strongman leader Ramzan Kadyrov at every opportunity. It is a situation we may not have heard the last of. 32) Panama After losing comfortably to Belgium and receiving a walloping from England it was tempting to wonder whether Panama might be the worst World Cup finals contender of the modern era. Their reaction to Felipe Baloy’s consolation goal against the latter showed how much it meant simply to be here, though, and a creditable performance against Tunisia ensured Hernán Dario Gómez’s team returned home with pride.
22||The best facial self-tansFacial self-tans are a great way to pare down a makeup routine for summer, when heavy foundation looks excessive and feels foul. They’re particularly handy if you suffer from uneven skin tone, rosacea or melasma that becomes more prominent around now, as the darker tint has a more unifying and camouflaging effect than thick makeup, minus any of the associated sweaty, streaky discomfort. Their drawback, for me, is that the vast majority of gradual tanning moisturisers don’t contain any sun protection at the time you’re most in need of it, and least likely to want to layer gloopy moisturisers to melt and merge in the heat. This is why Clarins Radiance-Plus Golden Glow Booster for Face drops (£20 for 15ml) remain the (forgive me) gold standard. Instead of further basting summer skin, one merely shakes one to three drops (one is perfect for my deathly pallor) on to a favourite serum, face cream or sunblock, mixes together and applies as normal. The result is a believable tan that lasts a couple of days. M&amp;S’s version, Self Tan Luxe Facial Oil, is vegan, bargainous (£9.50) and comes in a bigger, 28ml bottle, but the dosage is harder to control. Ignore the application instructions, is my advice. The product is excellent, but its consistency too runny to massage in without waste. Instead, I just mixed a few drops into my own moisturiser and got a streak-free, natural-looking glow, minus any dribbling or mess. Simpler still are Dr Dennis Gross’s Alpha Beta Glow Pads (two colour densities, £30 for 20 – expect to use a couple a week). These have the significant benefit of simultaneously exfoliating and tinting the skin in the sweep of one small pad, cutting the need for any preparation and all but eliminating the risk of streaking. I find they work brilliantly if the face is left for a minute post-application, before proceeding to serum and sunblock; I can generally see the results in under two hours. If even this feels like a job too many in the morning, just slap on an overnight gradual tanner before bed. James Read’s Sleep Mask (£25 for 50ml – should last several months) remains the best. Apply the milky gel after night-time cleansing, wash your hands, and wake up to a realistic, well-rested glow. Whichever you use, don’t forget your neck.
4||'I didn't breathe for the last 10 minutes': how we watch the World CupWhen Christian Sinibaldi turned up at homes across England to photograph fans watching the World Cup, he was overwhelmed by every nationality’s hospitality. “And their food,” he says. “I’ve eaten a lot of crisps and beer, but also the traditional Brazilian dish of feijoada in north London, Mexican quesadillas and guacamole in Putney, and a lovely Moroccan tagine cooked on the barbecue in Letchworth.” Sinibaldi sat with a fixed camera near the television screen and never asked anyone to pose: he didn’t need to. “Pretty much as soon as the match got under way, they forgot I was there.” He enjoyed watching the tension build. “Very few people left the room or changed positions throughout the game. They were glued to their chairs.” It does mean that Sinibaldi has not watched any matches himself, because he has been looking the wrong way. “But I could nearly always tell when a goal was coming – I could see it in their faces.” There’s a reason he made time for the project this year: as an Italian, it’s one way of dealing with the fact his home side didn’t make the cut. England 6 Panama 1 Cooper family, Milnrow, Rochdale, 24 June Timing is everything at Rick and Jo Cooper’s house, where the family are on countdown for England’s second match of the tournament, against Panama. With excited shouts of “Half an hour to kick-off” drifting in from the garden, the smell of burgers on the barbecue waft into the front room where the floor is strewn with balloons, inflatable clappers and St George’s flags. The country is in the early grips of a heatwave and little do the Coopers – grandmother Alison, 72, uncle Malc, 44, Rick and wife Jo, both 41, and their sons, Leo, eight, and Aaron, five – know that the sunshine will not be the only turn-up for England. Stones’ header puts England 1-0 up eight minutes in. “I missed it!” says Rick, distracted by Aaron walking in with lunch. But no one misses goals two, three, four or five – including two Harry Kane penalties – all before half-time. “This is unbelievable!” Rick shouts. “Football’s coming home.” The noise from the boys’ vuvuzelas is deafening. “The boys were too little for Brazil 2014,” says Rick, a Manchester United season ticket holder, “so I’m enjoying watching this one with them. I was obsessed with skiing as a kid. But France 98, where Beckham got sent off, that really got me into football and I’m mad for it now.” His brother Malc says, “You always have that hope with England, and it’s always been dashed. I remember Gazza with the tears at Italia 90, watching that with my late dad. And Maradona’s hand of God in 86, watching that on holiday in Torquay, around a tiny black-and-white TV. The injustice of it. But we’re perennial optimists, and with this young team, there’s a different mentality.” Their mother, Alison, is the only one who saw England triumph in 66. She says, “The country couldn’t believe it. My late husband, Henry, he loved the game. He always said: ‘If they play football, they’ll murder ’em.’ He’d have been thrilled with this one.” Brazil 1 Switzerland 1 Kiki Machado and friends, Crouch End, London, 17 June Cristina “Kiki” Machado’s house is a sight, and sound, to behold during the Brazil v Switzerland game, what with the yells of the 30 people squeezed into the living room, the guitar music from Kiki’s tenant Caco Barros (at front, glass in hand) and the green-and-yellow stars chalked on the pavement outside. “We drew six,” says Kiki (in hat), “because Brazil has won five times – we drew one more for luck.” Kiki’s living room is packed out with her “north London family”, friends collected over 20 years in this country, from Brazil, England, Lithuania, Serbia and Italy. When she arrived, her godmother gave her the number of her best friend’s daughter, Luciana, who was living in London. She never called, but seven years later they met by chance in the local library at a singalong for their children. “My family in Brazil said people aren’t celebrating there the way we are,” Kiki says. “It’s natural when you’re away from your country to find your people and cheer together.” She remembers as a child how everything stopped during a World Cup game, so when Martha asked if she could come home from school early for the match, she said, “Of course. Your teacher will understand.” After their 7-1 defeat by Germany in 2014, Brazilians are approaching this World Cup with trepidation. “I’m in defence mode,” says Janaína Campoy, 44 (on right, wearing glasses). “That game was a tragedy. It came just as things were going badly for us politically and economically. We lost confidence as a nation.” The self-esteem of an entire country seems a lot to put on 11 men, but they don’t let them down. After the match, they party until midnight, because that’s the Brazilian way to celebrate a draw. “When we won in 2002, that party lasted 24 hours,” Kiki says. “The hangover lasted a week.” Senegal 2 Japan 2 Adama Kande and friends, Ancoats, Manchester, 24 June The music and the chat don’t stop at Adama Kande’s city centre flat. Adama, 44 (in front of picture), a musician, came to the UK from south Senegal in 2008 and the green, red and yellow of his home country is all around his living room: on flags, posters and djembe drums. Watching with his partner Neilum Singh, 43 (second from right), and friends Iain Dixon (far right), 40, and Lamin Conteh, 42 (far left), Adama cannot hide his excitement. “Senegal is like Brazil,” he says. “Everyone plays football. When I was a boy, my neighbour was manager of the local team. He taught me, too – I’m a good player.” An early goal from Senegal superstar Sadio Mané sends them wild: the music and chants get louder, and the energy soars. When Japan equalise, Lamin booms: “It’s game on. Game on.” But when Japan equalise a second time, the mood deflates. “I wanted more,” Adama admits at full time. “They got the opportunity to win, but there were a few mistakes. They need to change tactics now.” For him, the World Cup couldn’t get much sweeter than 2002, when Senegal beat title holders France in the first game and reached the quarter-finals. He watched back home, crowded around a neighbour’s TV. “When Papa (Bouba Diop) pushed that ball inside, it felt as if we could beat anybody.” Neilum agrees: “They love their sport in Senegal. Because people have limited access to technology, they’re forced to share a TV, sometimes outside, sometimes in a cinema. Watching football with West Africans is electric – it’s just fire.” Morocco 0 Iran 1 Essakhi family, Letchworth, 15 June Before most Morocco matches, Mohammed Essakhi, 54 (in cap), finds himself in the kitchen cooking nibbles for friends coming over. He’s a school head chef and caterer, focusing on Moroccan and Spanish food. For this game, his starters include hummus, tzatziki and stuffed peppers. The barbecue comes after, “because when there’s a football match on, we want to watch it”. Balbair Chahal, 42 (pictured front left), works with Mohammed at the school; Phil Moore, 56, and Amanda Brosnan, 50 (centre), are friends and fellow Leicester City supporters. They watch the game with Mohammed’s wife, Rosalind, 56, his nephew, Kaeran Duff, 30, his son, Nizar, 16, who is training with Watford and hopes to go pro, and his daughter, Azza, 22 (far right). The 1-0 loss to Iran is “a bit of a let-down”, because the team played well, says Mohammed. Azza points to an important difference: “Footballers in England are so famous – it’s good to see people from your own background compete on the same platform.” “I would love Morocco to win,” Mohammed says, “but realistically, it’s not going to happen. What would really make me proud is seeing Morocco host the World Cup. We’ve been asking for about 20 years.” His best football memory is the 3-1 victory against Portugal in 1986: “I was still living in Casablanca, and I remember youngsters celebrating in the street. Nobody thought it would be possible. At that time, Africa had only two teams that had qualified.” Azza, who recently graduated, is working in Morrisons, and is delighted to wear her Morocco shirt to work when the team play Portugal a few days later. “It was to raise money for Clic Sargent [a cancer charity for young people]; we pay a pound to wear the team shirt. It was a real conversation starter. That’s what I love about the World Cup: the unity. No matter what happens or what team you support, there’s a conversation you can have with anybody.” Japan 2 Colombia 1 Nishi family, Acton, London, 19 June Naohiko Nishi (on right) and his eight-year-old son Atsuhiko (next to him) have no special food or drink, hang no flags, have no good-luck rituals. What they do have is a Japanese guidebook to the World Cup, with detailed information about every player: how old they are, what kind of a player. This is consulted very regularly. Today the Nishis – Naohiko and his wife Akiko (far right), their sons Atsuhiko, eight, and Takahiko, six (front right) – are watching the game with their friends Hiro and Shiho (on left), and their children Masa, 12 (on floor), and Iroha, nine (with giraffe). The children are keen footballers: Masa, Atsuhiko and Takahiko all play at the nearby Football Samurai Academy. Atsuhiko plays football three days a week, and says he hopes to play for Japan when he’s older. For him, the best moment of this game is Shinji Kagawa’s penalty, secured in the game’s sixth minute after a handball from Carlos Sánchez: “It was kind of scary before he took it – we were very surprised that we won.” His father agrees: manager Akira Nishino was appointed just two months before the World Cup began. “To be honest, Colombia is much better than Japan. They got a red card, which was so lucky for us. Winning this match was a great moment - because in the 2014 World Cup, Japan didn’t get a good result.” Though they were the first team to qualify, Japan failed to make it out of the group stages. For Naohiko, the joy of this competition has been watching Japan improve their standing on the world stage. “Japan didn’t join the World Cup until 1998. Only some of them played in Europe at the time - whereas now almost all the Japanese players play for Europe. The quality has got much better and their confidence has increased.” The win against Colombia, and a subsequent draw against Senegal, will be hard to beat, though Naohiko still holds dear his memories of the 2002 World Cup, held in South Korea and Japan: he was able to attend the opening game - where he watched Japan draw against a “very strong” Belgium. Iran 0 Spain 1 Shirin Azari and friends, Bromley, 20 June If only Vahid Amiri, the Iranian striker, could hear the chant from the mothers, teachers and former students of Iyda, or the Intercultural Youth Development Association, a Farsi-speaking community in south London: “Vahid pa Talayii omide team e mayii (Goldenfoot Vahid, you are our team’s hope).” Sadly, his golden foot doesn’t save the day: Iran’s only goal in the game against Spain is offside and they lose 1-0. It is a women-only party, organised by Shirin Azari (behind sofa, in white Iran T-shirt) with friends in Bromley. “We often get together for food and gossip and chat,” says her friend Pupak Navabpour, whose children learn Farsi at Iyda. Food is the focus at these events, and it is all set up before people arrived, “so you can eat with your eyes first”. Shirin has made dolmas and Turkish burek, and serves them with rosebud and cardamom black tea brewed in a samovar, followed by gaz (almond nougat) and nabat (crystal sugar) on sticks. “That is what we do when ladies get together,” she says. “The group was singing Iran Iran by Arash, dancing and chanting in Farsi.” “I think Iran are really good at defence, one of the best,” says Shirin, “but not attack. Even if they try to score, there’s nobody there; they keep themselves to their own goal.” Despite her criticisms, she is proud of her team, “because they don’t have the facilities or coaches that western countries have.” Pupak agrees: “It was gutting that the goal was disallowed. They defended well and almost scored a few times – even though they lost, I think they did quite well.” Pupak started taking Farsi classes as an adult when she realised she was beginning to struggle with her mother tongue. Now her children go every Saturday. “My youngest said, ‘But Mummy, I’m English.’ Even though I’ve spent most of my life here, I don’t feel that kind of belonging. When I watch Iran play in the World Cup, I suddenly feel that connection to home.” Serbia 1 Costa Rica 0 Bogdanovic family, London, 17 June On 17 June, Serbia won their first World Cup game in eight years. The more superstitious might have the Bogdanovics to thank for it: “We sit in the order we were sitting in 2010, when Serbia won against Germany,” says Deanna, 47 (on left). “We try to recreate exactly what happened that day, so we can win in the future.” Serbian snacks must be on the table and everyone must dress for the occasion. Deanna and Brian, 47, moved to London 20 years ago; soon they will have spent more of their lives here than in Serbia. “Often you question where home really is,” Deanna says, “but the World Cup erases that feeling. I’m not usually into football, but the World Cup turns me into a completely different person. When we scored,” she says of the winning goal, “it was such an amazing feeling. I don’t think we breathed for the last 10 minutes.” The only year-round football fan in the family is 15-year-old Vuk. Serbia haven’t qualified for the World Cup for more than half his lifetime, and he remembers being a small boy watching Serbia beat Germany. “Back then, Stojkovic was my favourite goalkeeper, and he saved a penalty. That was a proud moment.” His ritual during the game is never to jinx it by being overconfident: “Even if we were 3-0 up, I’d still keep my mouth shut until the final whistle.” Iceland 0 Nigeria 2 Silla Johannesdottir and friends, London, 22 June Iceland’s mere presence here is historic. The smallest nation ever to qualify for the World Cup, its population is the same as Sunderland’s. Silla Johannesdottir (on far right), who watches the game with her family and Icelandic friends, bearing flags and face paint, says, “It’s like a fairytale – we’re a tiny, tiny country. No matter how it goes, we’re so super proud of them.” But the game is disappointing, ending in a 2-0 loss to Nigeria. “When we got the penalty, there was a tiny bit of hope,” Silla says, “but Gylfi Sigurdsson didn’t score. That was a real low point, a kick in the gut. Everyone just left, there was no celebration. It was a bit sad.” What went wrong? “They were just better than us. They can run, those boys, and the Icelandic team just couldn’t keep up with that pace.” Her husband, Dadi Sveinbjarnarson (back right), agrees that speed was the Nigerian team’s strength. “The Icelandic team played pretty well, they had two or three tries on goal, and that was more than Nigeria, as far as I could see. Iceland just got outrun.” Dadi feels particularly connected to the team because he used to work with Iceland goalkeeper Hannes Thór Halldórsson, whom he describes as “a Viking shield wall”. “I was a commercial producer and he was one of our film directors. He is a very talented commercials maker who had a side life as an athlete – then that became the more important part of his career.” Halldorsson even directed a Coca-Cola commercial for the World Cup, using the famous supporters’ “Viking clap” as a lead-in. But Silla thinks everyone in Iceland feels connected to the team, and that even other nations have been rooting for them. “People approach us and say, ‘Well done.’ Everyone is happy for us. The World Cup really brings people together.” Colombia 3 Poland 0 Erik Sarmiento and friends, Manchester, 24 June In Colombia, football isn’t watched with strangers in a bar – it is a party to be shared with those closest to you, in your home. So Erik Sarmiento, 27 (sitting on the floor), is bringing South American carnival to inner-city Manchester by cramming 10 friends and family into his small flat to watch Colombia play Poland. The beers are flowing and a Colombian barbecue is on the go, with sides of guacamole, black beans, chimichurri and patacones (fried plantain) served with hogao (tomato salsa). The Spanish TV commentary is streamed at high volume and everyone’s focus on the match is unwavering, despite the noise of friends talking. An expensive bottle of Amarone wine sits by the television for final whistle celebrations. Erik, a business manager who lives with his wife Laura Van Hoof, 28, a Spanish teacher, came to the UK as a university student on a scholarship to learn English in 2009. “Growing up in Colombia,” he says, “sport isn’t associated with status or money because you can play in the streets. Colombia turns into a carnival when the national team plays. When I watch here, with Colombian food, music, friends, it’s a little bit of home in the UK.” The group play on bongo drums and improvise beats with a cheese grater, metal jug and spoons throughout the game. For 90 minutes, it feels as if the room is poised to explode – and it does, when Mina scores 40minutes in. “Goooooooooooal-azo,” they scream. By the third goal, they hug and sing: “Championes, championes, olé, olé, olé!” Erik says, “Football is an international language. I play four or five times a week – it’s how I met these friends. I saw someone wearing a Colombian club’s kit and now we are all watching together.” Sebastian Cano, 29, who moved to the UK in 2013, agrees: “It’s a sense of community. This is how it would be back home. I grew up with Carlos Valderrama [known to non-football fans for his big, blond perm] as a national legend, but in my opinion that generation was overrated. This squad is better. “The last World Cup was the first time in our history that we made it to the quarter-finals; James Rodríguez was top goalscorer and won the golden boot which was a big thing for us. Now our expectations are high.” France 1 Peru 0 Yves Ogrodzki and friends, Cheltenham, 21 June Studies over the years have reported that the French aren’t the easiest folks to please. Chef Yves Ogrodzki, 53 (with glass in hand), and his sous chef Jeremy Denni, 21, aren’t doing much to subvert those findings with their assessment of France’s victory over Peru. “It was a bit weak,” Yves says, “they could have done a lot better than that. I didn’t find it very exciting really.” Jeremy agrees, pointing out, “We have some of the best players in the world, so 1-0 is falling short. There were moments I was scared we wouldn’t win.” Yves and his wife Elisabeth, 53 (on right), run a French restaurant in Cheltenham, and they have invited the staff to their home to watch the game. “We want to bring to our customers a proper French atmosphere, so all our staff come from France. They are all in their 20s, it’s their first time working abroad, so we very often organise little parties like this at home.” Yves prefers rugby to football, but finds the World Cup gives foreigners an opportunity to talk about their national identity. “I remember when France won in 1998, people felt very patriotic. But living abroad, there’s a new dimension to our identity. The World Cup brings everybody together while still having that thing that says, ‘I belong to that country.’ Even someone like me who is more interested in other sports, we still get to go back to our roots. And I like the jokes. I’ve seen people joking on social media that now Italy haven’t qualified, they can look after everyone else by delivering pizzas.” There’s no special World Cup dish, just your basic French delights: a glass of pastis, sausages with mustard from Dijon, some traditional Parisian baguettes with ham and cornichons. “To bring luck,” Jeremy says, “we all sing the Marseillaise, the French national anthem, before the game starts.” Mexico 1 Germany 0 Hayaux-du-Tilly family, Putney, London, 17 June At the apex of a divisive Mexican general election, nothing brings the country together like beating Germany. Yves Hayaux-du-Tilly (back right) watched the game with his sister and her Irish husband, his daughters, the nanny Maggie who has lived with them for 16 years, his sons and their friends. His wife, who was working, was sad not to see their win. “It was a brilliant game,” Yves says. “Mexico generally make it to the finals, but they normally underperform. This time they played brilliantly; it wasn’t a consequence of a mistake from the German defence. We could have scored one or two goals in the second half; unfortunately we didn’t, but we won. We defeated the world champions.” The family members have varying levels of superstition when it comes to the World Cup. José Pablo, 19, “will probably wear the same underpants and shirt without cleaning it every game the Mexican team plays”. They have to hang the Mexican flag and the beer has to be Mexican: “And of course we have guacamole, nachos, quesadillas – as an expat, it’s a way to connect with your country.” After the victory, Yves was in Mexico and found the mood of the entire nation lifted. “I was there three weeks before the game and everybody was angry and trying to convince other people to vote for their candidate. Now, nobody really cares about the election. We feel nothing can be that wrong if we can beat Germany. It changes the mood of the entire country. It’s very, very powerful.” Yves, whose best football memory is watching Mexico play at the Azteca stadium during the 1986 World Cup, thinks people will be talking about this victory for decades to come. “I love that the World Cup gives us this opportunity every four years to try again. That’s what life is about: you always have the opportunity to prove yourself one more time.” Ten days later, Mexico got through to the final 16, despite losing 3-0 to Sweden in their final group match. “It was a bittersweet feeling,” Yves says. “I was a little bit disappointed by the lack of character, focus, concentration and discipline in the players. But the main objective is to get through to what we call in Mexico ‘the fifth game’,” ie the quarter-finals. “That has only happened twice, only at the World Cups in Mexico,” he says. Yves did ultimately enjoy watching the Sweden match in a pub, largely because of the simultaneous Germany v South Korea game, which saw reigning champions Germany crash out of the tournament. “We didn’t care about our score,” he says. “We were all watching South Korea and when they scored we all cheered and hugged the South Korean fans.” South Korea 1 Mexico 2 Lee Jaeyoung and friends, Bradford, 23 June No one gathered in front of Lee Jaeyoung’s TV thinks South Korea have a chance against Mexico. The group of international students are on a study abroad programme at Bradford University. “I asked my friends how they thought we would do,” says Jaeyoung, 27 (back left), who studies psychology, “and they predicted a 2-0 loss, or maybe 2-1 if we were lucky.” He is more optimistic, hoping for a draw, but in the end the 2-1 defeat comes as no surprise. “I saw Mexico play Germany, and the Mexican team is really good.” Before his friends arrived, Jaeyoung bought some beer and fried a load of chicken drumsticks – an extremely popular combination the Koreans call “chi-maek”, from “chi” for chicken and “maekju”, the Korean word for beer. “Unfortunately we couldn’t find Korean beer,” Jaeyoung says, “so we had Stella and someone brought Carlsberg. It was a really good time.” They hung up the Korean flag for luck. “I don’t watch football usually, just the World Cup,” says Kim Seungyeon, 21 (back right), who studies psychology and counselling. “It’s a lot like the Olympics in that if our team wins, I feel I’ve won, too. I know they work hard, so I’m really happy to support them.” For her, the moment to beat in World Cup history came in 2002, when hosts South Korea reached the semi-finals. “It was the best moment – a miracle.” Despite today’s loss, they are extremely proud of the team’s forward, Son Heung-min. “He got a really incredible goal during extra time,” says Jaeyoung, who is a huge fan of the Tottenham player. “After the match finished, I saw on the Korean news that he was crying in the locker room. I felt like shouting, ‘Don’t cry, Son! We lost but you were the best!’” He was similarly impressed with his team four days later, when they achieved the unexpected and won 2-0 against Germany, marking the end of the latter team’s World Cup. “I didn’t expect that kind of score,” he says. “It was really impressive.” The match was a 0-0 draw until the 92nd minute, which would have still resulted in Germany being knocked out, but then South Korea’s Kim Young-gwon scored: “And I was like, ‘What the hell? This is awesome,’” Jaeyoung says. The goal was ruled offside, then reviewed on VAR, allowed, and was swiftly followed by a second goal from South Korea. Even though the win didn’t change their knockout from the World Cup, the celebrations were exuberant. “We were screaming and dancing,” Jaeyoung says . “I just wish I had put a bet on.” Russia 3 Egypt 1 Anastasiia Fedorova and friends, Catford, London, 19 June The balloon is for Anastasiia Fedorova’s husband, whose birthday was a few weeks before the match. He chose to work an extra hour in order to miss the game. “He was absent on principle,” she explains. “He’s British but was born in Ukraine, so he doesn’t support the Russian team. Sometimes we have small political battles. If there was a game between Russia and Ukraine, it would be a nightmare.” Anastasiia, 31 (on right), and Polina Kaplitskaia, 29, studied at the same university, St Petersburg State in Russia, and four years later bumped into each other on a plane from London to Moscow and rekindled their friendship. They both came to the UK for love; Anastasiia’s husband is British, and Polina’s husband Andrey had been living in the UK for 10 years when he met Polina through a mutual friend on a trip to Saint Petersburg. Polina has brought along red, white and blue paints to decorate their faces with the Russian flag. She thinks Egypt’s own goal, clumsily scored by Ahmed Fathi in the 47th minute, prompted a surge of energy on the Russian side: “I don’t think our team was concentrating very hard - but then Egypt scored an own goal and after that Russia started playing better. They became more active and confident.” “Our first goal was the best moment for me,” Anastasiia says. “I remember thinking, we’re so close to winning the game, and if we win we’ll go through to the next stage and it will be the first time in Russian history.” She hopes the World Cup will be good for the Russian people: “I hope everyone sees the real Russia, how the people are nice and welcoming. Sometimes our government does things that aren’t nice, but the people are not the same as the government. My parents in Russia say the atmosphere is so warm.” Living abroad when your country is hosting sometimes means missing out on the party, and Anastasiia felt sad when she saw Instagram stories showing people celebrating in the streets of St Petersburg. “We won and that was a surprise for everyone,” she says. “We’ve only won two games so far – but for us it’s like we’ve won the whole thing.” • This article was amended on 2 July 2018 to correct the spelling of Adama Kande’s surname. • Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
9||Life as an NHS nurse in the 2000s: ‘When I joined there was a lot of hope’I work with adults who were born with heart conditions. We make sure things are working well, help them with psychological and social issues, and support people approaching the end of their lives. Cardiology is a great specialism. The heart itself is quite simple – it’s a pump connected to pipes – but if it’s not working it can have a big impact on everything else. When I joined there was a lot of hope. Labour had got elected and hundreds of thousands of nurses were recruited at that time – we can call ourselves Blair’s nurses. I would still love as many people as possible to come into nursing. It’s hard, it can be tiring, it can be draining. But there’s no job like it to make a real difference to patients: the laughter and tears you share create a special bond which helps them through their time with you. I think the most difficult part of the job is when you’re not able to deliver the care you want to give. One of the reasons I stopped working on the wards full-time was the increased workloads: I ended up regularly looking after 12 patients, when the international standard is one nurse to four. One of the hardest patients for me was a lovely woman who we knew was dying. It was Mother’s Day, and she was almost exactly the same age as my mum. Her death is a key memory for me. It’s sad, but you’re also happy you’re able to support someone through a difficult time. We have to give nice news as well sometimes. I was working on a night shift and got the call for a patient who’d been waiting months and months for a heart transplant. I was the one to tell her: “You can’t have anything to eat now, because there’s a heart that might be suitable for you.” In the last few years things have got more difficult. We’re still in what would be called winter pressure in June: we open extra beds and things in winter, but we hadn’t closed them from the previous year. Then this winter we had nothing else to open. The nurses on the ward where I used to work converted one of the cupboards into a bed, and are still nursing patients there. It does feel like things are teetering on the edge. With Brexit, we’re already seeing colleagues either leave or making plans to. I probably work with more nurses from the Philippines and from Africa than EU nurses, but they see all this stuff in the news about the hostile environment and they’re wondering whether they’ll have their visas extended. I also worry about cooperation across the EU in terms of medicine regulation and research. The NHS is absolutely amazing: we’re able to deliver a world-class standard of care to absolutely everyone, regardless of how much money they’ve got. It means nurses don’t even have to think about whether somebody has paid or not. I would never want to work in a system that didn’t do that. • Life as an NHS nurse in the 1990s: ‘Patient expectation has risen’
14||New Dark Age by James Bridle review – technology and the end of the futureI suspect your enjoyment – or otherwise – of James Bridle’s New Dark Age will depend very much on whether you’re a glass half-empty, or a glass exactly-filled-to-the-halfway-mark-by-microprocessor-controlled-automatic-pumping-systems sort of a person. I like to think that while I may have misgivings about much of what the current technological revolution is visiting on us, I yet manage to resist that dread ascription “luddite”. It’s one Bridle also wishes to avoid; but such is the pessimism about the machines that informs his argument, that his calls for a new “partnership” between them and us seem like special pleading. As futile, in fact, as a weaver believing that by smashing a Jacquard loom he’ll stop the industrial revolution in its tracks. At the core of our thinking about new technology there lies, Bridle suggests, a dangerous fallacy: we both model our own minds on our understanding of computers, and believe they can solve all our problems – if, that is, we supply them with enough data, and make them fast enough to deliver real-time analyses. To the Panglossian prospect of Moore’s Law, which forecasts that computers’ processing power will double every two years, Bridle offers up the counterexmple of Gates’s Law, which suggests these gains are negated by the accumulation in software of redundant coding. But our miscalculations concerning the value of big data are only part of the computational fallacy; Bridle also believes it’s implicated in our simple-minded acceptance of technology as a value-neutral tool, one to be freely employed for our own betterment. He argues that in failing to adequately understand these emergent technologies, we are in fact opening ourselves up to a new dark age. He takes this resonant phrase from HP Lovecraft’s minatory short story, “The Call of Cthulhu”, rather than the dark ages of historical record, although the latter may turn out to be a better point of reference for our current era. Lovecraft’s new dark age is, paradoxically, a function of enlightenment – it’s the searchlight science shines into the heart of human darkness that brings on a crazed barbarism. Bridle’s solution is to propose “real systemic literacy”, alongside a willingness to be imprecise – cloudy, even – when it comes to our thinking about the cloud. I’m not against this; indeed, I often think that in a world crazed by its sense of certainty, the best way to stay calm is to allow yourself the luxury of doubt. But while I can see it as making good stoical sense for the individual, I’m not sure it’s sufficiently rousing to prepare humanity, en masse, to cope with what’s coming down the steely, preprogrammed track. Bridle offers us techno pessimists plenty of examples to worry about. Some – such as death by slavish adherence to GPS navigation systems, and the woeful effects of the computational fallacy – I was already familiar with; but others did give me novel heebie-jeebies. I hadn’t bitten down on the fact that the very heat generated by the internet itself is a strong factor in global warming, which pretty much nixes any view that a more wired world will be a more sustainable one. Nor was I aware of the increase in a phenomenon known as “clear-air turbulence” (although really, it speaks for itself), which may well ground a lot of commercial aviation by the middle of this century. And while I may have known at an intuitive level that the Syrian conflict had an environmental dimension to it, Bridle is the first person I’ve read who authoritatively labels it as a resource war, provoked by drought. Meanwhile, those hot and powerful secret government computers are being used to speciously survey us (he makes a convincing case for the complete uselessness of CCTV systems), while with their spare processing capacity they try to crack the prime-factoring encryption system that’s vital for online privacy and commerce. That the US National Security Agency has already cracked some of the more commonly used prime number factors was, again, news to me. And I don’t think of the fake variety: for Bridle isn’t just a purveyor of the armchair jeremiad, who sits there blowing filter bubbles – he does fieldwork as well on our hideous and looming fate. I particularly enjoyed his inquiry into the weird and wobbly realm of British airspace and the link between drone programmes and so-called “plausible deniability” – the invisibility cloak for so much of our rulers’ dabbling in the dark arts. But perhaps the strangest and most unsettling aspect of the coming new dark age is the emergence of machine intelligence. Here Bridle makes an excellent and possibly original point: we’re accustomed to worrying about AI systems being built that will either “go rogue” and attack us, or succeed us in a bizarre evolution of, um, evolution – what we didn’t reckon on is the sheer inscrutability of these manufactured minds. And minds is not a misnomer. How else should we think about the neural network Google has built so its translator can model the interrelation of all words in all languages, in a kind of three-dimensional “semantic space”? I’d wondered why it was that Google Translate had massively improved – moving from being a reliable provider of nonsensical silliness, to, well, an effective and instantaneous way of translating. The problem is, we have a general idea how the program is doing it – but it can’t tell us exactly; and, as Bridle observes, this is tantamount to transgressing the first of Isaac Asimov’s famous Three Laws of Robotics – for if we’re in ignorance of what our robots are doing, how can we know if we’re being harmed? Intelligent computer systems are already menacing us with weird products devised algorithmically and offered for sale on Amazon, as well as bizarre and abusive “kids’” videos, which are mysteriously generated in the bowels of the web, and uploaded by bots to YouTube. Bridle borrows Timothy Morton’s modish conception of the “hyperobject” as a way of discussing our inability to apprehend the totality of the risks embodied in such vast phenomena as machine intelligence and global warming – but I’m not sure that acknowledging the ungraspable nature of anything really helps us to grasp it. Bridle looks to so-called “centaur chess” as a way forward for our wetware: computers may now effortlessly beat the grandest of masters at the game, but one of the defeated, Garry Kasparov, has developed a fight-back method, in which humans partnered with computers can indeed regain the podium. On this basis, Bridle argues, it’s possible to conceive of a new kind of “guardianship” of our frazzled planet and its poisoned wells, one in which we all work together. This seems Pollyanna-ish as much as Panglossian to me – I’m more struck by Nicholas Carr’s observation, in his takedown of the coming era of self-driving cars, The Glass Cage, that our inability to grasp the emergent techno realm may be a function of our having devised tools that do away with our need to use tools. Most of us already float free from the world of making, doing, extracting and refining – and observe it indolently and imperfectly through the scumbled lens of the cloud. We carry on ditching single-use plastic, and ordering stuff from Amazon, and giving our personal information away promiscuously, not, I’d argue, because global warming and AI are too big to grasp, but because we understand only too well that real change could only be effected by a great mass of individuals. And that, as Bridle acknowledges, is an impossibility, given the new technologies atomise rather than fuse our social formations. Still, no doubt once the microprocessors malfunction and the pumping system splutters to a halt, we’ll hopefully pick up pretty much where we left off before the Enlightenment – or possibly the Renaissance. One thing about the old dark ages was that they only seemed dark in retrospect, once the dread weight of state power had been reimposed. I bet there were plenty of people besides the Goths (and the Visigoths for that matter), for whom the fall of the Roman empire was a cause for celebration. I realise this isn’t a popular view. And I expect many readers will find Bridle’s perceptive and thought-provoking book terrifying rather than enjoyable – but then as I implied at the outset, I’m very much of the glass half- empty type. New Dark Age by James Bridle (Verso, £16.99). To order a copy for £14.44, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&amp;p of £1.99.
5||'We're in the abyss': how despair in Mexico set 'Amlo' on verge of presidencyIt’s a searing afternoon in Ecatepec, one of Mexico’s most violent and deprived cities, and thousands of followers have gathered under a vast white tarpaulin to hear their pathfinder rage against the machine. For the next hour Andrés Manuel López Obrador – or Amlo to his fans – will deliver a unyielding assault on the scoundrels, mafiosos and influence peddlers he claims have plundered Latin America’s second largest economy and plunged it into a cauldron of thievery, bloodshed and want. “This official banditry is going to end!” the 64-year-old leftist will rail. “Zero corruption and zero impunity!” First, though, he must brush his hair. After pushing through a crush of adorers, López Obrador pauses at the foot of a scaffolding stage, plucks a chesnut-coloured comb from his pocket and calmly runs it through his silver mane. Then the Amlo show begins. “Viva México! Viva México! Viva México!” he shouts from the rostrum, thrusting both arms into the air. “It feels like a dream – but we are just a few days away from achieving the transformation of Mexico!” That transformation is almost certain to begin on Sunday when 88 million Mexicans head to the polls to pick their new president. Amlo, who is making his third run for the presidency, has towered above his rivals in the polls for months. “We’re 30 points ahead!” he boasted to the sea of supporters before him in Ecatepec, who responded with cries of: “Presidente! Presidente!” Experts say three interlinked crises – security, corruption and poverty – explain why López Obrador now stands on the cusp of the Mexican presidency, and nowhere are they more visible than in Ecatepec, a gritty, neglected conurbation that is just 30km (18 miles) from Mexico City’s chic central districts but feels like another world. Ecatepec is Mexico’s most populous municipality and one of its most impoverised, with nearly 790,000 of its 1.8 million inhabitants living in poverty. It is also one of the most dangerous regions in an increasingly dangerous country where at least 200,000 people have been killed since a catastrophic “war on drugs” was launched just over a decade ago. “Environmental degradation, femicide, insecurity, car theft, extortion, kidnapping, the disappearance of women … Ecatepec is a microcosm that illustrates all of the country’s most serious problems,” said Azucena Cisneros, a local politician from Amlo’s party, Morena. “It’s an urban tragedy.” Amlo has built his campaign around pledges to eradicate corruption and rule for the poor. Among the devotees at his Ecatepec rally, many described him as the only man capable of saving them from a crime wave they blamed on venal politicians. A cry for help had been painted on to one banner next to the stage: “We are the most violent municipality! We have been robbed and ignored by these corrupt politicians! We deserve to live better lives! We are good people! That’s why Ecatepec is with you, Andrés Manuel!” “It’s so terribly insecure,” complained Gaby Mejía, a 46-year-old primary school teacher. “My students are always coming up to me and saying: ‘Miss, did you hear about the shootout near my house? That they killed you-know-who?’” Mejía’s mother, Josefina, 74, nodded in agreement, recalling how she had recently been held up by group of armed car thieves. “We’re already in the abyss,” she said, describing Amlo as Mexico’s salvation: “He’s one of those men who is only born every 100 years.” Many describe Amlo’s rise as the result of a furious popular revolt against the two parties that have ruled Mexico since the end of one-party rule in 2000 – the Institutional Revolutionary party (PRI) and the National Action party (Pan) – and which are widely blamed for the current crises. “It’s a social-civic insurrection. It’s a collective awakening,” said Germán Rufino Contreras, a former federal deputy and Amlo supporter in Ecatepec. But Viridiana Ríos, an Ecatepec-born member of Democracia Deliberada, a collective of young leftist Mexican thinkers, said she believed despair better explained why voters were embracing Amlo and change. “I think it is just that a lot of people haven’t noticed we have created a country where a lot of people have nothing to lose.” Fifty-three million Mexicans live in poverty, Ríos pointed out: “It’s a humanitarian crisis.” “[Voting Amlo is] a gamble, and when you have nothing to lose you can gamble more riskily.” Two days after Amlo’s triumphant rally, Cisneros and a group of Morena activists embarked on a pre-election march through some of Ecatepec’s most marginalized corners, places where many have shockingly little to lose. In Vivienda del Taxista, a rickety shanty built on a rubbish-strewn wasteland, she visited the home of Marisol Gutiérrez, a Morena campaigner and seamstress who supports her daughter and two grandchildren on an income of about 600 pesos (£22) a week. “It’s not enough. But … the truth is, there’s no work,” Gutiérrez said, showing off her family’s battered stone-and-asbestos abode which had a bullet hole in its roof and had been built directly under a transmission line. On one moldy wall hung a photograph of Gutiérrez’s son, Geovanni, who killed himself in 2016 aged 20. On another, a portrait of Jesus carried the phrase: “The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.” In the hovel nextdoor Enrique Hernández, a semi-retired rickshaw driver from Oaxaca state, said he also planned to vote Amlo: “More than anything because we all have the right to an opportunity in life.” Cisneros’s next stop was La Cuesta, a tumbledown slum cobbled together from cardboard, wooden crates and repurposed advertising hoardings above a natural gas pipeline. “It’s a timebomb,” said Arnulfo Reyes Lara, a social worker who fights to keep the community’s kids off drugs and off the streets. At every turn, Cisneros was bombarded with tales of deprivation and crime. Odilia Allende, 55, told of how her son had been murdered just a few streets away. “They shot him in the head … These are people with a future, with a reason to live and it’s not fair that the druggies just take their lives when they are on their way to work.” Juan Juárez, a 51-year-old mecanic, described how criminals had beaten his brother to within an inch of his life: “They had to put a titanium plate in his face,” he said, adding: “These days when we go out we feel fear. We need change.” Finally, a sobbing mother approached Cisneros to recount how her daughter had been abducted and raped before she somehow managed to escape alive. “How long ago?” Cisneros asked. “Five days,” the woman replied, breaking down into tears. “It hurts. It still hurts. I try to be strong. I know we have to go on.” “You will get through it,” Cisneros replied, and hugged her. After each heartbreaking petition, Cisneros grabbed her loud-hailer and marched on through the community, imploring locals to vote for change. “Es urgente un cambio en este país!” she shouted. “This country urgently needs change!” Additional reporting by Hernán Sarquis
2||What links Limbo (1) to Lust (2) and Treachery (9)? The Weekend quizThe questions 1 Which protest movement was founded by Tarana Burke? 2 The Corporation of Trinity House has responsibility for what structures? 3 What is linked, or divided, by the Bridge of No Return? 4 What gift for the pope was the subject of an Albrecht Dürer woodcut? 5 In American sport, what is MiLB? 6 What symbol is an octothorpe? 7 Anna Komnene was a princess and historian of which empire? 8 The original lingua franca was spoken around which sea? What links: 9 Flag; norm; gold exchange system; popular song; evening paper? 10 Flemish Giant; French Lop; Chinchilla; Rex; Angora; Himalayan? 11 Seven Years’, Crimean, American Revolutionary and first world wars? 12 Brian Moore and Alan Clarke; Kenneth Wolstenholme; Hugh Johns, in 1966? 13 Scarsdale, New York; Beverly Hills; South Beach, Florida? 14 Limbo (1); Lust (2); Gluttony (3); Heresy (6); Fraud (8); Treachery (9)? 15 King Herod; Henry VIII; Rembrandt; Captain Kidd; William Bligh? The answers 1 #MeToo. 2 Lighthouses. 3 North and South Korea. 4 Rhinoceros. 5 Minor league baseball. 6 #. 7 Byzantine (12th century). 8 (Eastern) Mediterranean. 9 Standard. 10 Rabbit breeds. 11 All ended by treaties of Paris. 12 Commentated on World Cup final: BBC radio; BBC TV; ITV. 13 Places that gave their names to fad diets. 14 Dante’s Circles of Hell. 15 Played by Charles Laughton on film.
23||20 of the best group trips for solo travellersSailing and socialising in the Mediterranean Med Sailors runs skippered sailing holidays for 20- to 35-year-olds, many of whom travel solo. Everyone shares a bunkbed cabin with someone else of the same gender; each yacht sleeps eight and travels in a flotilla of up to eight boats, so there is plenty of socialising. The yachts island-hop around Greece, Turkey, Croatia, or Italy (and the Caribbean too), making ports of call at villages and historic sights. Guests can try watersports, such as wakeboarding, join in the weekly regatta and enter a fancy dress contest on the last night. Each boat has large sunbathing decks, snorkelling gear and paddle boards. • From £495 for seven nights half-board, flights extra, medsailors.com Stripped-back safari in Southern Africa EcoTraining runs year-long courses for professional safari guides – but it also offers week-long tasters for nature lovers who want to experience life in the bush. The Wilderness Trails Skills course for adventurous travellers is great value, offering a stripped-back safari at a fraction of the usual cost. The setting is the Makuleke Concession, a remote part of the Kruger national park in South Africa, or the Mashatu game reserve in Botswana; sightings may include lions, leopards, elephants and rhinos. Guests walk up to 10km a day, carrying their own supplies, and learn to track animals, navigate, set up camp, make fires and leave no trace. Nights are spent wild camping under the stars. • From £458 for five nights for an all-inclusive course, flights and transfers extra, next departure 9 August, ecotraining.co.za Camino de Santiago, Spain Solo travellers planning a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in Spain won’t be short of company – 300,000 people completed the journey in 2017, an increase of nearly 200,000 in a decade. The Camino Francés is by far the most popular path, but the oldest route, the Camino Primitivo, is also good for lone pilgrims. The full 311km over the Cantabrian mountains is challenging, but the last 100km can be walked in a self-guided week with Camino Ways. Setting off from the walled town of Lugo, the first three days are spent following quiet Roman roads through forests and farmland. At lively Melide, the path merges with the Camino Francés, so the second half of the walk is more sociable. • £440 for six nights including half-board and luggage transfers, April to October, caminoways.com ‘Poshtel’ stay, Barcelona Hostels have always been a great places to meet fellow travellers – and these days, staying in one doesn’t have to mean roughing it. Casa Gracia, in a modernista mansion in Barcelona, is one of the new breed of poshtels. It has lots of stylish communal areas for hanging out and making friends, including a roof terrace; regular activities such as yoga, wine tasting and cooking classes; as well as events such as comedy nights and quizzes. Twice a week, there are tapas tours around the Gràcia district. Dorms sleep six, and there are single rooms for those who prefer not to share (from around £100). • Dorm beds from £32 a night, hostelworld.com Canyoning and hiking in Serbia Much Better Adventures runs sociable and affordable long weekends to wild places in Europe and north Africa (plus a few lengthier trips further afield). This is a great option for time-poor travellers, filling one or two days off work with adventure. About 55% of customers are single, and there are lots of repeat bookings by people who struck up friendships on their first trip. One recently added options is a three-day canyoning and hiking trip to Serbia’s Valjevo mountains, with monastery visit and full-board riverside accommodation. • From £230 for two nights full board, excluding flights to Belgrade, next departure 6 July, muchbetteradventures.com Party on a Greece island Friendship Travel takes over the Apollon hotel in Tsilivi on the island of Zante each summer, hosting house-party holidays for single guests. This year there are five new rooms, taking the total to 24, plus a new roof terrace. The hotel has a bar, restaurant and small pool; there is a sandy beach 100 metres away, and a water park within walking distance. Five three-course dinners with wine are included, and there are lots of local tavernas to try on the remaining nights. • From £660 for seven nights including breakfast, some meals and flights, departures weekly (last departure 11 October), friendshiptravel.com Brazilian road trip Dragoman runs overland tours lasting from eight to an epic 211 days in purpose-built trucks across Africa, Asia and the Americas. Passengers tend to be a mix of ages and nationalities, with plenty of people travelling solo. One of the newest trips is a 17-day journey through Brazil from Salvador to Rio: highlights include hiking in the Chapada dos Veadeiros and Chapada Diamantina national parks, exploring the gold mines of Ouro Preto and touring Brasilia. Accommodation is 60% camping and 40% hotels and hostels. • From £1,025 for 16 nights (plus £340 kitty) including board and most meals, excludes flights, next departure 6 November, dragoman.com Tour of Sicily In addition to its existing “no single supplement” holidays, this year Jules Verne has started solo group tours for single travellers. The nine destinations are France, Italy, Albania, Turkey, Egypt, Jordan, India, Botswana and Peru. There are themed trips and tours as well as holidays based in one place. Its Treasures of Sicily holiday has stays in Catania, Agrigento, Palermo and Taormina, plus visits to ancient Siracusa, coastal Cefalù (pictured), Mount Etna and the Valley of the Temples. • One-week trip from £1,095, including B&amp;B, flights, local travel and guides, next solo departure 1 November, vjv.com Savings for cyclists, Belarus Nearly 50% of people on Explore’s small group trips are solo travellers. Those who book by 2 July get their own room at no extra cost, saving up to £530. This is an annual special offer for bookings made between 1 June and 2 July – outside that period, solo travellers can share a twin room for no extra charge, or pay a single supplement. One unusual trip among more than 60 on offer is a exploration of Belarus by bike, taking in the capital, Minsk, Unesco-listed castles and a self-sufficient eco-village. • Belarus trip from £599 for four nights including some meals and board, excludes flights, explore.co.uk Yoga in Ibiza Your average retreat offers a couple of classes a day and lots of downtime, but this action-packed week at the Cala Blanca beach resort, eastern Ibiza, has almost 200 yoga and fitness sessions to keep solo travellers extremely busy. Lots of guests attend on their own and there are initiatives to get everyone chatting, from sharing tables in the restaurant to conversation benches and even (cringe) hug spots. And Primal Beat, a new retreat just for men, starts this autumn (6-13 October). • From £775 for seven nights all-inclusive (classes, food, shared room) but excluding flights. Three- to six-night breaks available from £365. Single occupancy extra (from £425). Next retreats 14-21 October and 14-21 April 2019, yogafitretreats.com Swimming in Slovenia Solo swimmers are very welcome on Strel’s swimming adventures – 40%-50% of participants are lone travellers. The swim tours take place in Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Greece, Turkey and the US. The Slovenia Lakes and Rivers trip has a real variety of aquatic challenges, including swimming across Lake Bled, stopping for a breather on its island with its 17th-century church, going for a dip at the base of the Kozjak waterfall, swimming down the River Soča, and tackling the length of Lake Bohinj (4km). Swimmers stay in the four-star Hotel Jezero on the banks of Lake Bohinj. • £510 for three nights including shared room B&amp;B, excludes flights. Single occupancy an extra £61, strel-swimming.com Family fun in Morocco After finding that 16% of its family bookings were made by single parents, Intrepid Travel has this year started running adventurous trips specifically for solo parents and their children. There are six destinations so far: Costa Rica, Thailand, India, Egypt, Vietnam and Morocco. Its Morocco tour takes in Marrakech, Berber villages, the Altas mountains and an afternoon camel-trekking on a beach by the Atlantic. The company has also expanded its range of adult solo-only tours this year, adding Peru and Bali. • Morocco trip from £336 for seven nights (kids from £297 ) including B&amp;B and some meals, excludes flights. Next departure 28 July, intrepidtravel.com Foodie weekend in Turin Solos was founded in 1982, making it the UK’s first specialist holiday company for single travellers. Today it has five hotels exclusively for solo guests, and holidays from tennis breaks to ski trips. One of its city breaks is a foodie trip to Turin, Italy’s chocolate capital and the birthplace of the Slow Food movement. The itinerary includes a walking tour of the city, and chocolate-tasting and vermouth-making experiences. Other Solos city breaks with a food focus include Bilbao (for pinxtos) and Lisbon (custard tarts). • Turin from £605 for three-night weekend including B&amp;B plus one dinner and flights, solosholidays.co.uk Painting and drawing in France GoLearnTo has a huge range of holidays with no single supplements, including cooking, wellbeing, language, sport and creative pastime breaks. Its French painting holiday, based at a farmhouse with extensive gardens and two pools, is particularly good value, with at least 30 hours of tuition, pre-dinner champagne, all meals and a day on location at Penne d’Agenais, a medieval hilltop village. After lessons, guests can borrow bikes to cycle to the River Lot for wild swimming. • From £820 for seven nights all-inclusive with shared room , next departure 8 September, golearnto.com The Trans-Mongolian from Moscow to Beijing Solo passengers are a common sight on long-distance trains such as the Trans-Mongolian. Lots of Russian, Mongolian and Chinese people take this route alone, as do western tourists – it is perfectly safe and a good way to meet fellow travellers. It also offers excellent value: from £492 for a 5,000-mile journey, with incredible scenery and a bed for six nights. The Man in Seat Sixty-One website is a great source of information for this and other long-distance rail journeys, such as London-Istanbul (four nights, from £241) or New York-San Francisco (three nights, from £140). • Trans-Mongolian from £492 for six nights for a bunk in a four-berth sleeper Climbing in Spain Well over half of Bristol-based Rock and Sun’s customers are solo travellers. And Spain’s Costa Blanca is home to, in its words, “an endless amount of limestone”, offering a huge variety of rock climbing experiences for all levels of ability. Accommodation is in a spacious villa in the Jalon valley, handy for shops and restaurants. • From £740 for seven nights including shared accommodation, some meals, coaching and transfers, rockandsun.com Coastal walking, the Channel Islands Ramblers Walking Holidays has a selection of trips with no single room supplement. Its week-long trip to Guernsey takes walkers to the island’s best stretches of rugged coast, along clifftop paths with fine views out to sea and historic sights ranging from second world war German-built fortifications to megalithic tombs over 4,000 years old. Inland, Guernsey is crisscrossed by quiet, picturesque footpaths and a there’s also a day trip to car-free Sark, a short ferry ride away. • From £799 for seven nights including half-board accommodation, bus and boat fares, flights and transfers, ramblersholidays.co.uk Hike, bike and kayak in Vietnam The customers on trips with G Adventures are roughly 40% solo travellers, and its hike, bike and kayak Vietnam holiday keeps everybody active from the first day, when guests cycle from Ho Chi Minh City to the famous Cu Chi tunnels. After a flight north, there’s more cycling in the cities of Hue and Hoi An, plus trekking in the rural Mai Chau valley and an afternoon kayaking among the amazing limestone karsts of Halong Bay. • From £841 for nine nights including all activities, entrances fees, one internal flight and some meals. International flights extra, gadventures.co.uk Independent cycling in Lithuania The website of the non-profit Lithuanian Cyclists Community has several independent cycling itineraries around the Baltic state. One of the most appealing is the Lithuanian Seaside Cycle Route. Its suggested itinerary can be followed independently, but for a little more support with accommodation and routes, try local operator Baltic Bike Travel. • From €499 for seven nights including shared B&amp;B accommodation (single room from €698), local transport and luggage transfers, bbtravel.lt Learn to kitesurf in Morocco Sitting right in the path of the north-easterly trade winds, breezy Essaouira, halfway down Morocco’s Atlantic coast, offers perfect kitesurfing conditions from April to September. Kite Worldwide offers a beginner’s package with guide, 12 hours of tuition, and launch and landing service. Participants should come away with a basic VDWS qualification. • From £911 for seven nights including flights from Luton to Essaouira, B&amp;B accommodation in a riad, all equipment and two dinners, kiteworldwide.com Browse The Guardian’s selection of self-guided and escorted holidays designed for solo travellers on the Guardian Holidays website
24||Driving holidays: a guide to taking your car abroad this summerNo one forgets the first time they drive their car off a ferry at the start of a motoring holiday abroad – either for the thrill of excitement, or the fear that comes with driving on the right for the first time. But it doesn’t have to be stressful if you follow the Money guide to taking your car away this summer. It just needs a bit of planning. Insurance Almost all UK car insurance polices automatically give drivers third-party cover across the EU, so it will pay out if the driver hits someone on Paris’s périphérique but not pick up the cost of damage to the driver’s car. If you want to have comprehensive cover for a trip abroad you need to contact your insurer. Some companies automatically extend a policyholder’s comprehensive cover abroad – for example, LV= gives free cover for up to 180 days in Europe. Others will make you pay a surcharge, typically £40. It is worth noting that if you know you are going abroad during the year, it is often cheaper to add European cover when you take out the policy. Breakdown cover It is a brave person who drives from London to Nice without this, but there is no obligation to buy it. If your car is relatively new and your UK breakdown cover is provided through your car’s manufacturer, you may find you already have European cover as standard. If you don’t, ask your provider to quote for a European upgrade. If it wants more than £50 for a two-week trip, you will be better off buying a standalone policy. GEM Motoring Assist, which wins Auto Express’s best provider award most years, quoted us £50 to take our 11-year-old car to Europe for two weeks. Euro Rescue is another firm to consider – it is a bit cheaper if you are travelling to France or the Benelux countries. Be sure to check the minimum car age, trailer cover, if it needs towing, as well as whether it offers a replacement hire car in the event yours cannot be repaired. Beware the cheapest European breakdown policies, which tend to be riddled with get-out clauses. Documents you need to take If you get pulled over, most European police will want to see your UK driving licence, an insurance cover note and – the one that catches UK drivers out – the car ownership, or V5, document. Having these will save you a lot of hassle and a potential on-the-spot fine. Other must-take items First up is the GB sticker, which is still required by most European countries. Next is something you may not carry at home – a red warning triangle that must be placed on the road if you break down. These are compulsory in France and Germany. Don’t pay Halfords £13 for one – Screwfix and eBay sell these for £5. It is a similar story for a reflective jacket – in most cases the driver must have one in the event of a breakdown. In Austria, a first-aid kit is compulsory, but it is not in other countries. Don’t forget to use a headlight adjustment kit to stop your headlights dazzling other road users. This can be bought for £8 at Halfords or £3.65 on Amazon. Remember, the lights on many estate cars can be manually lowered using the button on the dashboard. In France, you are obliged to carry a single-use breathalyser, but you can’t be penalised for not carrying one. The breathalyser has to be certified by the French authorities, showing an NF number. These are available in the UK for £3 online, or £5 at Halfords. French supermarkets sell them widely. Tolls France is covered in toll motorways and when you see the prices, you understand why these roads are often empty. The Via Michelin website says a driver going from Calais to Nice this summer will have to shell out €108 (£96) in tolls alone. With some planning you can avoid the tolls altogether, but be prepared for significantly longer journey times. If you are going to be doing a lot of driving in France consider getting a Sanef Télépéage tag. The toll prices are the same, but the windscreen-mounted tag allows buyers to use the special Télépéage lanes. The advantage is you avoid the long queues that can build up at toll booths. You can order the tag paying €41 up front from the Sanef UK website. The firm says it will send it out the same day if ordered by 2pm. The toll payments are taken by direct debit from your UK bank account. When you return the tag you get €20 back. The firm also offers tags for Spain and Portugal. Note that in some countries you can’t pay in cash at toll points as they use automatic number plate recognition only. For example, the M50 ring road around Dublin, Ireland, has camera-only €2.60 tolls. Don’t try to chance it by not paying as details are passed on to a UK debt recovery company, with the fine for non-payment set at €41.50 before the debt recovery firms add their fees. Instead, take a note of the number to call (displayed on the motorway) and pay by 8pm the following day. Satnav and radar It is forbidden to carry, transport or use radar detectors in France. You could be fined heavily and have your vehicle and the device confiscated. The AA recommends that if you have a satnav capable of displaying camera locations in France you should disable camera alerts before driving in the country. Petrol stations Be aware that many petrol stations in Europe are fully automated much of the time, especially after normal office hours. They tend to pre-authorise your card with a larger sum – typically €147 and then refund the balance if you put in less fuel. In the past, many refused UK bank cards but this appears to be less of a problem now. Also, be aware you might come across diesel fuel containing 8% biodiesel. This fuel – named B8 – is not suitable for use in all cars, so stick to the standard stuff if unsure. Speeding French police in particular are strict on speeding, and radar traps, even on a Sunday afternoon outside a quiet village, are not unusual. The motorway maximum in France is 130km/h (80mph), while the urban speed limit is 50km/h (31mph). And don’t assume that in Germany all autobahns are free from speed limits – many have 130km/h limits in busy areas. Finding a ferry deal If you haven’t booked your ferry, there’s still time to grab a bargain. This week the Ferries.co.uk website was offering returns from Dover to Dunkirk with DFDS from £129 – leaving on a peak Saturday 14 July and returning two weeks later. If you prefer to travel to Calais – a much better option for onward travel into France – it would cost £140. This is for a family of four in a standard family car. Switch to the speedier Eurotunnel and the price rises to £257 for those peak-time dates. If you prefer to go from Newhaven to Dieppe, which gets you a bit further south, the price for the same dates rises to about £300 with DFDS. Brittany Ferries want £424 for Portsmouth-Le Havre. The overnight ferry from Portsmouth to St Malo comes in at £743 return – and that’s before you have added any cabin costs. Switch to Poole-Cherbourg and you can bring the cost down to £590. Depending on where you live in the UK, it is generally cheaper to take a Dover-Calais option and to drive the rest of the way. You’ll pay less in extra fuel and tolls than the increased ferry fares, and it probably works out just as quick – albeit with much more driving.
18||A parent’s story: ‘Our son stole from us, courtesy of PayPal’This is a cautionary tale that will be of particular interest to the parents of teenagers who, having grown up in a digital age, are over-confident in their use of technology and underestimate the potential dangers of the internet. My son David is 17, and technology has always been part of his life. As a consequence, nothing fazes him about computers or the internet. He spends most of his time on his computer, primarily for gaming (though he has allegedly studied for his final year school exams, too). He is also (if I’m being honest) a bit immature for his years. And he has just demonstrated extraordinary naivety, courtesy of PayPal. It all started when I noticed a PayPal transaction on our Bank of Scotland account. PayPal is not something I am very familiar with – I used it to buy a radiator a couple of years ago but haven’t used it since. My husband, Steve, last used it 10 years ago and has no idea whether he still even has an account. So this transaction had me straight on the phone to Bank of Scotland to ask what was going on. It transpired a transaction had, indeed, been made, to “Alexander” in Russia, for £211. The bank confirmed it was Steve’s Bank of Scotland card that was used. Impossible, we said – we had only recently opened the account, and the card had only been used once and was, of course, in his possession. Only we couldn’t find it. Cue mild panic, then major panic as we tried to work out how it could have been lost. At this point I was still confident about getting the money back, and whoever had the card would not be able to use it again. Bank of Scotland’s fraud people said they would communicate with PayPal, and, in the meantime, gave us back the £211. Reassured, I put the episode to the back of my mind – until about a month later when, on checking our Bank of Scotland account, I realised to my horror that the £211 had been removed again. In response to my frantic phone call, the bank was extremely reticent, but, eventually, when a complaints handler asked if I knew someone called David, I was speechless. It had never occurred to me that my son was involved (now who’s the naive one?). When the whole sorry tale emerged, I could scarcely believe how David had behaved. Where were the values we thought we had instilled in him? Had we not brought him up to behave decently and honestly? Evidently not. And accepting what he had done was so very difficult – forcing us to examine ourselves as parents, too. I felt such a failure, and the two long sessions I spent with David uncovering what he had done were utterly miserable for both of us. Despite being too young to have a PayPal account (you must be at least 18), David had not one but three accounts. One, in his own name, was linked to his own bank account. The other two were in a false name and linked to two cards in his dad’s name – the Bank of Scotland card that had gone missing, and a Tesco Bank card which had remained in his dad’s possession. I was astonished PayPal would allow this. They had done no checking. They were clearly able to link all three accounts to David, but had not done so until Bank of Scotland contacted them. They had no proof of identity and hadn’t cared that two of the accounts had bank cards with a name that did not match the account holder. Call yourself a bank, PayPal? (It does – it is licensed in Luxembourg as “a bank”). So how had a son of mine got himself into such a mess and betrayed his parents so badly? Having previously sold one of his own online game accounts on the internet for £150 (courtesy of the many hours he was spending playing games), David thought a quick and easy way to make money was to buy and sell game accounts. These can be worth a lot of money if people have built up a lot of skills or accumulated valuable items such as weapons and other virtual goods. Using his own money initially, he tried buying a couple, but didn’t sell for a profit. He had read on PayPal’s terms and conditions that if you bought something and didn’t receive the goods, you would get the money refunded, so he tried this out for himself – by “selling” a watch he didn’t have. A buyer sent him the money – which he then spent – and then duly got her money back when the watch did not materialise. It seemed to escape David’s notice that he had a negative balance on his PayPal account as a consequence. Having run out of his own money, he simply reassured himself that if he took money from his dad, PayPal would give the money back again and all would somehow be well. So he “acquired” the bank card and bought a game account from someone called Alexander in Russia. It appears he then acquired a conscience, panicked about what he had done, and changed all of his account passwords to random characters so that he could no longer access them. To make matters worse, David had not received the “goods” he had paid £211 to Alexander in Russia for. And because he had agreed to Alexander’s request to pay using PayPal’s “friends and family” method, there was no way of getting the money back. The PayPal staff I dealt with were pretty nonchalant about their lax processes that had allowed a 17-year-old to behave in this way. However, thankfully, after a lengthy discussion, they admitted they would be unable to pursue David for the negative balance on his PayPal account due to his age. Bank of Scotland covered itself in glory after a shaky start. It refunded the £211 – an act of generosity that means I will be its customer for life. My son doesn’t know this yet – he has got himself a real job and is working to pay us back, and to rebuild our trust in him, which takes time in any relationship where dishonesty is so brutally exposed. As for PayPal ... I never want to use it ever again. • PayPal told Guardian Money: “All financial services companies are obliged to take steps to verify the identity of their customers and the financial products they use. PayPal takes this responsibility very seriously. We use established industry practices to verify our customers at multiple stages ... in addition to sophisticated technologies that constantly monitor and mitigate risk. “We go to great lengths to prevent misuse of our services; however, family fraud can be particularly difficult to identify and resolve. These cases can be extremely challenging for all parties involved, and we always try to do the right thing for our customers in such sensitive circumstances. “After carefully reviewing this case, we found we could have done more to support [David’s parents] ... and we apologise for falling short of the high standards rightly expected from us.” Names have been changed
24||‘I’m a billionaire, but I'm not a big spender’I’m not a big spender and I don’t like to talk about my net worth, but if you believe what you read online you’d go with about $1bn. I’ve made money through telecoms and the media. I founded the first competitive phone company in the US, Corporate Communications Network. It merged with MFS Communications, which eventually sold for $14.5bn to WorldCom. A lot of my success is down to luck and the fact I’ve focused on trends rather than fads. Media, communications, technology and sport have been big growth industries, and I like to think I have been involved in disrupting them. I spend some of my money on art – mainly revolutionary art and religious artefacts from all religions. I like revolutionary artwork because it’s interesting, both politically and socially. But I didn’t actually buy my favourite painting. It was originally a gift from Fidel Casto to Maurice Bishop, a former prime minister of Grenada. Another prime minister of Grenada, Herbert Blaize, then gave it to me. I have reproduced the painting inside the front cover of my new book Total Rethink. As far as religious artefacts go, I have collected pieces from Cambodia, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Lebanon, Egypt and Syria. One painting is by a Syrian refugee and was previously displayed in an art gallery in Beirut. I have a lot of artwork displayed in my gym at home, where I spend a lot of my time. I have no idea what I spend on art. I don’t look for expensive pieces – I look for art that moves me. We have iron manhole covers displayed outside every boardroom in all our offices in every country. They say MFS McCourt, which is the company we sold to WorldCom. They signify that we are in it for the long term. They’re not expensive, costing about $500 each, but they get everyone interested. David August makes my suits. He launched a fashion label with Conor McGregor, the UFC fighter, last year. The suits are all different shades of navy blue and I don’t know how much they cost, but it’s more than if they were off the rack. I own about 30 blue suits, and 15 to 20 sports jackets of different colours. I walk everywhere so for the past 20 years I have sent my shoes to the number one cobbler in the US, who he puts rubber soles on them. I’ve never met him. For the past 15 years I’ve spent about one week a month living in the Merrion Hotel in Dublin. They treat me right. Hotels are great places to watch people from around the world come and go. Living at a hotel offers some sort of exposure to creative juices you wouldn’t normally get. Bob Dylan lived at the Chelsea Hotel in New York during the 1960s, Coco Chanel lived at the Ritz in Paris, and Oscar Wilde lived at L’Hotel in Paris – so I reckon I’m in good company. I have property in Belgravia in London and Miami, but I don’t know what they’re worth. Real estate in both places has done very well though, fortunately. I eat quite modestly for breakfast and dinner, and appreciate good fresh food. I’m not a big drinker. My favourite restaurant is an Italian called Zafferano in Belgravia, but it’s not that expensive. I’d probably spend £100 on a meal for two people with wine. It’s not on the menu but they make me a simple pasta dish called amatriciana for £15. My biggest financial mistake wasn’t when I bought something but not selling something when I should have done. I sold 20% of my telecoms company RCN to Paul Allen, who was co-founder of Microsoft with Bill Gates, for $1.65bn. But the company got swallowed up in the dotcom bust, and I wish I’d sold the whole thing. My new book is about how people can engage in their creative side as well as business, and it’s for anyone – not just business people. If anyone comes up to me (or tweets me @DCMcCourt) and can prove they have read my book, I’ll guarantee to do one of two things: give them a copy, or read their business plan. We are keen to hear how you spend it: maybe you’re a “squeezed middle” just about coping financially; someone who has invested wisely; or a young adult saving furiously for a home. If you would like to appear in this column, contact spend.it@theguardian.com
24||MPs back plan for ombudsman to resolve new homes disputesThe government is under pressure to set up an independent ombudsman with the power to order housebuilders to pay out up to £50,000 or even reverse a sale, following reports of new-home buyers lumbered with defective properties. A group of MPs and peers has called on the government to make it mandatory for housebuilders to belong to the proposed scheme, which would be free for consumers and offer a quick resolution to disputes. The scheme would be funded by a levy on housebuilders, with larger ones such as Berkeley Group, Persimmon, Barratt, Galliford Try, Redrow and Bovis Homes, paying more than small and medium-sized firms. A report, Better Redress for Home Buyers, by the all-party parliamentary group for excellence in the built environment, highlights the confusing landscape buyers face when trying to resolve building defects, not helped by a plethora of warranties, housebuilding codes and complaints procedures. It says the proposed ombudsman should be able to order payouts of up to £50,000 so buyers are not left out of pocket. Disputes over larger sums might have to be settled in court, but the report adds: “In certain extreme situations the new homes ombudsman should be able to reverse the sale.” The recommendations come after a scandal over the poor quality of new homes built by Bovis, while other housebuilders have also faced similar complaints. A recent survey by the Home Builders Federation and the main warranty provider, NHBC, showed that 98% of new-home buyers reported snags or bigger defects to their housebuilder after moving in. The parliamentarians have proposed a snagging app that would enable buyers to photograph defects and send them to the builder, monitor the progress of complaints and go to the ombudsman if needed. Dominic Raab, the housing minister, said this week that the “vice-like grip” of the big developers must be broken to boost the building of affordable homes. Lord Best, vice-chair of the all-party group, says: “Buying a new home is stressful enough, but buying a defective one, as we heard from witnesses, can take a toll on people’s wellbeing as they wrestle with a Kafkaesque system seemingly designed to be unhelpful.” The proposed scheme would be modelled on the property ombudsman, to which all estate agents must belong. If they are struck off, they can no longer trade. Katrine Sporle, the property ombudsman, says: “New homes should be covered by an ombudsman. People have no idea that when they buy a new home directly from the developer, they have no access to redress.” The proposed scheme would cover the first two years following a house purchase when housebuilders are liable for defects, while subsequent problems would be down to the warranty providers. The report says: “Affected homebuyers are exasperated not so much by the existence of defects but by a builder’s failure or even refusal to put them right. Submissions we received described how buying a new home had been ‘the worst decision of their life’; how it was like ‘going through hell’ as the complaint passed between housebuilders and warranty providers; and how fighting for redress was taking a toll on their health.” The proposals have been presented to the ministry of housing, communities and local government as part of its consultation on a single housing ombudsman.
25||The 50 best podcasts of 20182 Dope Queens Comedy panel hit Phoebe Robinson and Jessica Williams’s podcast is a perfect storm of comedy and representation, with the two US comedians hanging out with their mostly female, often non-white and LGBT guests to chat “race, gender, sex, and other less serious topics”. Recorded in front of a live audience, Dope Queens isn’t a low-key affair, and all the better for it. Interview-based offshoot Sooo Many White Guys - produced by Broad City’s Ilana Glazer - is equally engaging. HJD If you like this try Another Round, Late Night Whenever The Adam Buxton Podcast Freewheeling interviews Buxton’s open-ended “ramble chats” are a delight, with Bob Mortimer, Aisling Bea and even Wes Anderson among those bouncing off his observational genius. There are moments when it gets hysterical, and one of the finest involves Louis Theroux breaking out a falsetto version of Yes Sir, I Can Boogie that goes on just long enough to make it eye-wateringly funny. HV If you like this try Richard Herring’s Leicester Square Theatre Podcast All Killa No Filla Sideways serial killer pod If true crime is the food of podcasts, comedians Rachel Fairburn and Kiri Pritchard-McLean are your mild-mannered chefs cracking jokes as they work. They claim they’re not mocking serial killers; they’re simply obsessed with them. Discussing how Ted Bundy only needs one name “like Britney or Madonna” suggests otherwise, and the pair’s understated humour means they just about get away with the grim jokes. HV If you like this try A Very Fatal Murder Athletico Mince Surreal, sport-themed ruminations If you’re more concerned with the state of Steve McClaren’s hair than Soccer AM, this is the football podcast for you. Bob Mortimer and Andy Dawson are the anti-Carragher and Neville, bringing surreal fun to the sport. You might find Harry Kane fighting over celery or Peter Beardsley feeling sorry for himself, but you’ll rarely hear the final score. HV If you like this try The Football Ramble Atlanta Monster Complex true crime Payne Lindsey had a huge hit with Up and Vanished, his podcasting debut, in which he examined the disappearance of a former beauty queen. Lindsey struck journalistic gold when his DIY sleuthing turfed-up two fresh arrests. For the follow-up, he explores a spate of 28 murders of black children in Atlanta. This time, race and City Hall politics loom far larger than a simple whodunnit. GH If you like this try Dirty John, West Cork Brian Gittins and Friends Erratic conversations with comics David Earl, the genius behind anti-comic Brian Gittins, has long been a pioneer of leftfield audio shows. Comparatively, this is more slick, bringing in guests to interact with him and his friend David Edwards and robot Charles. The fictional setting changes each episode, from the Haçienda in the 90s to a hot-air balloon, inviting the best/most game members of the modern alternative comedy scene – Jamie and Natasia Demetriou, Lolly Adefope, Diane Morgan, Kim Noble and Tim Key – to play. HG If you like this try Comedy Bang! Bang! The Butterfly Effect With Jon Ronson Exploring the murky world of modern porn Ronson’s intimate exposé of the pornography industry is more interested in search terms and algorithms than titillation, which is where its charm lies. Your host remains quietly curious as he listens to tales of how German tech opportunist Fabian Thylmann built up his online empire, but how tough it is for today’s actors. HV If you like this try The Moth Caliphate Terrorist doc Or: Cribs – Isis Edition, in which the New York Times’s terrorism correspondent, Rukmini Callimachi, reports back on her time spent rifling through abandoned Islamic State barracks, leafing through their HR records and diaries to piece together the human face within the inky darkness. Having raised the bar with The Daily, NYT is keen to show us just how cinematic their sound design can get with this Hans Zimmer-level dazzler. GH If you like this try Slow Burn Capital Brexit-style satire This semi-improvised narrative podcast is about the panic and bureaucracy in the UK after a vote to make execution legal has been made. In a Thick of It-style story that’s got more than a touch of Brexit chaos to it, Harry Enfield plays an inept capital punishment minister, and there’s a cameo from newsreader Jon Snow. However, it’s Fresh Meat’s Charlotte Ritchie and Liam Williams (of BBC3’s Pls Like) who steal the show as warring, ineffectual civil servants. HJD If you like this try This Sounds Serious Cocaine &amp; Rhinestones Country tales Tyler Mahan Coe’s history of country music lives up to its glamorously scandalous title, bringing out the backstories of both high-profile figures and lesser-known names. From the reason why Loretta Lynn’s songs were banned and Wynonna Judd’s life story to a three-parter based around those involved in the record Harper Valley PTA, each episode has more sagas than a country song, making it a gripping listen. HV If you like this try Disgraceland The Comedian’s Comedian Comics get in-depth Stuart Goldsmith’s interview podcast sees top billing comedians give insights into how they bring out the laughs, whether it’s Katherine Ryan demonstrating her “benevolent roast” or Shappi Khorsandi pinpointing her need to perform with a rant about her childhood. HV If you like this try The Two Shot Podcast Dear Joan and Jericha Fictional agony aunts Julia Davis and Vicky Pepperdine’s podcast is offensiveness disguised as polite conversation. Playing a pair of seemingly respectable agony aunts, their audience’s questions solicit filthy answers, dressed up as the kind of advice that comes from women in buttoned-up cardigans. From a lustful description of a stepson to a screeching tirade against “geriatric” mothers, it’s perfectly delivered gold that’s hilarious all the way through. HV If you like this try Why Is Your Bottom So Dirty? Dissect Musical academia Host Cole Cuchna recorded his track-by-track albums teardown by night, in his garage, while holding down a full-time job. It’s a feeling that still bleeds into his third season, on Frank Ocean’s Blonde: an uber-nerd, juiced on passion, blasting out genius-level Rap Genius footnotes. GH If you like this try In Sight Out Do the Right Thing Riotous quiz Award-winning moral panel show that asks the question: what would you do in a catastrophe? Led by Danielle Ward and a revolving cast including Sara Pascoe and Nish Kumar, the debate ranges from the righteous to the ridiculous. HG If you like this try Throwing Shade Elis James and John Robins podcast Pub chat in podcast form There’s more to Radio X than Blossoms. This podcast follows a mighty lineage of comic-led shows from the station (Adam and Joe, Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant, Russell Brand) but James and Robins give the setup a tenderness and emotionally unstable slant. Regular features like Humble Brag of the Week sit sweetly next to Robins’s sweaty-palmed obsession with Queen/Zappa. HG If you like this try Elis James’ Feast of Football Gossip Sex and the City for audio Allison Raskin has cooked up a smart soap opera of a podcast centred on all the juicy (scripted) gossip that goes down in a coffee shop. Along with standard news about whose husband’s cheating this week, there’s a hint of something more sinister going on in the US suburb of Golden Acres. Funny, quick-witted and perfect for a commute. HV If you like this try Homecoming Griefcast How to deal with loss Cariad Lloyd’s award-winning podcast about death is touching and, at times, downright hilarious, with guests including Sara Pascoe, Adam Buxton and David Baddiel. The death of Lloyd’s own dad at an early age shapes her sensitive questioning with a knowledge of knowing when it’s OK to make a joke. In Baddiel’s case, dark laughs stem from the absurd fallout of his mum’s affair with a golfing memorabilia salesman. HV If you like this try Made of Human The Guilty Feminist Instersectional panel show It can be pretty difficult to know what constitutes being an upstanding feminist these days, a fact that led Deborah Frances-White to create this much-loved podcast. Covering themes from menstruation and exercise to ethical clothing, she and her guests explore the contradictions and limitations of modern feminism in a way that never feels overly heavy. Plus, there’s a diverse pool of guests; recent interviewees have included FGM activist Leyla Hussein and actor Gemma Arterton. HJD If you like this try Scummy Mummies, Unladylike Hannibal Buress Handsome Rambler Leftfield interviews While its interview format appears traditional upfront, the chats are freestyle, and often scored with whirring synths and drums. His encounter with musician Lizzo brings the improv chaos of The Eric Andre Show to audio, while snagging time with the likes of Tiffany Haddish, Run the Jewels and Chris Rock is impressive, especially since Buress is often very high. HG If you like this try New Year’s Eve With Neil Hamburger Hey, Cool Job! Occupational inspiration With portfolio careers and freelancing ever more du jour, this podcast from US writer Mary HK Choi feels highly relevant. She interviews everyone from a music A&amp;R to a porn star to a paparazzo about the hard graft that’s got them to where they are. HJD If you like this try How I Built This, Wanna Be Hip Hop Saved My Life Romesh Ranganathan’s rap academia A melodramatic title for a comic known for his lethargic delivery, but this podcast drills into the genre’s impact on its guests’ lives, from Loyle Carner to Chali 2na, Doc Brown and star of Asian Provocateur, Shanthi Ranganathan (Romesh’s mum) teasing out coming-of-age memories and present day psychoanalysing. Start with Frankie Boyle’s episode and his conspiracy theory about Biggie and 2Pac. HG If you like this try Questlove Supreme Hit Parade Examining pop Chart analyst and critic Chris Molanphy’s super in-depth, meticulously researched podcast is perfect for the sorts of pop addicts who are always ahead of the charts. From B-sides that deserved better and the mid-80s obsession with the charity single to Madonna’s pivot to electronica, nothing is too big a topic for the host to break down. HJD If you like this try On Shuffle In the Third Person Podcast Laidback celebrity interviews Dry your eyes: there isn’t a new Streets album, but there is a Mike Skinner podcast. He and TONGA collaborator Murkage Dave are the hosts of this interview show, which, to date, has featured Liam Gallagher (who memorably describes fellow parents at the school gates as “nosy cunts”), Alexa Chung, XL boss Richard Russell and SB.TV founder Jamal Edwards. HJD If you like this try Distraction Pieces Podcast with Scroobius Pip Longform Journalism unpacked As any hack who has ever muttered: “Oh just give me the dictaphone, I’ll do it,” slightly out of earshot of a tedious starlet will already know – if you want great quotes, interview journalists. In between the endless stream of New Yorker staff writers we hear from all-time greats such as Gay Talese and Michael Lewis. GH If you like this try Thirty Seconds Or Less Love Island: The Morning After Post-show analysis You know your podcast has hit the big time when it’s not sponsored by Squarespace. This one has Kellogg’s Corn Flakes as its benefactor. Corn Flakes, of course, were originally designed to dampen the sex drive, but don’t tell Arielle Free and Kem Cetinay, who chew through the previous evening’s fumblings on the ITV2 monolith. GH If you like this try Buffering the Vampire Slayer Love + Radio Strange stories The stories at the heart of this intimate, moving podcast are what will keep you coming back for more, from heartbreak to revenge to near-death traumas. Nothing is too niche, either: a recent episode focused on a Texas violin teacher who believed he’d cracked a classical music mystery, while season five highlight A Girl of Ivory is about a man “married” to two plastic dolls. HJD If you like this try Swipe Left Swipe Left! Lovett Or Leave It Political panel Former Obama speechwriter Jon Lovett is a fast-talking bomb of smart one-liners – he’s the kind of man who would stalk the corridors of The West Wing or Veep, correcting everyone along the way. His podcast, from the same stable as quick-witted Pod Save America, offers razor-sharp opinions on Trump’s North Korea summit, Facebook’s influence on politics and Bill Cosby. HV If you like this try Slate’s Trumpcast Meat Body positive introspection Jonathan Zenti isn’t the most prolific podcaster and he admits that nothing will top his first episode, Host’s Fat, in which he talks about how he feels about being overweight. He’s right: it’s one of the most incredible podcasts you’ll hear; full of honesty, raw emotion and an insight into why society has such a problem with people who take up more space in the world. HV If you like this try The Heart My Dad Wrote a Porno Risque book club My Dad Wrote a Porno sounds bizarre on paper, but not as bizarre as the Belinda Blinked series – a set of stilted, cringe-inducing sex books written by host Jamie Morton’s dad. Morton’s reactions – as well as those of co-hosts Alice Levine and James Cooper – are what makes the show, though. And with their current tour taking them to huge venues around the world, you imagine there are probably plenty more Belinda-themed tomes still to come. HJD If you like this try The Worst Idea of All Time, No Such Thing As a Fish The Nod Exploring the US black experience Brittany Luse and Eric Eddings venture down various race-related paths, be it the Wayans brothers flick White Chicks or the 1974 Zaire football team’s World Cup adventure, in a garrulous way that appeals equally to everyone. Case in point: I Want That Purple Stuff, in which the duo delve not into Alice Walker, but how grape-flavoured soft drinks became a staple of African-American culture. GH If you like this try Cosby Unravelled On Shuffle Musical talking points Good music podcasts are hard to come by, not least because you can’t really play music on a podcast for reasons of copyright (boo). Despite this, On Shuffle – from US sport and culture site The Ringer – does a great job at summing up the biggest debates of the minute, from the death of divisive rapper XXXTentacion to whether Kanye West is actually cancelled. HJD If you like this try Hit Parade Pod Save America How the White House works Left-leaning common sense-merchants Jon Lovett, Tommy Vietor and Jon “Not the one from Swingers” Favreau all worked in Barack Obama’s team and now have plenty to get their Trump-baiting teeth into every week. Obama gifted them his last interview as President and now they give a twice-weekly insight into how the White House works and how horrendous the current situation is. HV If you like this try Making Obama Queery with Cameron Esposito Queer Eye for the podcast At a time when queer culture is more mainstream than ever but often commodified and contorted, it’s heartening to hear US standup Esposito make genuine connections with well-known names across the gender and sexuality spectrum, with a smattering of laughs thrown in for good measure. This warm podcast often feels like earwigging on a conversation between two mates, with recent guests including Search Party’s Alia Shawkat, Bad Feminist author Roxane Gay and Drag Race contestant-turned-comedian Trixie Mattel. HJD If you like this try Nancy, RuPaul: What’s the Tee?, Las Culturistas The Recappables TV-flavoured conversation Where once we would have had proper companions to watch TV with, nowadays it’s an altogether more solitary pastime, and one many of us squidge to fit into commutes or even gym sessions. However, chats about telly haven’t disappeared; rather, they now unfold on social media, in comments sections or on a podcast like this, which boasts strands covering Westworld, Billions and Atlanta. There’s also The Rewatchables, its sister show, which is all about the joy of rewatching your favourite films, from Miami Vice to The Big Lebowski via David Fincher’s The Social Network, a film that’s both compelling and now increasingly anachronistic. HJD If you like this try The Wire Stripped, How Did This Get Made? The Reductress Minute Bite-sized feminist satire Joke women’s site The Reductress has long been the place to go for hilariously on-the-nose comic “news” (among its recent hits are Eating Dinner in Bed Transformed Into Self-Care by String Lights and Are You Ovulating or Did You Just Look at a Picture of The Rock Holding His New Baby?). After putting faux-advice podcast Mouth Time on ice last year, they’ve launched The Reductress Minute, a recap of the site’s best stories of the week, plus some all-time classics. HJD If you like this try Guys We Fucked, Call Your Girlfriend Rule of Three A comedy fan forum Created by Joel Morris and Jason Hazeley – the writers behind Philomena Cunk and Ladybird Books for Grown-ups – this celebratory new podcast asks comics to talk about the comedy they love in order to learn something about the maths of making people laugh. Particular highlights include Rufus Jones on Robert De Niro’s Midnight Run, John Finnemore praising the dark delights of Chris Morris’s news satire On the Hour and Danielle Ward dissecting Bottom (not like that). HG If you like this try Sitcom Geeks, Museum of Comedy Sandra Scripted technophobia drama Gimlet’s seven-episode blast is snappy enough to binge in a day and one episode is never enough. Alia Shawkat is Helen, a woman in the middle of a messy divorce who gets a job scripting the answers of a virtual assistant (played by Kristen Wiig). Ethan Hawke is her bothersome manager, who becomes just another problem as Helen’s life begins to unravel. HV If you like this try Rabbits Savage Lovecast Audio agony aunt Dan Savage gives the best love and lust advice around in his distinctly NSFW podcast. Nothing is left uncovered, so if you need to know how to explain your kinky preferences on a dating profile or when to ask if your new partner is trans, Savage is your guide. And yes, the dilemmas he solves are real. HV If you like this try Dear Sugars Short Cuts Short documentaries The Radio 4 show offers “brief encounters, true stories, radio adventures and found sound” and each one is a self-contained gem. Josie Long presents the long-running series packed with observations on themes from sibling rivalry to mortality, and just about everything else in between, so you never know what you’re going to get. HV If you like this try The Truth Song Exploder Sleeve notes Each Song Exploder might be only be around 20 minutes long, but in that time host Hrishikesh Hirway persuades musicians to take the deepest dive into pop songs in a way that makes you crave a listen by the end. If you haven’t already been hooked, start with St Vincent’s New York, Lorde’s Sober and Solange’s Cranes in the Sky. HV If you like this try New York Times’s Popcast Still Processing Identity politics and pop culture The New York Times’ Wesley Morris and Jenna Wortham are two writers of colour who aren’t afraid to get real about race and identity. They present this sharp pop-culture pod, where you can expect to hear about everything from “bad” women on screen to Roseanne’s Ambien-fuelled Twitter meltdown, the rise of queer pop and what whiteness means on screen in 2018. HJD If you like this try Keep It Susan Calman’s Mrs Brightside Comedians on mental health The Scottish standup invites other funny people to discuss their mental health and help remove the stigma that persists. Although subtitled A Cheerful Look at Depression, Calman’s guests have varied challenges; in the opening episode of eight, she sits down with Edinburgh-nominated comic Jordan Brookes, who has pure O, a type of OCD that focuses around inner compulsions rather than outward rituals. Kind, raw, pertinent and funny, this is everything a mental health podcast should be. HJD If you like this try Terrible, Thanks for Asking Switched on Pop The maths of music A fascinating deep-dive into how vast teams of talented people channel their knowledge of melody, diminished chords and syncopated snares into making truly terrible slush pop. Or, if you prefer, a subtle reminder not to dismiss a Despacito or a Twenty One Pilots out of hand. GH If you like this try Henry Rollins’ Henry and Heidi Show Table Manners Food with famous people What could be just another pop star reminiscing about Live Lounges and the album campaign lull has turned into its own enlightening entity. This podcast finds musician Jessie Ware sitting in her kitchen with her rambunctious mum, who makes dinner for a new guest each week, from Ed Sheeran to London mayor Sadiq Khan, the latter of whom broke his Ramadan fast to talk about standing for re-election, nightlife in London, crime and chips. HG If you like this try Homo Sapiens Unpopped Zeitgeist musing The BBC’s pop culture offering gets a millennial spin with this factual-but-fun podcast hosted by journalist Hayley Campbell. Zoning in on the biggest pop culture trends and moments of recent history, from One Direction to Drag Race and, er, Come Dine With Me, she and her contributors offer detailed overviews that never feel overly weighty. HJD If you like this try The High Low The Watch Pop culture explained The Ringer – the website that’s the new home to cult sports writer Bill Simmons – bottles his brand of “lightly worn- heavy IQ” commentary in the same way his old stomping ground Grantland did. Here you can find The Watch, where writers Andy Greenwald and Chris Ryan take the week’s biggest watch/read/listen questions apart, from the Fox-Comcast merger and Black Mirror to Donald Glover’s This Is America video. GH If you like this try Slate’s Culture Gabfest, The Nerdist Where Should We Begin Couples therapy In each 40-45-minute episode, two romantically entwined, often anguished people sit with Esther Perel, Belgian psychotherapist and emotional mastermind, who works through their insecurities. From low libidos to overcoming infidelity, role play and all manners of childhood traumas that might lead to a skewiff love life, the podcast is an essential for nosy or curious types. Season three is set to branch out into family and platonic relationships. HG If you like this try Death, Sex &amp; Money Why Is This Happening? With Chris Hayes The news, explained Slate’s grumble-heavy Trumpcast made heavy weather in 2016. In 2018 the genre it spawned has morphed into a kind of horrified “Aaarghcast”. With a title that recalls Jeff Goldblum turning into The Fly, Chris Hayes explores a question bigger than just the meaning of Trump: just why the entire mass of society, democracy and media seems to be warping and folding beneath us. GH If you like this try Chapo Trap House WTF With Marc Maron Intimate interviews Prolific podcaster Maron pulls in big names, from Barack Obama downwards. His angry preambles are dynamite and he even makes the adverts sound furious. Start with the Jennifer Lawrence episode, in which she out-talks him and is rip-roaring company rather than line-toeing Hollywood ingenue. HV If you like this try The Joe Rogan Experience You Must Remember This Hollywood history This cinematic exploration is hosted by Karina Longworth, a narrator whose voice drips with old-school glamour and powder-room gossip. Marilyn Monroe gets the three-episode treatment and Joan Crawford enjoys six degrees, while there’s a whole string devoted to Charles Manson, with plenty of fresh material. HV If you like this try Hollywood and Crime From The Start to Football Weekly - listen to the Guardian’s own podcasts here
12||America gave me a good immigrant award. Oh, how bittersweetI’m not a loser per se, but the truth is I never win anything. Just this week my dental insurance wrote to tell me I didn’t even win a root canal that my dentist nominated me for. So I’m shocked to realize that this Saturday I will be sashaying along under the great domed ceiling of Federal Hall in downtown Manhattan to collect an award. An “Alexander Hamilton Immigrant Achievement” award for my “outstanding contribution to Lower Manhattan and New York State”. The award is presented by the Lower Manhattan Historical Association, an organization that honors multicultural diversity and celebrates “the dynamic cosmopolitan optimism that defines so much of the American spirit”. Americans handing out awards to immigrants is such a beautiful and important act, I could cry. I could cry about a lot, though. Hot tears of fury bubble up every time I see a wounded Syrian baby on the news and remember that Syrian babies are barred from this country, and those same tears run right down my face when I learn about Marco Antonio Muñoz, a 39-year-old Honduran father who killed himself in a Texan jail the day after his three-year-old son was physically wrenched from his arms by border patrol agents. Every day, there is a new attack on the dignity of immigrants in this country, making this a strange time to be celebrated as one. My friend and fellow comedian Hari Kondabolu says that America hating immigrants is like a body rejecting its own blood. Living here today feels exactly that way, like the auto-immune system meant to protect us has gone berserk and is attacking the healthy parts, becoming more inflamed and sicker and weaker with every assault. I fear that eventually that system will drag our whole self down, but many fight back. On Saturday morning, a 15-minute walk from Federal Hall in Foley Square, the New York Immigration Coalition has planned a march to demand an end to the separation of thousands of immigrant children from their families. I’ll go along and join in the shouting; then I’ll get false lashes put on because without them I tend to look sleepy in photos. I want to get photos taken with my award so I can show off about it on Instagram, naturally, but also to share the message that many Americans really do care for and appreciate immigrants. The US is already a fortress. I first got in to the country on an O1 visa, an artist’s visa, helped hugely by the fact that I’m white, European and well-connected within my industry. Every day I’m grateful for my life here, and I abide by the campsite rule to leave this place as good as, if not better than, I found it. Most immigrants do the latter: we make the country better. We contribute 15% of the national economic output despite being 13% of the population and we actually improve wages and job opportunities for US citizens. When we step off the boat, all boats rise. And despite President Trump’s obsessive attempts to link crime and immigration, the numbers don’t add up. Immigrants commit fewer crimes than people born here. Perhaps that’s because we’re not camping here – this is our home. Immigrants are invested in the US. Often we’ve left a whole other life behind, and all of our futures are meshed together. We do our best to love this country. Having to point all of this out feels quite desperate, and it also feels necessary. I’m tired of pointing out that the Kushners and Millers and Trumps all come from immigrant families. They’ve long since pulled the ladder up behind them, and now stomp on the hands clinging to the walls. Besides, saying that the US is a “nation of immigrants” isn’t quite accurate because it sidesteps the genocide of Native Americans perpetrated by the first Europeans here, and it negates the experience of millions of enslaved Africans who were forced to come here. But that dark past does go some way to explaining the present. The sounds of white supremacy booming from the highest offices in the land, cementing into place our ever more racialized immigration law? Those are not new. Here is what is new, here is what is changing. Minority groups will outnumber non-Hispanic whites in the United States by 2044. No matter how vicious this administration gets, the demographics of this country are shifting, meaning the future cannot be a repeat of the past. So, I am hopeful. On Saturday, I will walk up those steps where George Washington was sworn in as the first president, and go inside where I’ve been invited, and accept this wonderful honor, an honor I am happy to share with any immigrant who wants a part of it. Maeve Higgins is the author of the forthcoming book Maeve in America. Her podcast Maeve in America features immigration stories told by the people who have lived them
24||What do you do with your valuables when you go on holiday?Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper. Where do other people hide their jewellery and other valuables when they go on holiday? In the freezer, hidden in books – has anyone got a failsafe spot? And any other tips on not getting burgled? It happened once before and we don’t want to go through it again. Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions tomoney@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU
23||The highs (and lows) of travelling soloStanding in a fug of heat outside Cairo airport, taxi drivers shouting at me, night falling fast and without a single coherent idea about what I am to do, I stare into space, resisting the urge to turn around and buy a one-way ticket back to Heathrow. I have left England only once before, on a school trip. In my pocket I have £300 and the Nairobi address of a distant relative I’ve never met. This is supposed to be my great African adventure. It doesn’t feel that way. It was 1982 and if anyone had asked me on that night, “What are the pleasures of solo travel?” I might have burst into tears. What I did was take a bedsheet from my backpack, creep to a dusty space under some trees, lie down and hide beneath it, pretending to be asleep. Solo travel, it seemed at that moment, was the worst of all possible worlds. And so it can be. You are vulnerable and isolated, prey to crime, depression and homesickness. For female travellers there are extra challenges and dangers. There’s no one to watch your bag, or your back, no one to take the strain, not for a moment; and there’s never anyone to remind you why you came, remind you of the dreams that inspired the trip. Several times at the start of my first solo trip, I found myself pulling that sheet over my head, either literally or metaphorically. But … Some weeks later, having survived my Cairo ordeal, I got off a truck in the Sudanese region of Kordofan. The town – I can’t even remember its name – proved to be a village. There was no hotel, but there was a secondary school. There I found a lone teacher – Muhammed, I later learned – packing his bags for the holidays. Two bicycles were parked inside the staff room. I introduced myself and asked if he knew of anywhere I could stay while waiting for the next truck south. He looked me up and down. “There will be no more trucks for a few days. Can you ride a bike?” I nodded. “Can you eat our food? Drink water from holes in the ground?” I nodded, perhaps less confidently. “Then you can come with me to my village.” He gestured to the bikes. Twenty-four hours later I was with the Baggara tribe, sleeping on a palm mat in a grass shelter and drinking the greenish water that seeped into dry river courses. For about a week I experienced a way of life that neither I nor those around me realised was soon to disappear: a life without electricity, running water, communications, plastic, indeed almost anything from the outside world apart from two Chinese-made bicycles. It was, and remains, one of the most remarkable episodes of my life and it happened because I was alone. There were only two bikes. That is when it works. You are forced into contact with people. Villains are soon spotted, trustworthy individuals embraced. You ask questions and opportunities come your way. You make decisions and your route changes drastically, without anyone to argue against. You draw pictures and learn languages. The sense of freedom that comes, after a time, is addictive, even euphoric. At least, I would say it will come, if you resist the lure of the internet and the phone, the modern siren voices to wreck the solo traveller’s odyssey. I would not launch upon a first solo trip lightly: do some short practice runs close to home. When I was 16, I hitchhiked to Cornwall with a friend, and followed up with some solitary multi-day treks through the Peak District and Lakes. I wish I’d done a short European trip too, but I was impatient. And don’t discount group trips, where you can share common interests with strangers. A friend’s daughter, embarking on a trip to Thailand, recently asked my advice. I said, watch out for people spiking drinks, and take things slowly. The most vulnerable moments are when you arrive, so prepare for that. Find a base, among people you trust, and stick around for a while. If solo travel works out and you find your feet, I recommend a hard-nosed attitude to communications. You emerge at the other end, perhaps a little scorched by homesickness and hardship, but able to survive and make your way through almost any tricky circumstances. And when you find a friend, you never forget them. Like Muhammed. We rode all over his area, meeting other tribes who were passing through. There was a memorable breakfast with the Ham’r camel-herding tribe. There was an interview with a chief. One evening a man came galloping over to the hut on a fine horse to deliver the news that a souk truck was waiting for me by the three baobab trees. I hadn’t even understood that Muhammed was taking care of all this. Next morning he and I rode for two hours through a delicate pinkish sunrise and I climbed aboard a truck laden with sacks of onions. I never saw him again, but we exchanged letters for a few years. Since then I have travelled alone a great deal. The lows are still lower, yet the highs are higher. It remains more intense, more extreme, and the experience is always much richer. • SoloTravelerWorld.com and Facebook community Solo Travel Society are good resources for lone travellers Browse The Guardian’s selection of self-guided and escorted holidays designed for solo travellers on the Guardian Holidays website
14||Novel recipes: Midsummer cake from I Capture the Castle by Dodie SmithWe burnt the salt and the herbs (in America it is correct to drop the h in herbs - it does sound odd) and shared the cake with Héloïse; Simon only had a very small piece, because he was full of dinner. I Capture the Castle, Dodie Smith --- This week was Midsummer, a celebration of the summer solstice: the longest day of the year. Here in the Cotswolds, we watched the sun slowly descend, in glorious shades of orange and red, then finally slip over the horizon at about 11pm. I’ve not, in any of the years I lived in London, been as aware of English seasons as I am now. Perhaps it’s summer’s arrival this year has been very obvious, whether it is the pollen driving me slowly insane, or the heatwave that makes working outside impossible. But I think it’s more likely that I am living surrounded by neighbours who bring a small bowl of redcurrants straight from the bush in their garden. That I can point out the budding apple blossom, or walk off up to the Common to collect elderflowers. That the tree I duck under on my running route is now covered with glorious yellow flowers. That I can see the new produce in our local farmer’s market each week; I’ve kept a list of the food as it appears, already making plans for next year’s bounty. I can see, with astounding clarity, the seasons shift and change. Without wanting to wish away the months of asparagus, broad beans and strawberries, passing the midpoint of the year also reminds me that we’re heading into autumn, my favourite season. By the time it arrives, I will have finished drafting my next book, and this feels worthy of acknowledgement (panic, obviously), and a small personal celebration. I turned, as I so often do at this time of year, to my favourite book: I Capture the Castle. Though I have featured it in this column before, I felt compelled to include it one final time. This week turned out to be perfect. Towards the end of the book, with her beloved sister Rose away in London, Cassandra celebrates Midsummer alone. She carries out long-standing family rituals: making a garland of flowers, burning salt and herbs, eating a ceremonial cake, lighting a bonfire, and then - slightly more unexpectedly - a snog with her sister’s fiancé, Simon, who arrives as she is dancing around the flames. This is a version of the cake, a riff on a Swedish Midsommar recipe that Cassandra, suddenly able to buy groceries again, after years of poverty, could have pulled together. This is my final Novel recipes column for the Guardian. It’s been a joy to write over the past three years - thank you for reading it, sharing it and cooking from it. If you’d like to keep in touch, about my next book, upcoming events, or my other writing, keep an eye on my website: The Little Library Cafe. Cassandra’s Midsummer cake Serves 10 Ingredients Cake 6 eggs 225g golden caster sugar 3tbsp elderflower cordial 190g plain flour Cream 400ml double cream 2tbsp elderflower cordial And 400g strawberries Thyme, mint, edible flowers (optional) Equipment Two mixing bowls Electric whisk (or a whisk and good arm muscles) Three 20cm sandwich tins Greaseproof paper Spatula 1. Heat the oven to 160C (fan). Separate the eggs and put the yolks in one mixing bowl, and the whites in the other. Add the sugar and cordial to the yolks, and whisk until pale and smooth. Beat in the flour. 2. Beat the egg whites to stiff peaks. Fold a third into the yolks to loosen the batter. Fold in the other two thirds. Divide the batter between three well greased and lined sandwich tins (you can do this in batches if you don’t have three tins). 3. Transfer to the oven for 20 minutes, until the cakes are risen, golden and coming away from the sides of the tins. Bring the cakes out of the oven, cool for five minutes in their tins, and then completely on a wire rack. 4. Pour the cream and elderflower into a clean bowl, and beat by hand to soft, billowy peaks. Go slowly towards the end, as it’s so easy to over mix and for the cream to split (especially in summer). 5. Finally, layer up the cake. Hull all the strawberries, saving a handful of the prettiest ones for the top and slice the larger ones into pieces. Spread a third of the cream onto one of the cakes. Top with strawberries, and then place another cake on top. Spread with another third of the cream, then more strawberries. Place the final cake on top, then top with the cream, and decorate with strawberries, thyme, mint, and edible flowers. Store in the fridge until you’re ready to eat it. Serve generous slices.
2||A letter to… my friend with benefitsI’ve just seen you again after about 10 years, three marriages and four children between us, and it feels as if nothing has changed. But of course it has. We’re in our 40s now; both older, a bit fatter (well, me, certainly), a bit more jaded. Those heady days of our 20s are well and truly behind us. Gone are the days of no responsibility – and even this lunch date had to be planned well in advance. We’ve had two children each, you’ve had two wives – both of whom I still felt a pang of jealously towards, even though officially you were never mine to begin with. Keeping in touch has been easier since Facebook has allowed me a window into your life. I’ve seen the wedding pictures, seen the children, seen your happiness – happiness with a woman who wasn’t me. It hasn’t always been the easiest thing, despite our mutually agreeable arrangement. Do millennials still have “friends with benefits”? Those friends with whom you can enjoy the excitement of sex and the beauty of friendship without the anguish of missed phone calls and the risk of being dumped? We’ve had years of this ever-so-sophisticated arrangement where we would regularly congratulate ourselves on avoiding the complications of relationships, feelings, love even. But I do love you. I loved you when we started our arrangement. I loved you when you used to bring home girlfriends and I and our other housemate would put things in her shoes (yes, immature, I know). I loved you when you left for another city to work and I cried for days. I loved you even when you danced at my wedding. And I loved you when I heard about your wedding. I once told someone about our relationship, and they asked how long we’d been together. I remember the look on her face when I said we’d never been together, never been on a date, never sent each other Valentine’s cards. That I had, however, done things with you I’d never done with my husband. Experts say that, if you’re lucky, you fall in love only three times in your life. I broke the rules by allowing you to be one of them. You weren’t meant to be about that. You were supposed to be a delicious anecdote at a dinner party, a giggle with girlfriends, a drunken, “Do you remember when…” You weren’t supposed to be the one that got away. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.
25||The Bridge series finale review – goodbye Saga Norén. God we'll miss youThey don’t kill her! Her being Saga Norén, of course, and they being lots of people, including Susanne, AKA Steph, and Brian, AKA Kevin. And most of all writer Hans Rosenfeldt, who, having created one of television’s most enigmatic, alluring characters, could so easily have killed her off. Rosenfeldt has hardly been shy of killing over the four series of The Bridge (BBC2). Saga’s death would have seemed a natural way to go out, a way to avoid uncharacteristic sentimentality, and scotch any rumours of reincarnations. I was prepared for it, expecting it even. Instead … well, we’ll come to that. It’s been a stormy season, which started with a bang. Or rather, the sick thud of stone to head. (Do your nightmares persist, too?) Then it got lost in the Nordic murk, where a supershoal of red herrings lurked, then rolled themselves up, skewered and pickled themselves in a bloody act of self-loathing rollmop revenge. A massive late-breaking flashback was required, to see or make sense of anything. And a sizeable ask: that someone (and then someone else) would do vengeance on such a grand and elaborate scale. But it came back together, not just dramatically, but so movingly with Henrik’s reunion with his daughter Astrid. She can’t be taken away again can she, at the very end? I’m not sure I, let alone Henrik, could take that. No, because Saga is such a legend. For detailed analysis of the finale see Graeme Virtue’s brilliant episode recap. Briefly, more shots are fired; tears are shed; sex is had (in Saga’s perfunctory way); then a more meaningful kiss; resolution; and the realisation, for Saga, that it was guilt that has been driving her. So, she moves in with Henrik and Astrid to laugh and eat duck happily ever after. Don’t be daft, that would have been wrong. No, the end is perfect, definitive and beautiful. It avoids schmaltz and death, and features the three stars who have been there from the very beginning. One is human, the creation of Rosenfeldt; the others are works of engineering, mechanical and structural. Saga is off, on a voyage of self-discovery. She steps into her mustard coloured vintage Porsche, and drives away, across the Øresund Bridge. She stops – not to throw herself off, to join her sister, but to throw her badge into the flow. Now, no longer “Saga Norén Länskrim Malmö” when she answers the phone, she is just Saga Norén. God I’m going to miss her, and The Bridge.
5||New Zealand: majority of callers to new sexual harm helpline are teenage girlsA nationwide sexual harm helpline in New Zealand has received more than 1,200 phone calls in its first month of operation; the majority of them teenage girls aged 13-19. Safe to talk He pai ki te korero offers 24-hour free counselling via telephone, text message, web chat or email, having been launched by the ministry of social development on 1 June in the wake of the #metoo movement. Of those who got in touch with Safe in June, 83% were female and 17% male. The age groups of those most frequently in contact were teenagers, followed by callers in the 40-44 age bracket. Māori make up 27% of callers, and the majority of reports to the service were related to historical cases of sexual harm of a “significant” nature; meaning abuse or rape. Safe had received a small amount of communication relating to pornography or inappropriate web behaviours. “The majority of people still contact us over the phone, but we also get really high contact on web chats as well, then text, then email is the least popular method of reaching out,” said Dylan Norton, development manager for mental health and addictions at the National Telehealth Service, which operates Safe. “Where we identify there is immediate, imminent harm occurring, that’s when we have processes where we may have to ‘break glass’ [break confidentiality] to keep that person safe. If there was a situation where a young person was being raped, then we’d be telling someone such as the police to intervene if we didn’t have any other avenues.” Phone calls to the hotline are not recorded, said Norton, but web chats, texts and emails are. According to statistics from the ministry of health, one is three girls in New Zealand will experience an unwanted sexual experience by age 16, and one in seven boys. One in five adult women report an experience of sexual assault, and the incidents of reported sexual violence are twice as high for Māori women and girls than Pakeha [European]. Statistically, young people aged 16-24 are at the highest risk of sexual violence in the country, which has one of the highest rates of sexual abuse in the OECD. Kyla Rayner, agency manager at Wellington Rape Crisis, said Safe was a valuable resource for people who were not yet ready to seek face-to-face help, or where it was impossible to access specialised services if living in remote or rural areas. “This is a large volume of calls and we are not surprised, given the prevalence of sexual violence in New Zealand along with the current climate, [and] with the impact of the #metoo movement,” said Rayner. “The large volume of calls through Safe to talk also has a direct impact on local specialist services ... we are seeing high demand for services across the sector.” Both Rayner and Norton said they expected the number of calls to the hotline to increase, and hoped demographic groups that were far less likely to seek help, such as men and boys, would find the helpline an easier option for seeking assistance.
2||Stephen Collins on heatwaves – cartoon
2||A journalist who’s also a voyeur? What could be more natural?I love to rearrange my apartment on a whim, no matter the time of day (my downstairs neighbours love me). I am the queen of DIY projects: I will sew, spray paint, assemble and mount with glee and a glue gun. If I had not heeded the siren call of journalism, I would have gone for interior design, forcing my will on the design-challenged. I read interiors magazines and try to recreate budget versions of the showcased homes. I am basically a voyeur, peering into strangers’ homes and taking notes. So imagine my joy when I visited Chicago recently, and discovered precisely the thing to feed my obsession. When I asked for recommendations, my friend Eleanor’s response was cryptic. “Are you a fan of miniature things?” she asked, and the answer was a resounding yes. So that’s how I ended up spending a sunny afternoon in the basement of the Art Institute of Chicago, walking through the Thorne Miniature Rooms and peering into tiny replicas of living spaces from the last few hundred years. Reader, I almost floated with joy. Have you ever wondered, for example, what an entrance hall in 1835 Tennessee might have looked like? How about a Massachusetts bedroom circa 1801? (The answer in both cases is pretty flippin’ grand.) Added to the thrill of observing such wonders was the very specific – and infectious – joy of small things. More than once, I would glance up from, say, an English rotunda (c 1810-20) to find another adult peering wide-eyed into a French bedroom from the Louis XV period, before sharing a smile of childlike awe. Very few things elicit such pure feelings. Upstairs in the modern art wing, a few Picassos waited. I let them wait. Tiny rooms come first.
25||Saturday’s best TV: The NHS: To Provide All People; Eric Clapton: Life in 12 BarsThe NHS: To Provide All People 8pm, BBC Two Charting a day in the life of a Welsh hospital, a cast including Michael Sheen, Eve Myles and Sian Phillips perform Owen Sheers’s moving poem, based on interviews with NHS staff, to mark the 70th anniversary of Bevan’s baby. Words and images relay the near-miracle of its stormy birth and the joy and pain experienced thereafter. “The last thing I remember was a hand,” intones Myles, “a human anchor, a compassionate tether, as I slipped away into a chemical night.” Beautiful. Ali Catterall Blind Date 6pm, Channel 5 Having now firmly bedded in, Paul O’Grady’s revival of the ITV warhorse has begun to experiment with the format: last week featured a mother and son each selecting partners. As well as hearing how that double date went, O’Grady welcomes two new lovelorn hopefuls to the gauntlet of innuendo. Graeme Virtue Earth’s Greatest Spectacles 7pm, BBC Four More natural loveliness in this series of admirably gratuitous nature porn. This week, the astonishing transformation that takes place every autumn in New England when the leaves mutate from predictable summer green to a spectacular variety of reds, oranges and yellows. Phil Harrison Eric Clapton: Life in 12 Bars 9pm, BBC Two Comprehensive biography of the guitar hero, covering a career that would veer from tumultuous to tragic. This is no airbrushed portrait: Clapton’s worst addiction-fuelled excesses receive due attention, along with his subsequent determination to go clean and reinvigorate both his career and his reputation. Mark Gibbings-Jones Hidden 9pm, BBC Four Dylan Harris has Megan held captive. Will PCs Mari James and Ryan Davies realise what’s occurring when they pay a routine visit to ask questions about Mali Pryce? A bleak psychological thriller by any estimation, but hugely compelling thanks to the surefooted plotting and strong performances. Jonathan Wright Love Island: The Weekly Hot List 9pm, ITV2 Between Adam’s toxic behaviour, Samira’s struggles and Dr Alex having to explain what euthanasia was to Ellie (before she euthanised their relationship), it’s been an eventful series. This companion show looks back on the events of the past week, so expect plenty of screen time for the recent dumpees. Hannah J Davies Film choice Green Room, 10.45pm, Film4 Jeremy Saulnier’s follow-up to Blue Ruin is another laconically vicious exercise, this time bloodily working over the tropes of the siege movie. It has punk band the Ain’t Rights holed up in the basement of an Oregon roadhouse, beset by Patrick Stewart’s gang of neo-Nazis in a queasily suspenseful horror-thriller. Paul Howlett Live sport One-Day Cup Cricket: Kent v Hampshire The final from Lord’s. 10.30am, Sky Sports Main Event World Cup Football The knockout stages get under way. Uruguay meet Portugal in the later game. 2.30pm, 6.30pm, ITV/BBC One Athletics: Diamond League The seventh event of the season from Charlety Stadium, Paris. 7pm, Eurosport 1
6||Capital Gazette: US mass shooters and their history of violence towards womenA 38-year-old gunman shot through a sleepy newsroom’s glass door and kept unloading. He killed five people – four journalists and an advertising saleswoman. Two more were injured, and many more will be mentally scarred. This week’s attack on the newspaper, the Capital Gazette, comes at a time when threats against American journalists are rising. But threats, harassment and stalking behavior from the shooter, Jarrod Ramos, started years before – with a female high school classmate. The Maryland woman told the Capital Gazette in 2011 that she had answered Ramos’s messages, just “being friendly”, but soon realized the situation was “turning into something that gave me a bad feeling in the pit of my stomach”. “He seems to think there’s some sort of relationship here that does not exist,” she told the paper. “I tried to slowly back away from it, and he just started getting angry and vulgar to the point I had to tell him to stop.” He harassed her for more than a year. According to research from the gun control group Everytown for Gun Safety, FBI data on mass shootings from 2009 to 2016 showed that in 54% of the cases, the attacker killed an intimate partner, like a spouse or former spouse, or another family member, in the violence. Examples are easy to find. The Sandy Hook shooter, who killed 26 people at the Connecticut elementary school, also killed his mother. A Texas man targeted his in-law’s church, where he killed 26 people and wounded 20 more. Another Texas man killed his estranged wife and seven other people at a party. Other mass shooters don’t meet this strict definition – killing an intimate partner in an act of mass violence – but still appear to have previously had deeply problematic or abusive relationships with women. Like the Capital Gazette shooter, who harassed a female classmate he had not seen in years, the Virginia Tech shooter who killed 32 people also allegedly stalked two female classmates. The Pulse nightclub shooter allegedly beat, raped and controlled his wife, though she was not harmed the night he killed 49 people. The shooter who targeted a Parkland, Florida, high school allegedly abused his ex-girlfriend, before he killed 17 people. For Kate Ranta, who was stalked and harassed by her ex-husband for years, the signs are all too real. Her ex-husband was, “vandalizing my car, breaking into my home, showing all types of escalating behaviors, but I could never do anything about it.” When, on one November day in 2012, she called police to report her car tire was slashed, she told them: “He’s going to have to kill me before you people do anything about it.” “Twenty minutes later he came shooting,” Ranta said. She and her father were each shot twice. Her son, who was four-years-old at the time, nearly watched her die. She has since physically recovered, and her ex-husband was sentenced to 60 years in prison for attempted murder. However, she now suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder, has a bullet wound scar above her left breast, and lost a knuckle when she was shot through the hand. “These guys get like a slap on the wrist and get pleaded down to a misdemeanor,” Ranta said. “It’s infuriating, as a survivor of this kind of violence to have to see this happen time and time again.” Two newly passed laws in Maryland, still yet to go into effect, may have made it more difficult for the Capital Gazette shooter to obtain a weapon. One law, called a “red flag” law, may have allowed law enforcement or a family member to petition a court to temporarily restrict a person’s access to guns if they felt that person was a threat to themselves or others. However, a criminal background check is only required in Maryland for handguns. That requirement does not extend to “long guns”, such as the shotgun the shooter used. Further, because the shooter was only convicted of misdemeanor harassment – a crime not related to domestic violence – it is unlikely he would have been prohibited from owning a gun. “They talk a lot about taking firearms away from mentally ill, and really evidence shows mentally ill aren’t more violent than others,” said Lawrence Gostin, a law professor at Georgetown University and an expert in domestic violence. “It tends to be a red herring.” “But what is not a red herring, is individuals who have engaged in stalking behavior, or actual violence, or threatening behavior,” he said. “That is the single best predictor of future violence, and women in particular are scared by it.”
12||You can’t judge art on the basis of who reviews itSeventeen years since I started doing it for a living, I’ve finally been told which films I’m allowed to write about. Sliding Doors? Yes! If you’re a middle-class white woman who lives in London, that’s legitimate subject matter. Its heroine is a media type. I too take the tube – though a parallel universe doesn’t usually pop up if I miss the Piccadilly line. Happy-Go-Lucky? Just about: Sally Hawkins plays a teacher – uh-oh – but at least I’m also learning to drive. Bridget Jones? Not on your nelly. I don’t keep a diary. I don’t like chardonnay. I’ve never even slept with Hugh Grant. Now I know my limits, I shall stick strictly to movies which directly intersect with my own experience. So no more mafia masterpieces, or anything in a foreign language, or which involves war, aliens, gay people, a time before 1979, or cartoon jellyfish. The only thing I will see on screen is myself refracted back, for it is the veracity of this alone that I am in a position to judge. The people who belatedly told me this – mostly, as it happens, also white, middle-class women – were those who agreed with the stars of Ocean’s 8 that their film would have met with better reviews had the proportion of female critics been higher. They echoed the actor Brie Larson, who the previous day declared she didn’t care what a “40-year-old white dude” thought of Ava DuVernay’s little-loved fantasy A Wrinkle in Time as, by definition, he wouldn’t get it. Earlier this week, Jessica Chastain echoed Larson’s call for critics to reflect a diverse society, as did Baltasar Kormákur, director of a new movie about a heroic lady sailor – which has, in fact, had warm write-ups, including from our male writer. Earlier this month, a survey revealed 80% of US critics are men and 82% are white. Those are bad stats. Evidently there’s an obstacle somewhere along the line that means certain people tend not to enter a certain profession. But clamping down on the scope of that profession is a rum way to address it – as well as being patronising, illogical and dodgy. All feedback is void, runs the rationale, unless you’re either the target market for a film or vaguely resemble the people in it (there’s some confusion over which). It sanctions the silencing of people by dint of their age, ethnicity and gender. This is rarely a good look. So, Finnish pensioners must be muzzled as they exit Avengers: Infinity War, even if they enjoyed it. Should my son see The Little Mermaid, I’ll be sure to shut him up if he looks like he might try to discuss it. Women like films about women who are like them, and black people like films about black people. Hooray for the pigeonhole! And yet the apparently wildly racist members of the Academy awarded 12 Years a Slave and Moonlight their top prize. Reviewers raved about them too, somehow managing to see beyond their own skin, while the cinema-going public proved sadly less imaginative – for best picture Oscar-winners, neither film made a lot of money in the US. The best-reviewed movies there last year were Lady Bird, Get Out, Coco, The Big Sick, Dunkirk and Wonder Woman – a selection almost impeccably unrepresentative of the people writing the reviews. The debate about the intersectionality of film critics has become a hectoring convention of people having their cake and eating it. The muddle is troubling. How does an inclusivity mission sit with telling someone without ovaries to keep mum about Mamma Mia!? The most famous film critic of all time – the New Yorker’s Pauline Kael – rarely gets a namecheck. Two of the most respected reviewers in the US at the moment happen to be the LA Times’s Justin Chang (35, Chinese American) and the New York Times’s Manohla Dargis (57, female). How do you square the insistence that there are exciting and important women’s stories overdue for the telling with remaking Ghostbusters? You can’t just blame the studios. Their primary job is to make money, and if that means jumping on bandwagons and yoking themselves to brand awareness, so be it. The fact remains that punters showed up: despite the backlash and poor reviews, Ghostbusters took $230m worldwide. Meanwhile, they conspicuously failed to turn out for other 2016 releases that could perhaps lay greater claim to being essential female narratives (as well as better movies): films such as Queen of Katwe ($10m) and Toni Erdmann ($12m), 20th Century Women ($7m) and Things to Come ($6m), Maggie’s Plan ($5m) and American Honey ($2m), Certain Women ($2m) and The Fits ($170,000). Yet as female-fronted spin-offs go, Ghostbusters still felt more organic than Ocean’s 8 ($177m so far), whose psychological weirdness can only really be explained by the fact that, for better or worse, it is unusual for eight women to club together and commit grand larceny. Perhaps there is something else going on here too: a diminishment in the value we place on whether something is actually any good, rather than on whether we just hope it’s good, as that would be handy. The basic quality of something, be it a movie or a review of it, has become, if not quite redundant, then certainly something skirted around. Considerations of script, performance, direction, taste, plausibility and originality must be managed against those of intention, politics and climate. Asking if certain films are actually any cop can seem in itself impudent, perhaps renewing an offence tackled in the film. The standing ovation that erupted at the premiere of Nate Parker’s The Birth of a Nation at the height of #OscarsSoWhite fever in 2016 demonstrates how appetite can trump sense. The film was terrible, but people only clocked that a few months later, when Parker’s involvement in a sexual assault case came to light. Had it not, this ghastly turkey would probably have been for ever lauded. When it comes to culture, objectivity has become an increasingly dirty concept. And the imputation is therefore that the endeavours of anyone who has dedicated their professional life to judging things have been at best fruitless, at worst fraudulent. Yet anyone who has seen a film, eaten a sandwich, sat on a chair, or engaged with anything for which a quality benchmark exists, must know that sacrificing standards does no one any favours. Not the person who’s given up time and money to see the movie, the film-makers making genuinely good movies, the journalists trying to write good reviews, or the readers trying to make head or tail of them. One thing I like about cinema is that it gives me a break from my own parochialism: my stupid face, my petty concerns. I’d thought one of the points of art was to offer fresh perspectives. Happy-Go-Lucky is a fine film. I’d happily give it a repeat viewing. But if I knew I would be forced to watch it and variations on it for all eternity, I think I’d have opted for a different job. • Catherine Shoard is the Guardian’s film editor
12||Conviviality, cricket and Yorkshire sun, but then a shadow fallsOn four mornings in Scarborough this week, somewhere between the hours of 10 and 11, a certain kind of man could be seen walking north from the town centre through streets that had seen better times – perhaps the men had too. Some of them walked singly and others in groups, and sometimes they walked with women who were probably their loyal wives. Panama hats were prominent – if not the real thing, then lookalikes made of straw or cotton, and decorated with bands of striped silk. A generous observer would have put the average age of these men – us, that is – at 65; certainly, the only turnstile with a queue was the one for concessions, £10 rather than £16. “Full-price tickets this way!” a steward shouted encouragingly, as if he were offering a fast track through airport security, but at the North Marine Road cricket ground there weren’t many takers. We were there to watch Yorkshire play Surrey. Scarborough is what’s called an “outground” of the Yorkshire club, the venue for an occasional excursion from its headquarters at Headingley in Leeds, the last survivor of a tradition that for a hundred years after the club was founded, in 1863, took it to pitches in places such as Hull, Huddersfield, Sheffield and Harrogate – the purpose being, pre-television, to give every part of England’s largest county the chance to see the team play. Outgrounds exist elsewhere: Surrey swapped the Oval for Guildford last week, and Lancashire will leave Old Trafford for Southport in late August. But Scarborough, my friend and companion, David, said, was rather special. Yorkshire had been coming here since 1878 – and it was, well, Scarborough, the most topographically appealing of the big English seaside resorts, with its two bays, its cliffs, its spa, its busy little harbour and its castle on the headland. Its rivals – Whitley Bay, Blackpool, Skegness, Great Yarmouth – come nowhere near it in terms of landscape; in fact, they are flat strangers to that word. With Scarborough, generations of Yorkshire children obtained their first, and sometimes last, idea of heaven. This week the golden sands of my friend’s childhood stretched into an unusually blue North Sea. Inside the ground on Monday, the 4,000 spectators began to bake, refreshed occasionally by a plastic beaker of beer, or when a lick of sea breeze, a zephyr, crept in over the wall from the North Bay. I’ve been to a few cricket matches, and yet I know very little about cricket. What strikes me is the skill that’s required of the people who watch it, who know the instant they have to stop talking to their neighbour and look across the field just in time to see the ball leave the bowler’s hand in the direction of the batsman, and then to stay focused on the result – hits, misses, runs, catches and so on – until this vital little sequence comes to an end and the conversation can be resumed. For instance: “You see, after his wife died, they were very helpful. They got him that house … [pause, click of bat on ball, unrewarded cry of “Catch it!”] … somewhere up Shipley way, and he’s been living there with the lady from Wetherspoon’s ever since.” Some people, I noticed, didn’t break off their talk but carried it right on through the action, so the ground was never entirely free of a low hubbub of conversation. The game itself seemed almost incidental. A young couple in the benches in front of us read their books. If restive, you could take a stroll to the tea room (a lovely little building with “TEA ROOM” painted on its slate roof) or to the bar and the stalls that sold souvenirs, burgers and secondhand books. An ice-cream van was parked across the field. Behind us stood a mobile version of Yorkshire’s cricket museum, where displays told the story of Lord Hawke, who captained Yorkshire for 27 years and transformed it from a team famously described as “10 drunks and a parson” into the most successful county team in England. (If Yorkshire chauvinism is oppressive, which it can be, then the Old Etonian Hawke, 1860-1938, has to take his share of the blame.) And yet people slyly, almost secretly, were giving the play their attention. Their eyes tracked the course of the ball when my eyes couldn’t, and they applauded whenever an opportunity came their way: to greet a fine stroke or a mean over, or a catch, or when an even half-successful batsman returned to the pavilion, or when another scored 50, or the total runs on the scoreboard reached a certain figure. And they clapped both sides – though more, naturally, for Yorkshire than for Surrey. Football often looks like a game designed to release anger in its followers. Cricket that day looked the opposite – like a game conceived to release warmth, a game born of sunshine rather than frost. The next morning I went to a gentlemen’s outfitters, Streffords in Huntriss Row (“also at 19 Saturday Market, Beverley,” said a sign above the window) and bought their finest panama. The shop has been in the same family for three generations, the man who sold it to me said, and arrived in Scarborough after the Luftwaffe had bombed its original location in Hull. I imagined a lot of Scarborough had been like this once: dignified, a little proper, catering for worsted mill managers and wool merchants who arrived with their families on seaside expresses from Harrogate. Today, the grandeur is sparser. Just across the street from Streffords, the magnificently ornamented Conservative Club has fallen into ruin, while the Grand Hotel, which looks as thought it was built to house a French government in exile, has seagulls nesting under its eaves and an unspeakably sad interior. Money is everywhere a problem. Bakeries in Scarborough sell sausage rolls at £1 for four and many restaurants don’t open on Mondays and Tuesdays. Formerly useful shops now sell “collectables”; in one window an old hand grenade had a price tag of £42. Yorkshire were all out before lunch on Tuesday and then began to bowl. The crowd was as pleasant as ever. A young woman in a white summer dress who sat near us made a beautiful arrangement of a scotch egg and pickled gherkins on her plate and then shared cherries and cheese and biscuits with her friend. Shouts of encouragement for the bowlers came from the Yorkshire fielders. “Come on, Bres! Come on, Bresy Lad,” as Tim Bresnan ran into bowl; followed by, “Oh yes, Bres! Oh lovely, Bresy Lad’ if the ball was well directed. The sea fret arrived in the afternoon. At first it was comic. “Fog stops play” must be a rare event. But then it really did begin to stop play. The mist would roll in and play would be halted until it rolled out again. My friend counted nine interruptions in all, until the umpires decided enough was enough and ended the day early. A panama in a chill mist looks like headwear designed for the wrong country. The sun returned on Wednesday and Surrey won easily on Thursday, but by that time another story had cast a shadow over the game. Surrey complained that their promising young all-rounder, the 20-year-old Ryan Patel, had been subjected to racial abuse. The England and Wales Cricket Board said it was aware of the allegation and working with the two counties to establish the facts. As it happens, Patel spent part of the match fielding only a few yards from where we sat, and there, with one foot on the boundary rope between balls, had friendly exchanges with a few young men in the crowd. I can’t think that they were abusive – Patel was smiling – but that was 10 minutes out of four days, in front of an audience that day by day changed its composition and its placement. One voice in the crowd, one ugly word: the excursion lost a little of its innocent sunshine. • Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist
26||From abortion to affirmative action, how Trump's supreme court pick could change AmericaDonald Trump is considering which of his conservative picks for the supreme court he will to nominate to take the seat vacated by Justice Anthony Kennedy this week. Whoever is chosen, their appointment, if approved, could upend legal precedent on key issues where Kennedy, arguably a moderate conservative, had been counted as a crucial swing vote. Abortion After Kennedy’s retirement, perhaps of greatest concern for the left is the question mark that now hovers over Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 supreme court case that recognized a woman’s constitutional right to an abortion. During a pivotal reconsideration of the rights secured by Roe v Wade in 1992, Kennedy upset the anti-abortion movement by casting the crucial vote to uphold a woman’s right to choose. He defended it again 2006. Trump’s shortlist has more conservative legal minds, many of whom have been open about their anti-choice views. William Pryor, an appeals judge on the 11th circuit, has previously called Roe v Wade the “worst abomination in the history of constitutional law”. Affirmative action Kennedy has continued to evolve on affirmative action, which advances members of groups known to have experienced discrimination. Kennedy cast the fifth vote in the 2007 supreme court decision against Seattle and Louisville plans to use race to account for diversity and integration in schools. In 2016, however, Kennedy’s vote proved pivotal when the court upheld the University of Texas’s affirmative action programs, which used race as one of its admissions factors. Trump’s justice department has sided with a group suing Harvard for allegedly discriminatory admissions process, which might signal the sort of perspective on affirmative action he could expect his nominee to hold. LGBT rights Kennedy might be best known for penning the majority opinion in Lawrence v Texas in 2003, which argued for respect for the private lives of a gay couple and subsequently all couples, same-sex or not. He followed that up with writing the majority opinion of the court in Obergefell v Hodges providing the legal basis for same-sex marriage. But in 2000, Kennedy cast his vote upholding the right of Boy Scouts of America to deny scoutmastership to gay men, and also penned the opinion in the more recent Masterpiece Cakeshop case, which affirmed the right of the baker to refuse to bake a cake for a gay couple. Observers expect Trump’s nominee to trade in Kennedy’s uncertainty for a more steadfast position against LGBT rights. The current fifth circuit court judge and former Texas supreme court judge Don Willett, who is on the shortlist, mocked same-sex marriage in a tweet that said: “I could support recognizing a constitutional right to marry bacon.” Civil rights and national security On two separate occasions, Kennedy demonstrated his penchant for retaining the writ of habeas corpus, the right for a person in detention to challenge that detention if they deem it to be unlawful. In the case of Rasul v Bush he concurred with the majority that Congress should ensure that Guantánamo prisoners can petition for habeas corpus. And while America was deep in the throes of its new war on terror amid a changing landscape on national security law, Kennedy wrote the majority opinion of 2008’s Boumediene v Bush, assuring the provision of habeas rights to terrorists in indefinite custody. And when a reporter asked “Would you try to get the military commissions – the trial court there – to try US citizens?” Trump stated: “I know that they want to try them in our regular court systems, and I don’t like that at all.” Voting rights In 2013, civil rights organizations decried the court’s majority opinion in Shelby county v Holder, which limited the federal oversight of states that historically exhibited discrimination in voting. Again, Kennedy cast the pivotal fifth vote as Chief Justice Roberts, and wrote optimistically “our country has changed”, placing the onus on Congress to pass legislation to tackle the issue. Corporations Trump is likely to nominate another justice with judicial philosophies favorable to corporations. Citizens United v FEC, the 2010 decision that gave rise to Super Pacs, has had perhaps one of the most significant impacts on America’s electoral system and will probably continue to do so, with Trump’s next nominee. America has Justice Kennedy to thank for penning that decision. As Kennedy put it, “an independent expenditure is political speech”. And just moments before his retirement was announced on Wednesday, unions decried the court’s reasoning in Janus, that collecting fees from non-union members to aid collective bargaining violates the first amendment. Criminal justice Proponents of criminal justice reform should not expect much to change. “I am the law and order candidate,” Trump routinely reminded his supporters during his 2016 campaign. Trump’s next nominee will sit in the chair of the man who found that the death penalty is acceptable if there is no mitigating evidence, and that the government bears no responsibility in situations of abuse in private prisons.
2||Tim Dowling: our tortoise is running amok, and I’m on his sideIn the 23 years we lived at our old house the tortoise was an undemanding pet: in the summer he stalked the garden freely; in the winter he held the kitchen door open. He’s not affectionate, but he’s quiet. He’s also about 50 years old – my wife has had him since she was eight – and will probably outlive us. When you know you’re going to have to bequeath a pet to someone eventually, the fact that it requires very little maintenance is a plus. Things are different in the new house – the garden is full of seedlings and unestablished annuals, with no raised borders. Left to his own devices, the tortoise will mow through a whole bed in an afternoon. What he can’t eat, he squashes. My wife bought a rabbit run to pen him in, but every moment he’s in it is spent trying to figure a way out. I find this very hard to watch. “He hates it,” I say. “He’s got to learn,” my wife says. “He’s going to win this,” I say. “I know it, and you know it.” Here is the new routine: in the morning my wife puts the tortoise in the rabbit run on the lawn, with a few radish tops for company. I spend an hour sitting in my office shed watching the tortoise circle the perimeter of his cage, probing for weak points. When I can’t stand it any longer, I lift him out and place him where I can keep an eye on him. The next time I look, he is gone. At about midday my wife comes out and starts screaming about some decimated sweet peas. “Why did you let him out?” she says. “I didn’t,” I say. “He must have climbed over the bars.” “Don’t be stupid,” she says. “I’m not telling you how he does it,” I say. “Because I’m on his side.” She puts the tortoise in the kitchen, where it crawls under the dog’s bed to sulk. The next day, the routine is repeated. I try providing the tortoise with such a bounty of salad that he has no room left for annuals, but he likes variety: two grapes, a lettuce leaf, a bit of bindweed and an entire bush my wife planted the day before. The next day I wake the youngest one at midday. “What,” he says, from under the duvet. “I need you to babysit the tortoise while I work,” I say. The duvet flaps down to reveal one cold blue eye. “Do I have to read to it?” he says. “Just follow him around and keep him out of trouble,” I say. “After two hours I’ll take over.” “Yeah, I’m not doing that,” he says. “One day you’ll look back and realise it was the best job you ever had,” I say. The duvet flaps up. On Tuesday I make a big speech about the monstrous injustice of the cage, and disassemble it. On Wednesday morning my wife refuses to put the tortoise outside, but once she leaves the house he pushes open the garden door and thunks down three steps. I turn to find him outside my office staring up at me, with an expression that says: if anyone asks, you haven’t seen me. Unfortunately when my wife comes home the tortoise is still there, sunning himself on the bricks. “Look,” I say. “He’s learned.” “He hasn’t,” she says, picking him up. “And neither have you.” For two days the weather is overcast and cold, and the tortoise doesn’t stir from under the dog bed. On the next sunny morning he knows what he has to do: get outside, and disappear. At about 11 I hear the thunk of his shell as he negotiates the kitchen step, but I don’t look up. At 12 he passes my office door with some leaves hanging off his chin, but I say nothing. At sunset my wife goes looking for the tortoise, but she can’t find him. “You’ve done this,” she says. “I’ve done nothing,” I say. I see him most mornings these days, but by afternoon he’s under cover and by evening he’s back in his hiding place. To be honest, I know exactly where he goes, but my lips are sealed.
2||How to survive the teenage years: a parents’ guideThe Quentin Blake picture book, Zagazoo, tells the surreal story of George and Bella, who become parents after they unwrap a parcel containing a baby. The perfect baby becomes a baby vulture who screeches all night; in toddlerdom, he’s a clumsy elephant. When Zagazoo hits the teen years, he turns into a hulking beast who becomes stranger and hairier by the minute, and they hit breaking point. Blake’s illustrations get wilder. George’s hair turns grey. “Suppose it never stops,” Bella panics. “It doesn’t bear thinking about,” George cries. “What will become of us?” It’s very funny, but it also conveys a powerful message about adolescence: that it’s something to dread, survive, tolerate – for children and parents. But does it have to be this way? We asked the experts, from our own advice columnist to counsellors, writers and gaming gurus, people with professional and personal experience of the teenage years. The result is our guide to embracing your adolescent, understanding the very real changes they’re undergoing, comprehending the world they inhabit – and perhaps taking a look at yourself, too. 1 Let go “Parents are biologically driven to protect their child, but in evolutionary terms, the protected child has to grow up and separate, and so the period of adolescence is there for that to happen,” says Nicola Morgan, who writes about teenagers. Morgan says this process is easier for teens, because they’re biologically programmed to separate, while the parents are still in protection mode. “There’s nothing in the parent brain that makes it want to separate from the child. The trouble happens when we try to protect for too long – that’s where, often, conflict comes.” “It’s OK to mourn the loss of the cuddly little person, but embrace the fact that they’re entering a new stage of life,” Relate counsellor Ammanda Major says. But don’t think your teenager doesn’t need you any more. “They absolutely do, even though they think they don’t,” Major says. “It’s just that it’s different from when they were a child and you were in total control.” 2 Understand the biology Hormones and seismic growth throw adolescent brains into overdrive – and they don’t finish developing until their 20s. This is pure biology, and it means adolescents gravitate towards certain behaviours: emotional roller-coastering, so-called “bad” risk-taking, lower empathy, susceptibility to peer pressure and weaker impulse control. “Sometimes its immensely reassuring to know that there’s a biological reason behind some adolescent behaviour,” Morgan says. “If you’re in the thick of some challenging moments, keep that in mind.” This development of the brain also means sleep patterns are affected. Put simply, teenagers aren’t ready for bed when you want them to be, and they might struggle to get up in the morning. It’s useless to get into arguments over bedtimes – things have changed since they were toddlers you could sleep-train. No amount of arguing and rule-setting can beat biology. Instead, help them to change their routine where possible to accommodate a new pattern of sleep – even if it’s only at weekends. 3 Don’t write off gaming “Video games are a big part of childhood and teenage life, so getting to grips with them can be a window to understanding and engaging with your teenager,” says journalist and gamer Andy Robertson, author of Taming Gaming. “Clearly, if they play too much, or on their own in a bedroom, it can have an isolating effect.” His advice is to bring them out from the shadows, and make gaming more of a family-friendly activity. This requires getting involved early: “Avoid just setting limits when they are young – find games you want them to play.” Research the Pan European Game Information (PEGI) rating so you know which games are appropriate. PEGI ratings work like film classifications – from 3, suitable for three years old and above, to adult-appropriate 18s. There are also symbols showing what sort of content to expect, from scary scenes to sex. “Games can instil amazing character traits like perseverance, kindness, cooperation and strategic thinking,” he says. “And gaming health is about a balanced diet. With food, we don’t worry about plate time, it’s what’s on the plate that matters. Similarly, it’s what’s on the screen that’s important.” In other words, aimless YouTube surfing isn’t the same as time spent playing a well-planned strategic game together. “Also, don’t assume they don’t want you involved. Show some interest early, and you might have a connection for life.” If you’re just not interested in joining in, you can still set limits. Discuss with them how many hours a day they think it’s appropriate to play, what kind of games you are comfortable with. Make sure it’s a dialogue and that, although you are the ultimate arbiter, they still have some say. 4 Keep lines of communication open “There’s no doubt that the way you communicate will change,” Major says. “If you experience this, the rowing, the shouting, the melodrama or the silent treatment can feel very personal, but try not to take it as such.” Always keep the channels of communication open. Take the time to learn their language and when they might want to talk. For example, a face-to-face sit-down conversation across the table will be too confrontational. You should try to cultivate moments where “sideways” conversations happen, such as in the car or while walking or doing household chores together; this way, things can be much more relaxed and they will often open up or be more receptive. Major is also at pains to remind parents to continue to include an adolescent in everything they might normally do as a family. “A grunt might actually mean, ‘Yes, please’, so keep them involved. Don’t feel hurt when they reject you; enjoy it when they don’t.” Annalisa Barbieri, the Guardian’s advice columnist, urges parents to see their children as separate beings from the word go. “What I don’t understand are parents who want their children to acquiesce when they’re little, but magically know their own minds when they’re a teenager – that’s where the difficulty seems to be.” 5 Set social media standards Accept that the widening of the online landscape is probably the biggest difference between your own adolescence and that of your child’s. But remember, just as in real life, your teenagers will need boundaries in their virtual worlds. Keep tabs on what they get up to, Morgan says. Educate yourself, if necessary, but develop a mutual trust. “Only when we engage with the positives can we negotiate and encourage healthy behaviours.” Give them some tech responsibility at home – sorting out a dodgy Skype connection or, if they have younger siblings, ask them for help talking about online safety. Show trust where you can. To help them see that life’s not all online, let them choose an offline activity you can do together. It doesn’t matter what – climbing, cake decorating, whittling, kite-flying, surfing. It’ll give them a rush, a new skill – and some good social media pics. Finally, don’t forget to look at your own habits and set a good example. “It’s difficult to lay down the law if you can’t stop looking at your phone,” Morgan says. “Model good behaviour to them.” 6 Take mental health seriously Many common mental health problems, such as depression, have their onset in early adolescence. Natasha Devon, a children’s mental health campaigner and the author of A Beginner’s Guide to Being Mental: An A-Z, often gets asked when “normal” teenage behaviour becomes a mental health issue. “It doesn’t matter. What if your partner said to you, ‘Is this really serious, or is this just the menopause?’ How would that make you feel? If someone genuinely shows interest in you and listens to you, then that improves your brain chemistry. Just listen to what they have to say.” “There seems to be a horrible divide between the generations, based on the fact that adolescents today are growing up in a technologically advanced age. What happens is parents end up telling their teens they should be happy because they’ve got more materially than they ever had. But material things don’t make you happy.” This rather toxic attitude towards teenagers is something that Barbieri sees too: “I think teenagers are scared of becoming teenagers because adults talk about it in a way that is so scary.” 7 Your role “Don’t forget your own partnership,” Major says. “Nurture each other. If you’re on your own, find some support. Act with your partner and don’t undermine each other.” Consider whether your reaction to your teenager’s behaviour is coloured by your own experiences. Major says: “Maybe you toed the line when you were an adolescent. If you have a youngster who isn’t doing that, be prepared to be jealous of their gutsy response – you might wish you’d done the same.” Revisiting your youth is important for maintaining your empathy and humour levels, Devon says. “Keep checking in with your teenage self – what would that person make of your adult life now?”
2||Blind date: ‘She didn’t laugh when I tried to go down an up escalator’Laura on Rosie What were you hoping for? A fun way to come out to my wider family. First impressions? Warm, smiley, punctual. What did you talk about? Accents, snog marry avoid (with inanimate objects) and Calpol. Any awkward moments? I was definitely drinking my wine faster than her, so kept having to slow myself down. Good table manners? Excellent, although the only wine she likes is rosé. Best thing about Rosie? She didn’t laugh when I tried to go down an up escalator. Would you introduce her to your friends? Rosie was very sweet, so I think my friends would be too much of a bad influence. Describe her in three words Friendly, open-minded, genuine. What do you think she made of you? Hopefully not terrible craic. Did you go on somewhere? She had to get the last train back to High Wycombe, so no time for fun. And... did you kiss? No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? That we would have got on as more than just friends, or could have had more of a wild night. Marks out of 10? A solid 7. Would you meet again? If she moved to London, I could take her to a drag show. Rosie on Laura What were you hoping for? A new experience and a fun evening. First impressions? Very pretty, very open, with a warm personality. What did you talk about? Drag Race, reclaiming “queer” and Harry Potter. Any awkward moments? No. Good table manners? Excellent. Best thing about Laura? She was great at keeping the conversation flowing. Would you introduce her to your friends? Definitely – we had a lot of common interests. Describe her in three words Fun, easy-going, down-to-earth. What do you think she made of you? Maybe less pretentious than she expected. Did you go on somewhere? It was a weekday, so I had to catch my last train home. And... did you kiss? No, there didn’t seem to be a moment for it. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? For it to have been on a weekend. Marks out of 10? 8. Would you meet again? I’d love to. • Laura and Rosie ate at Hans’ Bar &amp; Grill, London SW1.hansbarandgrill.com. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com
21||Country diary: fretting at the bird ledges devoid of guillemotsTen feet below the top of Mowing Word is a hollowed-out bedding-plane that stretches the whole length of this magnificent limestone cliff. Decades of nesting auks have whitewashed the rock, making their breeding site obvious even from a distance. Though it’s one of the best locations for sea-cliff ascents in Britain, voluntary bans negotiated years ago between naturalists and climbers have generally been scrupulously observed during the razorbill and guillemot breeding seasons. The critical period is during incubation, which generally takes place in June, is short, and concludes with the fledgling guillemot, accompanied by its father, flailing off the ledge to bounce and belly-flop its way to the water below. Guillemots are endearing birds and these intense cliff-ledge colonies are hypnotically appealing. No nests are built. A single huge egg – imagining a nine-stone woman giving birth to an 18-pound baby gives an idea of its relative size – is laid on the bare rock. Its pyriform shape ensures it rolls only in the tightest circles. Vivid markings are a recognisable, unique signature on each egg. The animation, the continual whirring flights of parent birds, the yarra-yarra-yarra racket, snaking necks and long bills create a mesmeric atmosphere. Somehow, you come to care for guillemots. No doubt the memory hovers of the final, brutal annihilation of its larger cousin the great auk on an Icelandic skerry in 1844: “the first species native to North America to become extinct by the hand of man” (Peter Matthiessen). I visited Pembroke recently, fretted at seeing empty bird ledges on Mowing Word and atop the Elegug Stacks. Was another disaster like the 1967 Torrey Canyon oil spill, with its images of oiled guillemots, imminent? Or the die-off known as the Irish seabird-wreck of 1969, that autopsies attributed to PCB poisoning? Or the unexplained one in 2014, perhaps due to agrochemical run-off from river pollution incidents into Cardigan Bay? Or Natural Resources Wales’ inexplicable 2015 decision to end funding for Tim Birkhead’s crucial 40-year study of guillemot populations on Skomer? Perhaps I needn’t have worried. The guillemots are back, delayed a month by storms and cold spring weather. But affection breeds anxiety, and history asserts the danger of complacency.
5||Brexit will strengthen Ireland-US relations, says Irish ambassadorBrexit is likely to lead to a strengthening of the US-Irish bond and the emergence of Ireland as the main bridge between the US and Europe, Dublin’s ambassador to Washington DC has predicted. The UK’s departure would leave Ireland as the only predominantly English-speaking EU member, and a natural destination for US investors looking for a European base because of Ireland’s longstanding “special relationship” with Washington, Daniel Mulhall said. Mulhall, a former Irish ambassador to the UK, said he found anxiety over Brexit had accompanied him from London to Washington. “Since I arrived here last August, I’ve found that I’ve been asked about Brexit more often than anything else that I’ve had to deal with,” Mulhall said, adding that the greatest concerns he encountered were about the nature of the post-Brexit border between Ireland and Northern Ireland, and the impact of a hardened border on the Good Friday peace agreement. The ambassador stressed that Ireland had no desire to take things away from Britain but would have little choice but to counterbalance the negative impact of Brexit by taking advantage of the upsides. He listed the two main benefits brought to US-Irish relations by Brexit as Ireland’s greater appeal as a destination for investment, and an enhanced diplomatic role as Washington’s closest EU partner. There are already 700 US firms with investments in Ireland, according to Mulhall, who added: “In the future I would expect that US companies who feel a need to have a base within the European Union would see Ireland as a more attractive option because perhaps Britain may be less attractive on account of Brexit. “There’s also potential for greater political dialogue between our two countries [Ireland and the US] and especially in a context where Ireland will be the only English-speaking country and probably will be the country in the European Union after Brexit that has the closest and most intensive relationship with United States,” Mulhall said. “Certainly in terms of economic and cultural norms.” Ireland plans to open new diplomatic missions in the US and bolster existing missions as part of a plan announced by the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, to double the country’s global footprint by 2025. “We see ourselves as a global country, not so much an island behind an island at the edge of a continent, but rather an island at the centre of the world,” Varadkar told a Washington audience during a US visit in March, generally seen as a success in terms of developing a rapport with Donald Trump. Mulhall said the coming diplomatic expansion would “ensure that we take full advantage of the opportunities that exist in the United States”. More than 35 million Americans identify as having Irish heritage. The investments of 700 US companies in Ireland, employing 150,000 people, are balanced by those of roughly 500 Irish companies in the US, employing 100,000 Americans. Trade in goods and services is more or less equivalent in both directions. Those figures are dwarfed by the US-UK economic relationship, in which each country is the biggest investor in the other’s market, with UK companies spending $480bn (£340bn) in the US, and employing 1.1 million Americans. Ireland is looking to take over the mantle as Washington’s leading European interlocutor at a time of high transatlantic tensions over trade and foreign policy, particularly in the Middle East. The Trump administration is threatening secondary sanctions against European companies doing business with Iran. It has slapped steel and aluminium tariffs on the EU, which has responded with retaliatory tariffs on a list of US-made goods including Levi’s jeans, Harley-Davidson motorcycles and bourbon whiskey. Ireland is most concerned about collateral damage caused by US sanctions against the Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska, who was on the board of the Rusal aluminium company. Rusal owns a processing plant employing 450 people in Limerick, catering for more than 30% of European demand. Deripaska resigned from Rusal’s board in May but it is not yet clear whether that will shield the Limerick plant from the damaging impact of US sanctions, which have been deferred until October. “We do still retain a concern about the long-term fate of the company, which we are determined to do everything in our power to assist,” Mulhall said. “We would share the view that’s pretty universal across the European Union that we need to make a special effort on both sides to avoid a downward movement of relations. We need to stand back and to recognise the things we have in common and to avoid becoming obsessed with the things that at the moment divide us.”
0||Pay rise for politicians as penalty rates trimmed further in hospitality and retailAustralia’s federal politicians, senior public servants, and members of the judiciary will enjoy a 2% pay rise on Sunday, while hospitality and retail workers will see their penalty rates cut for the second year in a row. Large taxation and wage changes will affect millions of people from 1 July, the start of the new financial year. The independent Remuneration Tribunal decided last month to award federal politicians a 2% pay increase from 1 July, matching a 2% rise in July last year, and a 2% rise in January 2016. Malcolm Turnbull will enjoy a weekly pay rise of $203 next week, worth more than $10,500 a year, lifting his annual salary to more than $538,000. The Treasurer, Scott Morrison, will see his annual pay increase to more than $388,200, and the pay of the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, will rise to $384,000. The annual base salary of a federal backbencher will increase from $203,000 to $207,000. But workers in the hospitality, fast food, pharmacy and retail industries will have their penalty rates cut on Sunday. It follows a decision by the Fair Work Ombudsman last year to cut rates for public holidays, and steadily reduce penalty rates for the next four years, for award-dependent workers in particular industries. On Sunday, full-time and part-time workers in the hospitality industry will have their Sunday penalty rates cut by 10%, while causal workers will continue to receive the same rate. In retail, full-time and part-time workers will see their Sunday penalty rates cut by 15%, while casuals will lose 10%. For fast food workers, the penalty rates will drop 10%, and pharmacy workers face a 15% cut. The cuts in penalty rates coincide with the first stage of the Turnbull government’s $144bn, seven-year personal income tax plan, which rolls out this weekend. Workers earning up to $125,000 a year will receive a tax rebate between $200 and $530, depending on their income, when they file their 2018-19 tax return next year. Those earning more than $87,000 will also receive a tax cut, because the top threshold of the 32.5% tax bracket will be increased from $87,000 to $90,000 from 1 July. The Australian Council of Trade Unions says the personal income tax cuts will not be enough to prevent some workers being worse off. Grade 5 cooks earning $54,514 will gain $530 from the tax rebate, but could lose $1,000 from the cut in Sunday penalty rates, and $232 from last year’s cut to public holiday penalty rates, leaving them $702 worse off overall. Permanent pharmacists will gain $530 from the tax rebate, but could lose $1,693 from the cut in Sunday penalty rates, leaving them worse by $1,163. The ACTU says polling shows voters in the electorates of Swan and Hasluck in Western Australia, Flynn and Capricornia in Queensland, and Dunkley and Corangamite in Victoria, are concerned about the four-year program of penalty rate cuts. It asked ReachTel to conduct the polling on 25 June, using an automated telephone-based survey system, under which the numbers and the person within the household were selected at random, and the results weighted by gender and age to reflect the population according to ABS figures. ReachTel asked voters: “The Labor party has introduced a bill to federal parliament to restore penalty rates that could benefit up to 700,000 workers. Do you approve or disapprove of Labor’s plan to restore penalty rates?” A majority of voters wanted the penalty rate cuts restored. Of the 1,161 voters surveyed in Capricornia, 48.6% strongly approved and 20.3% somewhat approved, while 31% somewhat or strongly disproved. The results were similar in other jurisdictions – 65.2% approved out of 1,207 voters in Flynn; 56.3% approved out of 752 voters in Swan, 68.9% out of 910 voters in Hasluck; 70.5% out of 1,195 voters in Dunkley; and 65% approved out of 1,322 voters in Corangamite. “The Turnbull government is cutting the pay of 700,000 people who rely on penalty rates at the same time as they’re delivering handouts to big business,” ACTU secretary, Sally McManus, said. “It’s not surprising that the twin policies of taking away from working people and giving public money to big business are so unpopular. These ideas have been proven not to benefit the community. These are bad ideas.” Last month, the Reserve Bank governor, Philip Lowe, warned a forum for central bankers in Portugal that “the relationship between wages and unemployment looks to have changed” because historically the current level of unemployment should see Australia with wage growth of about 3.7%, but it was stuck about 2.1%. He also referenced a research paper on productivity, wage growth and unions, of which he said “the evidence is pretty compelling – changes in industrial relations arrangements in Germany have affected wage and employment outcomes and the Australian experience is very similar to the German one. It’s hard to escape the conclusion that changes in industrial relations has changed the inflation process.” On 1 July, the minimum wage will increase by 3.5% to $18.93 per hour, following a Fair Work Commission ruling last month. It means the national minimum wage rises to $719.20 per week, an increase of $24.30 on the basis of 38 ordinary working hours a week.
5||North Korea still secretly enriching uranium, say US officialsNorth Korea has increased its production of enriched uranium for nuclear weapons at secret sites in recent months, contrary to Donald Trump’s claims that it was “no longer a nuclear threat”, according to a new report. NBC News quoted more than a dozen US officials familiar with the intelligence assessments. Coming soon after satellite images showed rapid improvements being made to a North Korean nuclear research facility at Yongbyon, the developments will make it harder for Trump to claim that his summit with Kim Jong-un in Singapore this month was a success. Neither of the concessions the US president claimed Kim had delivered – the destruction of a missile engine testing site, and the repatriation of the remains of US soldiers killed in the Korean war – has materialised so far. Meanwhile Trump has already made a significant US concession: suspending joint exercises with South Korea that had been due to start in August. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, is reported to be planning a trip to Pyongyang in early July to continue negotiations with the North Korean government, in the hope of persuading the regime to make specific commitments on nuclear disarmament. Over the past seven months the North Koreans have conducted no new missile or nuclear tests. But NBC quoted a US official briefed on the latest intelligence as saying that uranium enrichment had been stepped up. “There’s no evidence that they are decreasing stockpiles, or that they have stopped their production,” the official said. “There is absolutely unequivocal evidence that they are trying to deceive the US.” It has long been suspected that the North Koreans have established a uranium enrichment plant in at least one secret site apart from Yongbyon complex. “There are lots of things that we know that North Korea has tried to hide from us for a long time,” a US intelligence official told NBC. The joint statement signed by Trump and Kim in Singapore was vaguely worded. Kim promised “complete denuclearisation” but that has been Pyongyang’s theoretical policy since 1992, and the regime interprets it to mean a long-term mutual process in which the US would also disarm. Pompeo was due to start follow-on negotiations with the North Korean leadership within a week of the 12 June Singapore summit. But Pyongyang appears to have dragged its heels. The secretary of state is now hoping to visit Pyongyang during a trip to the far east in the second week of July, as first reported by the Financial Times. “There was a delay but I think he has now got the agreement to go,” said Victor Cha, a former director of Asian affairs at the National Security Council. “They have to put meat on the bones of the Singapore statement. Pompeo is under pressure to get something before August, when the exercises were going to start,” said Cha, now at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies. It the visit goes ahead it is possible Kim would order the repatriation of the remains of between 100 and 200 US service personnel killed in the 1950-53 war, to coincide with Pompeo’s arrival. It is a gesture that US officials had been predicting would take place last week. Trump told a rally in Minnesota last week that the repatriation had already happened. “Pompeo needs to get the remains of the POWs and MIAs [missing in action] but it’s not enough,” Cha said, arguing the secretary of state would have to extract a concrete commitment on disarmament to live up to the administration’s claims for the Singapore summit.
5||India's huge solar ambitions could push coal further into shadeIndia says it intends to launch a tender for 100 gigawatts of solar power, 10 times the size of the current largest solar tender in the world – another Indian project scheduled to open for bids next month. But analysts have said the country has neither the infrastructure nor the energy demand to warrant installing so much solar capacity in one go, saying the announcement reflects the scale of India’s ambition to become a renewable energy leader. It is one of several green power promises made by Delhi this month on the back of continually falling renewables prices, with implications for coal projects including the proposed Adani Group mine in Queensland, Australia. The Indian power minister RK Singh flagged the 100GW tender at an event in Delhi last week. While discussing a world record 10GW solar tender set to launch in July, Singh reportedly told the audience: “Now [we] will bring out a bid of one lakh megawatts which would also include solar manufacturing and storage.” One lakh refers to 100,000 in the south Asian numbering system, equivalent to 100GW. His office confirmed the plan to the Guardian but declined to provide further details other than that the tender would be launched “in the near future”. ‘Brilliant statement of intent’ The unscheduled announcement surprised some energy policy specialists who said it was unrealistic and unnecessary. “There are many, many operational constraints to the plan in terms of land availability, transmission connections, who’s going to buy and pay for those [transmission] towers, and so forth,” said Vinay Rustagi, the managing director of Bridge to India, a renewable energy consulting firm. “I don’t think a 100GW tender makes a lot of sense,” said Tim Buckley, a director at the pro-renewables Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, but adding he thought the plan was a “brilliant statement of intent”. Delhi announced this month it was raising its target for the amount of renewable energy capacity it plans to install by 2022 to more than 227GW. The previous target, already considered ambitious, was 175GW. About 70GW have been installed so far and another 40 are under construction or being put out to tender, according to government data from June. Buckley said on current trends India was unlikely to reach the 227GW target, but said it was setting an aspirational goal to attract investment and develop the local industry. “The idea is, aim for the moon and you’ll hit the top of the tree,” he said. There are constraints on how fast additional capacity can be added, not least the fact that India simply does not need much more power. “India is not a hugely starved country in terms of power supply,” said Rustagi. “The growth in demand on the whole is pretty stable at 4% to 5%, and there is already enough capacity being added to the system to cater to this incremental demand.” More than 200 million Indians still live without regular access to electricity. But Indians are among the lowest per capita users of electricity in the world, especially those being newly connected to the grid. “These are all relatively poor rural households with very little demand for power,” said Rustagi. “Even if all the 250 million-odd people without electricity got power in the next year, our analysis says power demand would grow by about an additional 1%.” He chalked up the government’s big energy promises to national polls looming next year. “The election is coming up in 2019 and they are facing various economic and industrial challenges,” he said. “I think it’s more a part of putting a very positive spin on messages.” Coal put in the shade At the beginning of the decade, India had planned to power its growth almost entirely using thermal coal, with about 600GW of coal power plant projects in the pipeline in 2010. Its plan spelled disaster for global efforts to keep warming below the two-degree target set by the Paris climate accords. But as the price of renewables has crashed, and the impact of fossil fuels on Indian air and water has become clearer, the country has sought to reinvent itself as a green energy leader. “We have missed the first and second industrial revolutions,” Singh said at an event in Delhi on Friday. “We caught up with the digital revolution, but we need to lead this revolution towards clean energy and renewable energy.” India has shelved or cancelled nearly 550 thermal coal projects in the past seven years, Buckley said. More projects are likely to be cancelled as the price of renewables continues to fall: a report released by Bloomberg New Energy Finance last week estimated the cost of solar and wind in India was now 50% cheaper than coal. Singh said on Friday coal would remain a part of India’s energy mix because it was “a backbone” to the intermittent power provided by renewables. But researchers say the proportion of energy the country derives from coal will keep falling – and that diminishing demand can easily be met by Indian mines, raising questions about the need for new projects such as the proposed Carmichael mine in the Galilee Basin of Queensland, Australia. “The incremental demand for thermal power in India is very little,” Rustagi said. “I don’t see how it makes sense to undertake a huge international project like [the Carmichael mine] … when we have enough domestic coal available.”
6||Comedian claims he tricked Trump with prank call onboard Air Force OneDonald Trump appears to have returned a prank phone call from a comedian pretending to be the senator Robert Menendez on Wednesday as he was returning to Washington DC from a rally in North Dakota aboard Air Force One. John Melendez, a veteran performer on Howard Stern and Jay Leno’s shows, published a podcast episode Thursday that includes a recording of a three minute conversation between himself and what sounds to be the president. “Hi, Bob. How are you? Congratulations on everything, we’re proud of you,” the voice presumed to be the president says, apparently referencing the resolution of a five-year corruption investigation into the New Jersey Democrat. “You went through a tough, tough situation, and I don’t think a very fair situation, but congratulations.” The pair briefly discussed immigration, with Trump stating, “I want to be able to take care of the situation every bit as much as anybody else at the top level. I’d rather do the larger solution rather than the smaller solution.” The comedian also urged the president to choose a supreme court nominee who is not overly conservative, with Trump responding that he had “a big list of people” and that he would announce a nominee in 12 to 14 days. Melendez, who performs as Stuttering John, told CNN that he was “shocked” to receive a call back after a series of long-shot prank calls to the White House switchboard. “I just could not believe that it took us an hour and a half to get Jared Kushner and Donald Trump on the phone from Air Force One,” he said. The prank began when Melendez and his producer called the White House and asked to speak to the president. After being rebuffed under his own name, Melendez tried again, this time using a fake British accent and claiming to be an assistant to Senator Menendez. The operator took a message for the pseudo-senator, despite the fact that Melendez and his producer could be heard giggling and joking about hemorrhoids on the line. Later in the podcast, the comedian received a call from the switchboard asking for confirmation of the senator’s phone number. Despite noting that the comedian’s phone number was not in their records for Menendez, the operator accepted Melendez’s explanation that he was on vacation. Melendez subsequently described receiving a call from Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, before playing the audio of the apparent call from Trump. The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment from the Guardian, but a White House official gave a statement to CNN that does not dispute the authenticity of the recording: “The President wants to be accessible to members and likes engaging them and wants them to have the opportunity to connect. The downside of that is sometimes the channels are open too widely and mistakes like this happen.” Politico reported that the White House was “scrambling” Thursday to figure out how the prankster had been able to gain access to the president so easily, while Axios described White House staffers as “freaking out” over the breach. Trump is by no means the only world leader to be duped into a phone call. In May, the British foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, held an 18-minute phone conversation with a Russian prankster pretending to be the Armenian prime minister. In 1995, Queen Elizabeth II spoke for 17 minutes with a Canadian radio host pretending to be the prime minister. The real Menendez released a statement criticizing the White House’s policy of separating migrant children from their parents at the border, and said he would “welcome any opportunity to have a real conversation with the president on how to uphold the American values that have guided our family-based immigration policy for the past century”. Diamond and Silk, two pro-Trump YouTube stars who recently testified to the the US House of Representatives about Facebook’s alleged censorship of conservatives, responded to the contretemps on Twitter, writing: “It should be against the law for a comedian to impersonate a government official.”
0||'We've turned a corner': farmers shift on climate change and want a say on energyOut in the bush, far from the ritualised political jousting in Canberra, attitudes are changing. Regional Australia has turned the corner when it comes to acknowledging the reality of climate change, says the woman now charged with safeguarding the interests of farmers in Canberra. Fiona Simson, a mixed farmer and grazier from the Liverpool plains in northern New South Wales, and the president of the National Farmers’ Federation, says people on the land can’t and won’t ignore what is right before their eyes. “We have been experiencing some wild climate variability,” Simson tells Guardian Australia’s politics podcast. “It’s in people’s face”. “While we are a land of droughts and flooding rains, absolutely at the moment people are seeing enormous swings in what would be considered usually normal. They are getting all their rainfall at once, even though they end up with an annual rainfall that’s the same, it’s all at once, or it’s in so many tiny insignificant falls that it doesn’t make any difference to them. “And the heat. We’ve had some record hot summers and some weird swings in seasons”. Simson acknowledges there are “always going to be some outliers who are going to have some wild ideas” in farming or in any other sector of the Australian economy but she says “overwhelmingly, I think it’s got to the point where the science is very acceptable”. The shift under way in the bush has filtered through to lobbyists lane in Canberra. Only a few years ago, when the then Labor government put a price on carbon, legislating a market mechanism to drive emissions reduction at least cost, the NFF rose in full battle cry against the heresy. But now, the NFF stands at the front of a phalanx of business groups trying to support the Turnbull government through the deeply fraught business of landing the national energy guarantee. Simson isn’t trying to pretend black is white. She acknowledges the Neg looks a whole lot like the emissions trading scheme that her group shouted down only a couple of years ago. “I think the Neg for us is some sort of ETS potentially. It certainly talks about carbon and putting a value on that. There will be a price on that and there we go.” She says it’s time to see the climate change-driven transition under way in the energy market as opportunity, rather than something to resist. “I think farm representation and farmers generally have come quite a long way in their attitude to climate, and climate change and climate variability and dealing with all of these things, and accepting some of the facts behind the science.” “We have turned quite a corner ourselves, and our approach now to this is quite different than it was in those days [when Labor pursued emissions trading], when the [previous NFF] leaders chose that path.” She is supportive of the efforts of the agriculture minister, David Littleproud – a next-generation Queensland National – to reset the resting disposition for the Nationals on climate change and energy. Littleproud is happy to acknowledge that climate change is happening and he characterises the shift to renewables as “exciting”. But the Nationals are lagging their communities on the issue. The party remains split on climate change and energy, and on the Neg. Some are trying to cook up a coal transition fund as the price of supporting the policy, but if that’s the price of entry, Labor federally and the Labor states might veto the framework before it can ever get off the ground. Simson says dissenters need to get out of the road of a settlement. Consensus needs to be reached because the damage inflicted by the last decade of policy warfare is going to take time to unwind, and the key to unwinding the destruction is policy certainty. “I have some sympathy for [the Nationals] because I know that our sector has had some wide-ranging discussions to come to the agreement that we have.” “But at the end of the day, that’s their job”. She says politicians “need to stop picking winners. This is not about coal versus renewables ... it’s a bit like a farm, we are probably going to need a bit of everything. Surely, let the market decide is the best way rather than one politician thinking what’s going to be the technology of the future”. Simson notes that Australian farmers love markets. They are entirely comfortable with competition. So the same rules should apply to the energy market. “For us it is very important that the policy be technology neutral, and let the market decide.” She says politicians also need to understand that voters have had enough of the internal intrigues and the brinkmanship. “People are really frustrated at the moment with the politics, whether it is internal politics and infighting within the parties, or whether it is party against party. People are wanting now to have outcomes. People are facing skyrocketing energy prices. Some of my members are facing bills triple what they were a few years ago.” So while there are still questions to answer about the detail of the policy framework, the Neg must be approached as opportunity. Simson says affordability, reliability, technology neutrality is fundamental, and the farm sector needs a tailored solution where emissions reduction can be built into the core of the business. “We think there are a lot of opportunities for small-scale energy generation and it’s already happening”. “We would particularly like to take advantage of some of the heat generation that some of our intensive industries are using. For example, the pork industry has been amazing at capturing methane and then using that as energy generation – all the manure, the slurry going into the pits, having the methane captured and then driving a lot of the technology.” “Things like that on farm are amazing opportunities.” She says farms are often at the end of the power grid and are not well served by the status quo. She says the Neg framework could allow farmers to band together, and small communities to band together, to build their own energy infrastructure. “We can work with this general framework. There is lot of opportunity”.
27||Revenge, justice and compassion: what you should read in JulyBri Lee Eggshell Skull Allen and Unwin Your book in your own words: I tried to write a page-turner of a courtroom drama (the kind Australians love) in order to trick people into reading what is essentially 100,000 words of feminist jurisprudence. I really put myself on the page with Eggshell Skull. I didn’t know (still don’t) if I’m a “good” writer, but I knew it was honest – sometimes alarmingly so. I figured there was no point writing about yourself unless you were going to do it properly, you know? The books goes through my growing up with my dad being a cop, then how I graduated from law school and spent a year working as a judge’s associate in the Queensland district court. At the end of an extremely difficult and triggering year listening to trials and sentences for sex offenders, I decided to go to the police and make an official complaint against a man who committed a sex offence against me when I was a child. That’s when the really rough stuff started. It’s a book about trying to fight for, and believe in, justice. What you were reading when you wrote it: Every single non-fiction in first-person books published in Australia. All true crime I could find. All memoirs by women. To pick one though, I’d say Everywhere I Look by Helen Garner. It’s my favourite of all her books. It was so sharp, like her writing was a blade she’d been sharpening for a lifetime. The next Australian book you’ll read: I am telling everyone I know about Trace by Rachael Brown. People might have listened to or heard of her podcast (same name), but the book itself is meritorious in its own right; Brown has a spare style yet simultaneously an excellent turn of phrase. It’s just a damn good read. Kate Rossmanith Small Wrongs Hardie Grant Your book in your own words: Small Wrongs is a meditation on remorse in the criminal justice system and remorse in our everyday lives. I thought I understood human nature, but after my daughter was born, I spent hours awake, reflecting on my own upbringing. I became fascinated by the concept of remorse, and was drawn to the criminal courts, observing case after case. I put a fundamental question to judges, lawyers, victims and offenders: how can you ever know if a person is truly sorry? Small Wrongs interweaves stories from the courts with stories of my relationships with my father, my husband and my daughter, showing how remorse works on us in sharp and opaque ways. It probes our expectations of one another and of people caught up in the justice system. What is it to demand an apology from someone? What is it to admit to wrongdoing? What you were reading when you wrote it: I researched and wrote Small Wrongs over eight years. Helen Macdonald’s H is for Hawk was useful in thinking about hybrid memoir. I also loved Marilynne Robinson’s Gilead trilogy. She writes with power and delicacy about people’s relationships and interior lives, about ideas and experiences of regret, resentment, and forgiveness. The next Australian book you’ll read: I am reading The Lebs by Michael Mohammed Ahmad, his novel about a Lebanese-Australian teenager, Bani Adam. It is set in Punchbowl Boys’ high school in Sydney’s western suburbs in 2001. I love the energy of Ahmad’s writing, his prose, his ability to animate the complexity of the young men’s world. Phillipa McGuinness The Year Everything Changed Penguin Your book in your words: Quite a few years ago I found myself thinking about the publishing phenomenon that is the book devoted to a particular year. Books like 1776, 1915 or 1968. Trying to think of a year within memory that wasn’t all about war, I settled on 2001, though of course it was the year a war began that has not ended. It was also the year we lost our second child, the worst experience of my life. I realised I wanted to tell my own story within the story of a year, one that included a day, 9/11, that everyone remembered. Not only where we were, but how we felt. 2001 gave us the war on terror, the Pacific Solution and the unexpected third term of John Howard. One.Tel, HIH and Ansett collapsed, as did Enron, but in Australia we managed to avoid a recession. It’s not all bad news: from thousands of possibilities, we might even celebrate a year that gave us Wikipedia, Moulin Rouge and the Strokes. More essayistic than chronological, I wanted to remember what it was like to be there and make sense of the impact of so many of the events, big and small, that unfolded that year. What you were reading when you wrote it: A lot. In my introduction I mention three books that were guiding lights: David Marr and Marian Wilkinson’s Dark Victory; Lawrence Wright’s The Looming Tower and Jane Mayer’s The Dark Side. At night, as I returned from 2001 with a desperate need to calm my mind, I reached most often for a book published in 1974, Annie Dillard’s Pilgrim at Tinker Creek. Meditative and poetic, it carried me far away from the horrors of 9/11 and Tampa. The next Australian book you’ll read: Virginia Lloyd’s Girls at the Piano. It promises a mix of the personal and the historical, not to mention the performative, that will be right up my alley. Belinda Castles Bluebottle Allen and Unwin Your book in your own words: Bluebottle tells the story of a family cracking apart on a steamy Boxing Day in a Sydney beach shack, and the enduring effects of that day on the children. The father is mercurial and charismatic, a nightmare of unpredictability, and the children absorb his whims according to their current position of favour. It’s a novel about how the individual children in a family experience the dramas of their childhoods, how the same events can have very different meanings in their adult lives. The setting is important to the story too: Bilgola and Avalon are so wild, lush and elemental for city suburbs. Coastal weather is also a feature. I’d always wanted to write a story around the breaking of a southerly, to shape a novel around that weather pattern. I love the sense of build-up, chaos and aftermath. What you were reading when you wrote it: The Burgess Boys and other fiction by Elizabeth Strout. It was thrilling to discover Strout. Her subtle, gripping stories confirmed my sense that what we mean to one another, and how we carry our pasts, are central to who we are and how we understand our lives. The next Australian book you’ll read: Jessie Cole’s memoir, Staying. I listened to Jessie talking about her difficult but beautifully vivid memories of growing up as I was travelling to work one morning and ended up walking along a city street in tears. Nino Bucci The Stoccos Penguin Your book in your own words: It tells the story of Gino and Mark Stocco, the crooks who became notorious for shooting at police and then gallivanting across Kelly Country. But that manhunt was the end of their strange lives as criminals, not the start. This is about the man they murdered, the people they sought vengeance against in deeply troubling ways, and the police who tracked them down. In telling those stories it explores contemporary Australia and life on the road. It delves into the identity of migrants, farmers and law enforcement. But overwhelmingly it is about a father and his son and the madness that built in them and then consumed them. Was it the isolation? The slights of the people who moved them on? The breakdown of a marriage? It is not something that can be completely explained, but this book leads you down the roads the Stoccos travelled, and back out again. What you were reading when you wrote it: There were three: The Tall Man, Chloe Hooper; Helter Skelter, Vincent Bugliosi with Curt Gentry; People Who Eat Darkness, Richard Lloyd Parry. They encouraged me to shape the sense of place, and embrace the organic narrative arc that underpins most true crime. The next Australian book you’ll read: The Bush, Don Watson. Writing The Stoccos has made me increasingly ponderous about the vastness of Australia, and what it means that so many of us now live in cities. Lisa Portolan Happy As Echo Your book in your own words: Have you ever considered how your notion of happiness has been constructed? Happiness isn’t just an ephemeral, transient emotion that fills us with glee – for most of us, it’s a series of milestones, possessions, a modern-day notion of success and the perfectible self. We can’t be slothful, broke, uniformed and happy – or so we think. Happy As examines how communication, advertising, dominant social norms and digital media have constructed our perception of happiness, and how this personification of the emotion could be leading us astray. It’s possible that our insatiable quest for happiness is actually making us miserable and if we refocused on personal authenticity and accepted the fallibility of self, we might reach a longer lasting sense of contentment. Happy As is an off-beat, slightly ironic look at the human condition, our fixation with happiness, ego and the desire for the perfect self. What you were reading when you wrote it: Distraction, Damon Young. It examines our compulsion as human beings to ensure life means something, or that we’re at least “happy” – we can’t simply live the next 75 years or so being distracted. It reinforced my thinking around meaning as a happiness requirement, and of digital person-holes. The next Australian book you’ll read: The Friendship Cure, Kate Leaver. Kate’s a brilliant Australian journalist. Her look at friendship as a central component to our increasingly isolated and lonely lives really interests me from a social perspective; why are we so disconnected when we’re so connected? Tracy Ryan We Are Not Most People Transit Lounge Your book in your own words: It’s the story of two misfits, Kurt and Terry, well-meaning but lonely, who fall in love despite all odds. Those odds include a 30-year age gap, and coming from opposite sides of the world. Kurt is a Swiss who migrates to Australia in the 1960s with his first wife, and Terry a young woman born in Australia that same decade. Though so different, they were both brought up in the Catholic Church and have fallen away from it. This gives them common ground. In his earlier life, Kurt was a trainee priest despite his better judgement; in Australia he’s a teacher, against his will – he’d rather plant trees. Terry, briefly a postulant nun, can’t find any place to belong. It seems they belong together, yet the past keeps getting in the way. It’s a novel about love, difference, migration, and trying to make a home that isn’t just a roof over your head. What you were reading when you wrote it: Bizarrely, a dark, disturbing German “Krimi” or crime novel, Tina Schlegel’s Schreie im Nebel (“screams in the fog”), which has a vegan detective! We were living in southern Germany at the time, and that brought back memories of Switzerland, not far away. Schlegel’s plot and characters have nothing to do with my book – it’s just a language connection. The next Australian book you’ll read: I’m looking forward to Anita Heiss’s edited collection, Growing Up Aboriginal in Australia, excited about the range of insights its many contributors will offer. I loved Tony Birch’s Common People and he’s one of the writers in this volume too. Kate Wild Waiting for Elijah Scribe Your book in your own words: Waiting for Elijah examines the fatal police shooting of 24-year-old Elijah Holcombe in Armidale, NSW in 2009. Elijah was mentally ill when he was shot by Senior Constable Andrew Rich in a small back street of a large country town. Rich told police that he had no choice but some eye witnesses disagreed, and Rich’s actions became the subject of a legal argument that lasted years. Although the Holcombes believed that Elijah had posed no threat to anyone, Rich had acted on society’s behalf, they said. Every one of us bore responsibility for the outcome. As first responders in situations where mentally ill people find themselves in crisis, police bear the brunt and often the blame for the final outcome of these complex situations. Waiting for Elijah is about compassion and fear, about the systems we use to try to fix things, and the strength that resides in owning our human frailties. What you were reading when you wrote it: Joe Cinque’s Consolation, Helen Garner. Helen faced and solved so many of the issues I struggled with in giving narrative drive to a legal story that sprawled over a six year period. Cries Unheard, Gitta Sereny, and Adrienne Rich’s poetry collection, The Fact of a Doorframe, were also important emotional touchstones while I wrote Elijah’s story. The next Australian book you’ll read: Tracker, Alexis Wright. I access and understand history best through biography, and Tracker’s life captures the modern history of black Australia in the Northern Territory. Told by a writer as unique and wise as Alexis, I think it will be special. Ali Berg and Michelle Kalus The Book Ninja Simon and Schuster Your book in your own words: The Book Ninja stars Frankie Rose, a 29-year-old woman who is desperate for love, but can’t quite seem to find it. So she turns to the one true love in life: books. She decides to plant all her favourites on the train, with a love note written on the seventh last page, in the hopes of finding the man of her dreams. She blogs about her dating adventures, sharing tales of the quirky, crazy and romantic characters she meets. The Book Ninja is a love letter to soulmates, friendship, the magical city of Melbourne, but most of all, it’s a tribute and declaration of love to our favourite books. We were inspired to write this by our initiative Books on the Rail, where we drop books on public transport for people to find, read and return. What you were reading when you wrote it: We’re so lucky to be sent hundreds of books by publishers all over Australia, as part of our Books on the Rail movement. In other words, we were reading a lot! Some of our favourite inspirations at the time of writing were Graeme Simsion’s The Rosie Project and Brooke Davis’ Lost and Found. The next Australian book you’ll read: Eggshell Skull by Bri Lee. We’re both big Bookstagrammers, and Bri’s book is all over Instagram at the moment - with rave reviews. This book is about violence, sexual assault and the legal system - and considering the current climate, we feel it necessary for us, and everyone else, to read it. Now.
28||ABC rejects idea it is unfairly competing with commercial mediaThe ABC does not crowd out commercial media but sparks innovation and nurtures the creative community, the broadcaster has told a government inquiry. In a submission to the government’s competitive neutrality inquiry, the ABC has rejected the suggestion its activities online should be curtailed because it is unfairly competing with News Corp and Fairfax Media for online traffic. Commercial media have lobbied for the government to review the ABC charter with a view to restricting it to services such as regional news and information, emergency broadcasting and children’s programming. While revenues for commercial news have declined, the ABC’s traffic has remained stable, suggesting the cause of that decline is not related to the broadcaster, the submission argues. “What has changed is the arrival of large global competitors such as Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix and Google as players in the market for digital media services,” the submission says. The government’s inquiry is examining the expansion of the ABC’s online news service, ABC iview, SBS On Demand and other services, in the light of complaints from Foxtel, News Corp Australia and Fairfax about taxpayer-funded media crowding them out and that the ABC is spending money competing with commercial media. “Any move to curtail the ABC’s activities would serve only to punish Australian audiences who trust and value us,” the ABC managing director, Michelle Guthrie, said when releasing the submission. “The ABC looks forward to engaging further with the panel and having an opportunity to respond to the concerns raised by other participants in the inquiry.” Economist Robert Kerr, commercial TV lobbyist Julie Flynn and former ABC TV executive and producer Sandra Levy are on the panel, appointed by the communications minister, Mitch Fifield. Competitive neutrality principles require that public entities should not enjoy a competitive advantage. In response to accusations that it was using taxpayer funds to compete against commercial media, the submission revealed that the corporation spent less than 0.2% of its budget on digital marketing, such as Google ads, to promote its content. The ABC submission provides historical context too, saying it’s not the first time it has been attacked by the commercial media for ideological, opportunistic or “a straw man-diversion tactic”. “During the 1930s Depression, the ABC was confined to broadcasting news bulletins on radio until 7.50pm, when it was expected that the public had read the afternoon newspapers,” it said. “By 1937, Sir Keith Murdoch had concerns about the growing independence of ABC News and its effect on his commercial radio and newspaper interests, and his newspapers began a call to reduce the ABC’s licence fees.” The submission points out that the inquiry is the result of an agreement between the government and One Nation, and the culmination of longstanding criticism of the public broadcasters by commercial media. Guthrie said public and commercial media had successfully co-existed since the founding of the ABC 86 years ago. “This mixed media model has contributed enormously to media diversity, a well-informed public and a richer Australian culture,” she said. “As its submission shows, the ABC is well aware of its privileged position in Australian society. “Far from disadvantaging commercial media, the evidence shows the ABC has a positive influence on the broader media sector, including in its focus on innovation and its ability to serve as a launchpad for ideas and fresh talent.” In a separate submission, the commercial broadcasters have argued for SBS to drop its partly-commercial model because they are competing for the same advertisers. Free TV also wants SBS to stick to its multicultural charter and cease offering mainstream content.
4||Africa’s group-stage failure stems from slim resources and talent drainOne could curse Japan for their dishonourable exploitation of the rules at Senegal’s expense. Naughty Japan! And quibble about refereeing decisions that went against Morocco. Bad VAR! But the fact is Africa has no representatives in the knockout stages of the World Cup for the first time in 36 years and no one is surprised. Each country and team has its specificities but there are also problems shared by many nations in a confederation that has more members than any other continental body but the same number of participants in the last 16 as Oceania. When the World Cup is expanded to 48 teams the Confederation of African Football will argue for an increased allocation but it is better not to dwell on its countries’ results in Russia. It would be wrong to extrapolate too much from one tournament and there are positives to which CAF could point, such as the fact that Senegal and Nigeria, in particular, deployed a clutch of exciting young players,such as Ismaila Sarr, Moussa Wagué and Oghenekaro Etebo, who could become even better thanks to their experience on the global stage. And the role of bad luck does have to be acknowledged. Things might have panned out very differently for Senegal if Colombia had not had a man sent off in the opening minutes against Japan or if only two yellow-card verdicts had gone the other way. Injuries struck Tunisia especially hard even before the tournament began, depriving them, most notably, of their most creative player, Youssef Msakni. Egypt were able to travel with Mo Salah but plainly not in his best state. The choices of individual coaches can also be questioned. Héctor Cúper’s negativity in charge of Egypt – even against Saudi Arabia, for goodness sake – was exasperating and started with his decision to include only one striker in his squad. Nabil Maaloul of Tunisia was guilty of ceding the initiative to England in his side’s first game when he withdrew attack-minded players and his team, whose strength is not defending, dropped deeper and deeper, almost inviting the goal that Harry Kane eventually scored. Beyond those individual issues one could point to a couple of curious weaknesses that African teams (but not only African teams) displayed during this tournament: flawed defending from set-pieces and a lack of deadly predators. That again raises questions about individuals but also alludes to the wider issue shared by many African countries: incomplete honing of potential. That has a lot to do with resources. For a start there is the talent drain that affects most sectors of most African societies – emigration from sub-Saharan Africa has enriched destination countries and depleted the source. Lots of talent remains in Africa, of course. But when it comes to football, governments and federations tend to have less money for infrastructure than many European, Asian and American counterparts. In some cases much of the money that is available is siphoned off by parasitic officials. Venal administrators are among the reasons why Cameroon and Ghana, for instance, have been unable to build on glorious feats by players. Nigeria’s league is a prime example of a domestic championship that is not run as well as it could be, which is why the Super Eagles’ victory over Iceland – a country with a population around 400 times smaller – was not especially praiseworthy. It was telling that the best performances from African teams in Russia came from Senegal and Morocco, two countries who benefit from proper youth development schemes. In the case of Senegal the scheme is not coordinated by the country’s government or football association: rather the academies that reared many of their players are disparate private initiatives, although some of them, Génération Foot (alma mater of Sarr, Badou Ndiaye, Sadio Mané and Diafra Sakho) and Diambars (Idrissa Gueye and Kara Mbodji) have been incorporated into the nation’s top flight. Academies abound in Africa but the ones in Senegal are among the best-run. Morocco have tapped into European academies. Seventeen members of Hervé Renard’s squad were born abroad to parents with Moroccan heritage. They are not all graduates of training centres but all got most of their footballing education outside Morocco. The make-up of Algeria’s squad at the last World Cup was similar. Tunisia used to be more reluctant to seek second-generation players but one of the first things Maaloul did after qualifying for Russia was begin scouring Europe for players with Tunisian roots, ultimately drafting four France-born players into his squad. The Maghreb countries have some of the strongest domestic leagues in Africa but Maaloul says player development in that region has a particular problem. “There are some common factors,” he said after the eliminations of Tunisia and Egypt. “We need to change our lifestyle because it is not in line with high-level football. We need two more generations to reach the top level of performance in terms of fitness and physical strength. We are far from the level required.”
8||Talking Horses: Natural Scenery looks attractive bet for NorthumberlandBeaten just half a length in last year’s running of the Northumberland Plate, Natural Scenery (2.05) is taken to go one place better when they run the race once more on Saturday. The Godolphin mare has an excellent record on the Tapeta at Newcastle, having won on both her other starts here, and looks pretty well handicapped too. An arguably unlucky third in the Ebor in August, she is somehow 4lb below the mark she had that day, having raced just once in Britain since then. Her spring form in Meydan was fair but the impression is that a second assault on this race has been the basic plan for her for the last 12 months. She can give a welcome boost to the underachieving stable of Saeed bin Suroor, at odds of around 10-1. Withhold was undeniably well treated when storming home in the Cesarewitch but he’s 12lb higher now and hasn’t been seen for eight months. Higher Power, last year’s winner, is feared more. 12.20 Newcastle He’s been dropped 1lb for finishing 11th on Guineas weekend but Ekhtiyaar was only beaten two and a half lengths that day after trouble in running and, on ratings, it was a 5lb better effort than on his reappearance. He didn’t peak until July last year and it’s reasonable to expect that he has more to offer. 12.55 Newcastle An unlucky third in this race a year ago, Kimberella has already been in grand form this year, going down by just a nose to Sir Dancealot at Hamilton when last seen. Given a clear run through, he should go close at least. 1.10 Newmarket A five-length success on her debut at Goodwood was really impressive from Impulsion and was achieved despite evident greenness. She’ll have to be straighter to win this Listed contest but that seems likely. 1.30 Newcastle No fewer than four of these carry penalties for recent successes, though surely there will not be many who expect the frustrating Suegioo to follow up on his first success for four years, now that he is chucked into such a hot contest. From the in-form yard of Iain Jardine, Bedrock makes more appeal, his recent Flat form being an improvement on what he showed before trying hurdles. 1.45 Newmarket Dutch Connection, expected to start favourite, comes from a yard with a 3% strike-rate in June, which hardly encourages. Sir Dancealot might be a safer bet in any case, having run with credit in much better races at York and Ascot this year. 5.15 The Curragh You’ll need At The Races to watch it live but the Irish Derby is by far the most significant horse race run in Britain or Ireland on Saturday. For many, it will boil down to a simple question of whether Saxon Warrior can leave behind the disappointment of his fourth at Epsom, now that he tackles a more conventional track. He looked a talented Guineas winner in May and clearly must be feared but it’s surprising that anyone is prepared to back him at odds of 8-11. There must be a big chance that his Epsom running is a fair reflection of his ability at this distance, in which case this is a very open contest. Dee Ex Bee will surely run his usual game race and Delano Roosevelt is better than he showed at Ascot. But the value could be 20-1 about Joseph O’Brien’s Latrobe, who has been a bit of a talking horse and may finally be getting his act together, having belatedly broken his duck here three weeks ago. He probably needs this distance and perhaps even further. It’s not hard to imagine him running on into the argument up the long straight.
3||Weekend crossword No 391
3||Quick crossword No 15,022
3||Prize crossword No 27,549
0||Ian Macdonald, father of the Senate, in danger of losing Queensland ticketHe’s the longest continuously serving senator in the Australian Senate, famous for his passionate defence of retaining the gold travel pass for politicians and his battles with Penny Wong and Gillian Triggs. But Ian Macdonald may be about to lose the upper house spot he has held on to since 1990, as the Queensland Senate ticket becomes the latest Coalition preselection flashpoint. Liberal-National party sources have long said that Macdonald, who became the father of the Senate (the title given to the longest continuous-serving MP) in February 2015, was told at his last preselection this would be his last term. But the Queensland Liberal-aligned LNP member has refused to step aside, and having failed to groom a successor in his almost three decades in the Senate, is fighting to hold on to a winnable spot on the six-person ticket. He has told party members he will not voluntarily move on, despite several overtures having been made to him to “retire gracefully”. He has also previously told the parliament he would “probably be carried out of here in a pine box”. “His biggest sell is that he is the only senator based in north Queensland,” one LNP source said on the condition of anonymity as speaking on preselection issues is against party rules. “But we haven’t won seats in north Queensland. In fact, we have gone backwards, in both the state and federal elections, and it is because, frankly, he is not doing the work needed to win up there. “He’ll be 80 if he gets another six years. We all know what he’s done in the past, but we’re trying to set this place up for the future.” In Queensland, the Liberal and Nationals parties are officially merged, meaning only one Senate ticket is produced. Facing an insurgency from conservative minor parties, such as Katter’s Australian Party and One Nation, the Nationals traded away one of their positions on the Queensland ticket to take the No 2 spot and ensure a win at every election. It has left the Liberals jostling for positions one, three and four, as the “winnable” spots. Macdonald, who has nominated for every Liberal position on the ticket, faces strong challenges from Brisbane mining executive Paul Scarr, finance executive Gerard Rennick, former candidate Teresa Harding and former Newman government MP Scott Emerson, who lost his state electorate last year to Queensland’s first Greens MP. “Scott may not have done enough work,” another LNP source said. “Paul, Teresa and Gerard have been working on this since [George] Brandis announced his departure.” The Nationals-aligned senator Barry O’Sullivan is believed to have fought off a strong challenge from Susan McDonald, a well-known figure in Queensland beef circles, whose father Don McDonald is a former party president. O’Sullivan has been strongly pushing his role in establishing the banking royal commission among party members to cement his spot. But his supporters are not claiming victory yet. While O’Sullivan is thought to have the branch numbers, the LNP state council vote has proved unpredictable in the past. The lack of women in the vote has also raised eyebrows, as the coalition attempts to address its gender imbalance. The LNP executive has also been under pressure to quell insurgencies against sitting MPs, after Jane Prentice, an assistant minister in the Turnbull government, lost her preselection to her former campaign manager. The state executive intervened to save Andrew Laming from members of his branch moving against him, as the party attempts to present a show of unity. Moves to switch up the LNP Senate ticket have been in place since January, after Brandis, a moderate in the Queensland arm of the party, announced his retirement. Amanda Stoker eventually won the battle, after a strong push to install another woman into the Queensland party, but her more conservative leanings have left LNP moderates worried about the balance. “Ian may be an ornery and stubborn bloke, and he may never stop talking about how things used to be, but he’s a true Liberal, and we saw that in the same-sex marriage debate, when he voted yes, despite his own beliefs,” a party source said. “Take a look at the LNP and you’ll see his type are rapidly becoming the minority.” The LNP Senate vote will be held on Friday, and will be followed by the state conference.
5||Bring on England: Colombians believe their team will triumphColombia does not really do quiet: the need for music, talk and laughter is too deeply ingrained in the national soul. But on Thursday morning its second city, Medellín, fell silent as if the soundtrack had been switched off. It flipped back on at 10.33am, as throaty roars, shrieks, squeals and cries of “Gol! Gol! Gol!” burst out in unison on every street in the city. Yerry Mina’s 74th-minute header against Senegal earned Colombia a place in the World Cup second round and now they face England in Moscow on Tuesday. Colombia celebrated with car horns, fireworks and a collective sense of relief. “The triumph wasn’t so much from a footballing aspect but because of the capacity to overcome adversity,” said Alexander Otálvaro, a member of the association of Colombian sports editors. Javier Villalba, a football fan from the Caribbean city of Barranquilla, said: “In Colombia, the national team is like a big family, everyone supports each other, so even though we have big stars they are not looking out for themselves, they are looking out for the team.” With the England game just days away, the belief that the team is stronger than its individuals is becoming central as the country prepares for the challenge without its hero, the boyish Bayern Munich playmaker James Rodríguez. For much of 2018, Colombians have been hanging on news alerts on Rodríguez, gripped by the saga of his faltering marriage to a model, Daniela Ospina, the sister of his Colombia teammate David Ospina, the Arsenal goalkeeper. Now, they are gripped by the latest reports from the physio room on the No 10’s persistent calf problems. Rodríguez seems likely to sit out the England match after hobbling off in the first half against Senegal. Despite the absence of Rodríguez and doubts over whether the team’s captain, Radamel Falcao, is past his best, most Colombian fans swing between cautiously optimistic and wildly optimistic over their chances of defeating England. Among them is Gabriel Gómez Jaramillo, a midfielder in the legendary Colombia team that thrilled the world in the early 1990s with their outrageous talent and even more outrageous hair. “It will be difficult for both,” he said. “England have a lot of good players, but they are very young. Colombia has the experience, and that is so important.” Beating England for a place in the quarter-finals would equal Colombia’s best placing in the tournament, but World Cup success means much more. “The World Cup means the opportunity to show the world we are much more than they think we are,” said Villalba. “[It] is the chance to show our best face, to show there are a lot of warm, good people here and we are much more than the drug and violence problems that we have.” The lowest point in the nation’s footballing history came when player Andrés Escobar was murdered in Medellín days after turning the ball into his own net, thus contributing to the team’s elimination from the 1994 World Cup. However, while Colombia’s darkest times may be in the past, the present is still complicated. A peace deal with insurgents followed by a bitterly partisan presidential election two days before the first match has left the country divided like never before. The World Cup, while it lasts, erases those divisions, and keeping that going for just a bit longer could be the true reward for beating England.
0||Emil Gayed: self-described 'nurturing' obstetrician who mutilated womenIn an online profile on a health website, Emil Shawky Gayed describes himself a “calm” and “sensitive” obstetrician and gynaecologist who has “practised medicine for many years”. “I have always managed to implement all the changes required to be able to provide the best quality care as possible... my approach is sympathetic, warm, and nurturing,” the profile says. Dozens of his former patients have a starkly different opinion. They describe him as someone who was rude and irate when questioned, and who dismissed or made light of their complaints of being in severe distress and pain. He has been found guilty by the New South Wales civil and administrative tribunal of professional misconduct for failing to adequately inform patients before performing surgery on them, and of needlessly performing surgeries such as hysterectomy and fallopian tube removal on women who could have been treated with painkillers and bed-rest. One of his patients died. But some of the hospitals where Gayed worked have no record of his employment. This is alarming given Gayed is now the subject of two separate inquiries investigating his treatment of women spanning five public hospitals. What is known about Gayed is that he graduated from Egypt’s Ain Shams public university in 1976. The University’s faculty of medicine is one of the most highly-regarded medical training faculties in Egypt. A ledger of graduates held at the faculty’s registrar’s office shows Gayed obtained the second-lowest grade of ‘good’ out of a range of four grades ranging from ‘pass’ to ‘excellent’. Records held by the Egyptian medical syndicate show Gayed registered as a doctor in 1977. Egyptian doctors seeking to work abroad sometimes require a certificate of good standing from the medical syndicate and permission from the ministry of health, depending on the requirements of their workplace. No record of such a letter exists on Gayed’s file with the syndicate. Syndicate records show while he was licensed to practise medicine in Egypt with heavy supervision in a residency or similar program, he would have been unable to practise as a specialist or a GP without a masters degree or further specialisation, which it has no records of him obtaining. By 1982 Gayed was working overseas. Records from the General Medical Council, responsible for registering doctors to practise in the UK, shows Gayed registered there in 1982. The council has no record of where in the UK he worked or if he received further training there. By the 90s Gayed had moved to Australia where he trained to become a specialist gynaecologist and obstetrician. He graduated as a fellow of the Royal Australian College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in 1993. While records of the first years Gayed worked in Australia are scarce, it is clear that within several years complaints and concerns arose about his work in his chosen speciality. Gayed began working as a locum or visiting medical officer in rural and regional towns in NSW. He often consulted patients in private rooms and performed procedures on them in the public hospitals of those towns. Gayed did stints at Kempsey District hospital between 1990 and 2003, Grafton Base hospital between 1994 and 1995, Cooma hospital between 1994 and 1999, and Manning Base hospital between 1999 and 2016. He filled in for several months as an obstetrician and gynaecologist at Canberra hospital in 1996, and also did some work at Mona Vale hospital on Sydney’s northern beaches between 2002 and 2007. But the bulk of his career was spent in regional communities. An investigation was first launched into Gayed in 2000 relating to his time working in Cooma, where general practitioners and midwives who worked with him there and in Canberra expressed concerns about his dismissive and uncaring treatment of women. While the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists confirmed it was subpoenaed for information about Gayed at the time, it no longer has records of what specific information was requested, or the outcome of any investigation. The ACT health department said it could find no records of Gayed as an employee, including as a contract medical officer or a visiting medical officer. Several senior doctors spoken to by Guardian Australia have confirmed, however, that he did work at Canberra Hospital as a locum in 1996, and that midwives especially had concerns about him. During this time, he performed ablation surgery on his own wife, which involves surgically destroying the lining of the uterus, at the John James private hospital. She was transferred to Canberra hospital’s emergency department after suffering complications. But the bulk of complaints surrounding Gayed relate to his most recent employment as a visiting medical officer at the Manning Rural Referral hospital in the small town of Taree on the mid-north coast of NSW. He consulted at his private clinic in Taree and at private rooms in Dee Why, a northern Sydney suburb 316km south. He appeared to return to his home at Collaroy Plateau, near Dee Why, on weekends, and regularly worshipped at the St Rewis Coptic Orthodox church. Although staff at the public hospital and patients had serious concerns about Gayed spanning more than two decades, Gayed’s career did not start to unravel until 2015, when one of his patients made a complaint to the Health Care Complaints Commission. The complaint was made by a woman who nearly died after a procedure Gayed had performed. She mentioned to investigators that Gayed had paid for a friend of hers to get an abortion after he failed to detect she was pregnant before performing a procedure on her that would likely have harmed her unborn child. This complaint sparked a wider investigation that found seven women received inappropriate medical treatment from Gayed between 2011 and 2016, and that many of them did not give informed consent to major surgery. The investigation found he needlessly removed the uterus of a woman who could have been treated with painkillers and bed rest, and that he removed another woman’s healthy right fallopian tube. After details of their cases were published by Guardian Australia, dozens more women came forward describing traumatic surgeries they did not want or did not need at the hands of Gayed. Some alleged they were left with serious infections and nerve damage. Manning hospital scanned Gayed’s ablation records and found ten further patients who Gayed had performed ablation on despite the presence of hyperplasia – which can be an early sign of cancer – in the uterus. Ablation should never be performed on women with hyperplasia because scarring from the procedure can mask cancer growth and trigger the development of cancerous cells. One of Gayed’s patients died after he failed to tell her that tests revealed she had hyperplasia. He performed ablation on her and did not follow- up or refer her to a cancer specialist. The hospital found Gayed had performed hundreds of ablations on women, at a far higher rate than other gynaecologists. Dr Osama Ali, the clinical director of Manning hospital who is now reviewing the cases of more than 45 women who have made further complaints to a hotline the hospital established for Gayed’s patients, said he “struggled to understand why” Gayed performed needless procedures on women. “It’s a question for him to answer, why he’s operated on all these ladies,” Ali said. “Whether it’s a matter of money, increasing his skills, recklessness, a lack of insight... I can’t tell. They’re all possibilities.” He said there was never any indication that Gayed was mentally unwell. The NSW Medical Board is now also under review for its responses to ‐ and management of ‐ historical complaints about Gayed. The Guardian has tried to contact Gayed to comment on the accusations against him, but he has not returned calls. His current whereabouts is unknown. Additional reporting by Adham Youssef in Cairo.
0||Coalition’s tax strategy at odds with OECD and many other countriesThe Turnbull government’s plan to stop the level of taxation rising across the economy is putting Australia at odds with the OECD and much of the world. New analysis of 80 countries – which account for 60% of the global gross domestic product – shows most have been steadily increasing their tax-to-GDP ratios since 2000, across the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Latin America, Africa, and major Asian economies. Data show that between 2000 and 2015, the average tax-to-GDP ratio rose from 14.2% to 19.1% in the African countries analysed, and from 18% to 23.1% in Latin American countries. In the OECD region, the average tax-to-GDP ratio rose slightly from 33.9% to 34%. Altogether, 75% of countries in the database increased their tax-to GDP ratios since 2000. Australia has bucked the trend. Its tax-to-GDP ratio fell from 30.4% in 2000 to 28.2% in 2015 – almost the same level it was in 1990 (28%). The majority of 35 OECD countries increased their tax-to-GDP ratios between 2000 and 2015, while just 16 reduced them. Among the OECD countries that increased their tax-to-GDP ratios are: Korea (21.5% to 25.2%), Switzerland (27.4% to 27.7%), Japan (25.8% to 30.7%), New Zealand (32.5% to 33%), Germany (36.2% to 37.1%), Italy (40.6% to 43.3%), Austria (42.2% to 43.7%), Belgium (43.5% to 44.8%), and France (43.1% to 45.2%). Among the OECD countries that reduced their tax-to-GDP ratios are: Ireland (30.8% to 23.1%), the United States (28.2% to 26.2%), Australia (30.4% to 28.2%), Israel (34.9% and 31.3%), Canada (34.8% to 32%), Poland (32.9% to 32.4%), the United Kingdom (33.2% to 32.5%), Norway (41.9% to 38.3%), Sweden (49% to 43.3%), and Finland (45.8% to 43.9%). The OECD’s measure of taxation includes tax revenue from federal, state and local governments. Australia’s federal budget, when discussing the tax-to-GDP ratio, only refers to commonwealth government tax revenue. The recent budget shows Australia’s tax-to-GDP ratio was 22.3% in 2015-16. The difference between the federal budget tax-to-GDP ratio of 22.3% and the OECD’s figure of 28.2% is explained by the addition of state and local government revenue to measure Australia’s overall tax-to-GDP ratio. The OECD data can be found in a new database that allows tax revenue information for 80 countries to be compared. It is the largest public source of comparable tax revenue data available. It shows there is a great deal of variation in the mix of taxes used by countries to generate revenue. Across all countries analysed, the three major sources of revenue are income and profit taxes, social security contributions, and taxes on goods and services. Property taxes, payroll taxes and other taxes represent a more modest source of revenue. Australia relies more heavily on personal income tax than almost any other country in the world. The OECD average for personal income tax is 24.4% (of all revenue), and for corporate income tax it is 8.9% (of all revenue), but Australia’s share of personal income tax is 41.5% (of all revenue) and its share of corporate income tax is 15.3% (of all revenue). The OECD says Australia and New Zealand do not levy social security contributions, explaining why Australia’s reliance on income tax is so much higher. Last week, the Turnbull government secured a big victory in parliament, convincing the Senate to pass its multibillion-dollar income-tax package, which will be rolled out in three stages over seven years. The tax cuts will cost the budget $143.9bn in forgone revenue after a decade. The government also wants to prevent Australia’s commonwealth tax-to-GDP ratio ever rising above 23.9%, and it wants to cut the statutory corporate tax rate for all companies from 30% to 25%, worth $65.4bn in forgone revenue by 2027-28. An OECD working paper, which draws on the new database, says tax-to-GDP ratios have been converging in the 21st century as countries with low revenues have significantly increased their tax-to-GDP ratios, helping them to make “strong progress” towards mobilising domestic financing for development. The paper says levels of tax revenues are now higher and more even across countries than at the turn of the century, and countries with the lowest revenues have experienced the largest increases in their tax-to-GDP ratios.
6||Trump to announce supreme court pick on 9 JulyDonald Trump said on Friday he plans to announce his nominee for a forthcoming vacancy on the supreme court on 9 July – a lightning-quick move to replace the retiring swing vote Justice Anthony Kennedy, 81. Speaking aboard Air Force One en route to his private golf club in New Jersey on Friday afternoon, the president announced that he has five finalists, including two women, out of the shortlist of 25 names that had been previously circulated. Speaking to reporters on the plane from Washington DC, Trump said he may interview one or two contenders for the nomination this weekend in New Jersey. “I’ve got it narrowed to about five,” he said. Of Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 decision that legalized abortion in the US, he said: “I’m not going to ask them that question.” Anthony Kennedy announced on Wednesday that he would retire, confirming rumbling speculation shortly after the supreme court ruled in favor of Trump’s controversial travel ban on a group of Muslim-majority countries. Democrats had argued that any nomination should be delayed until after the midterm elections in November. But the Republicans are in the driving seat on the decision, with a majority grip on the Senate, the body that confirms the judge, as well as their person in the White House. The shortlist comprises 25 names of judges who are known for their conservatism, even to the point of being called rightwing ideologues by some Democratic lawmakers. Democrats have little chance of blocking Trump’s pick, while experts have warned that legal abortion, workers’ and others’ rights and even democracy itself are at stake.
4||Gareth Southgate: Maybe I’ve put more pressure on myself, maybe I haven’tGareth Southgate has conceded his honeymoon period as England manager is over and admitted the decision to rest so many players for the team’s final World Cup group game has left him open to criticism should the knockout tie with Colombia be lost. The England players had accepted Southgate’s plan to make eight changes for the game against Belgium in Kaliningrad, where they were beaten 1-0, with the manager making a point of taking his captain, Harry Kane, to one side to explain his reasoning. The defeat has actually dropped England into a potentially more favourable side of the draw but, with momentum checked, Colombia represent awkward opponents in Tuesday’s last-16 tie in Moscow. Had England won against Belgium they would have topped the section and faced Japan, ranked 61 in the world, in Rostov on Monday. “I think whoever we played we believe we’re capable of beating [them],” said Southgate. “And whoever we play, in a one-off game, is capable of beating us. But we had to make a decision we felt gave us the best opportunity preparing the whole squad for that game, and that’s what we tried to do. “Of course, if we don’t win, I understand people would say whatever about the Belgium match as well. But, for me, that was the right thing to do and you’ve got to take decisions you believe are the right ones. “Maybe I have put more pressure on myself, maybe I haven’t. That is the least of my concerns. The most important thing for me is that the players are in the best physical condition for the game on Tuesday. I don’t think, mentally, we lose anything because they know we’ve made changes and they know Belgium weren’t their full team as well. “So, we’re in to big matches where margins will be fine and judgment on me will be extremely harsh. That’s why we’re here. We want to be in those games. To be trying to win a first knockout game for 12 years is exciting. We’ve got the chance to be the team that changes that. It’s one of the reasons why we did what we did [against Belgium], to give ourselves the best possible opportunity of doing that. I wasn’t so comfortable with the love-in in the buildup to Belgium, to be honest, so it’s nice that there’s a little bit of an edge back.” England have won only two World Cup knockout games since 1990 – against Denmark in 2002 and Ecuador in 2006 – but Southgate is convinced the decision to grant all but Jordan Pickford, John Stones and, after the break, Harry Maguire, an evening off in Kaliningrad will ensure his first-choice selection are fresh for the tie at the Spartak Stadium. He is expected to revert to the lineup that defeated Tunisia in the opening Group G fixture on Tuesday against Colombia, with Dele Alli fit to return in place of Ruben Loftus-Cheek. The manager had spoken to Kane, still the tournament’s leading scorer with five goals, to explain the strategy. “I felt the need to sit with him but he was brilliant, absolutely brilliant,” said Southgate. “He totally understood, 100% team first. He said: ‘Look, I know everyone says I want the Golden Boot. Of course it’s something I want to do. But the main thing is getting the team through the first knockout.’ He was excellent on that, showed real leadership and understanding of the big picture. “There is something about tournament strategy that’s important. You have to be bold enough to accept that might come with questions at times but, if we believe it’s the right thing, stand by it. We have seen it in other tournaments with junior teams. When they have had an opportunity to play everyone, they have done. “The harmony of the group is really important. You get players going into training knowing they have played in a World Cup. There is a big difference as a player going home knowing you can say that. No matter how much praise I give them for the way they are training, unless you can get them on the field it doesn’t feel the same for a player.” Southgate’s approach has been backed by the players. “Gareth is a top manager and a man of great knowledge, and everything he has done up to now, since I’ve been in the England set-up, has been spot on,” said Maguire. “We are fully behind all of his decisions. He’s a brave manager and he makes big decisions. He fills you with confidence, no matter what decision is made. We trust him as a group and hopefully it’s the right decision in the long run. “He and [Roberto] Martínez were both probably looking at the bigger picture and know that the next game is the biggest one of them all. Hopefully it can benefit us. It’s only a good decision if we go and put in a performance in the next game and qualify for the quarter-finals.”
4||Colombia’s Davinson Sánchez ready for battle with Spurs clubmate Harry KaneThe Tottenham Hotspur player WhatsApp group has taken a global twist. The club have 12 on World Cup duty, representing six nations and, whenever one of them or their teams do well, the messages and encouragement follow. The tone of some of the exchanges may be different in the coming days or perhaps radio silence will descend out of necessity. Davinson Sánchez is the lone Spur in the Colombia squad and he has begun to prepare for Tuesday’s last-16 match with England. Sánchez and Colombia might have faced Belgium if results had worked out differently, which would have put him up against his clubmates Jan Vertonghen, Toby Alderweireld and Mousa Dembélé. Instead, it is England and, when Sánchez reflects, it is the opposition he would have chosen. The 22-year-old will face Kieran Trippier, Danny Rose, Eric Dier, Dele Alli and Harry Kane and it is the duel with the final name on the list that forms one of the principal subplots. Sánchez against Kane, centre-half v centre-forward, a contest that has been played countless times in Tottenham training sessions. Each one knows the other’s game inside out but, at the Spartak Stadium, they have to find a way to gain the edge. It stands to have a decisive bearing on the result. Can Sánchez and his towering defensive partner Yerry Mina of Barcelona stop the player who leads the race for the Golden Boot with five goals? “Harry is a compañero, a mate,” Sánchez said. “I haven’t spoken with him, although we’ve got a WhatsApp group there [at Tottenham] and we say congratulations to each other when we score or when we win. I’m happy for Harry because he’s in a great moment but if I play against him, I’ll try to stop him. “Who we faced was not in my hands and I’ve also got Belgian teammates at Tottenham. But obviously being more familiar with the Premier League, I’m going to prefer England as opposition. Can we beat them? Anything is possible.” Colombia are dreaming of going deep into the competition, of emulating or bettering their charge to the quarter-finals at Brazil 2014, when their exuberant football helped to energise a nation and, also, change perceptions about it around the world. The passion of the Colombia supporters who have travelled to Russia has been a feature of the tournament but what has sustained the team has been their mental fortitude. The campaign got off to the worst imaginable start when the midfielder Carlos Sánchez was sent off in the third minute of the tie against Japan. But, after the 2-1 defeat, they beat Poland 3-0 with a free-flowing display before toughing out a 1-0 victory over Senegal to advance as the Group H winners. Colombia had been second-best in the first half against Senegal but they found a way to win, Mina heading the winner in the 74th minute. “We’re a team with a lot of character,” Sánchez said. “We’ve always known if we play to our potential, we can be a Colombia team that can take on anybody. It always gives you confidence to get a result like the one against Senegal, when you get that momentum and, obviously, anything from here on in is a triumph. “We are in a tough profession. It is a job that has big challenges and the slightest problem can expose us. The staff and players try to enjoy it and work with responsibility. But most of us understand that football bears fruit when you do it with passion and love. Our entire country celebrate every goal as if it’s our last.”
4||Gareth Southgate looks to lay ghost of Euro 96 penalty shootout to restIt was inevitable that, at some point, the conversation with Gareth Southgate would turn to the most harrowing ordeal of his professional life and the reasons why the England manager, after two decades of living with the consequences, is so determined to make sure his team will not fall into the same trap. Southgate was thinking back to that night against Germany in the semi-final of Euro 96, with the game drawn 1-1, and the traumatic events that led to John Major, the prime minister, offering him a sympathetic hug outside Wembley. The night Southgate was asked by Terry Venables, just moments before the penalty shootout started, if he would take one and it hit him, in his own words, like “a bolt from the blue”. The night he assured Bryan Robson that, yes, he had taken a penalty before. “Bryan didn’t ask for details,” Southgate later recalled. “That suited me. My penalty career had been brief: one missed effort for Crystal Palace three seasons previously.” It is 22 years since Southgate set off on that lonely walk from the centre circle and, if nothing else, at least it means he can speak from authority now England have reached the stage of the World Cup where the line between success and failure could feasibly rest on one team’s accuracy from 12 yards. Southgate can remember that walk and how dark it had suddenly become: the realisation the world was watching, the nauseous feeling that Andreas Köpke, the German goalkeeper, seemed to have grown a few inches and, worse, the moment the crowd made out who it was walking towards the penalty area. “It’s Southgate, the inexperienced lad,” was how it felt at the time, nerves mangled. For England, Southgate’s haunted look that night is all part of a wider narrative. Add Stuart Pearce and Chris Waddle at Italia 90, Paul Ince and David Batty at France 98, David Beckham and Darius Vassell at Euro 2004, the misses of Frank Lampard, Steven Gerrard and Jamie Carragher at the 2006 World Cup and the Euro 2012 aberrations of Ashley Young and Ashley Cole. England’s shootout record is, frankly, abysmal: six defeats from seven in major tournaments, the exception being against Spain at Euro 96. And not forgetting, the penalty misses of Les Ferdinand and Rob Lee against Belgium in the King Hassan II International Cup in Morocco in 1998. Equally, it is fair to say England’s players will never have been better prepared if Tuesday’s game against Colombia, or any of the possible assignments beyond that point, goes the same way and perhaps that should not be a surprise given the identity of the manager and his own story. “I have had a couple of decades thinking it through,” Southgate said. “I was a volunteer, really [in Euro 96]. The type of character I was, I felt you should put yourself forward. It is probably braver not to, if you are not confident. But in defence of the staff who were there at the time, penalty shootouts weren’t as regular then. FA Cup ties, for instance, went to two or three replays, so we weren’t in those situations as often as now. The depth of knowledge and understanding wasn’t so great and we didn’t have as much information as we do now.” Southgate was asked after the 1-0 defeat against Belgium in Kaliningrad whether his players had started practising penalties and he replied the process had started in March rather than cramming in everything over a matter of days. His players have been encouraged to practice at the end of virtually each training session, starting with the walk from the centre circle. A team of video analysts – two of whom, Stephen O’Brien and Mike Baker, are in Repino – have been studying the opposition penalty-takers to offer Jordan Pickford clues, as well as analysing the diving patterns of all the World Cup goalkeepers. England already have their five designated penalty-takers drawn up and the back-up options. Southgate even has a list of the staff who are allowed to go on the pitch and others he wants to keep out of the way. The phrase he uses, more than once, is to “own the process” – meaning to take control rather than wilting under the pressure, as he did. England’s players even had psychometric tests before the tournament to help the process. “We’ve looked at individual processes, individual techniques,” Southgate said. “We’ve done various different studies and different practices. Then we’ve looked at how, collectively, we would want to approach a shootout, making sure there’s a calmness, that we own the process and it’s not decisions made on the spur of the moment. We have to make sure it’s calm, that the right people are on the pitch and it doesn’t become too many voices in the players’ heads. The margins are fine in the knockout phases. We have to be prepared physically and mentally to go to extra time and beyond if that’s what it takes.” This is not something Southgate has just started thinking about. In May, he could already identify the five players he considered had the best psychological profile to be mandatory picks. Penalty shootouts are often described as a lottery, yet the England manager strongly disagrees. “Definitely, it’s not about luck. It’s not about chance. It’s about performing a skill under pressure. There are individual things you can work on within that. We have to know who is in charge, who needs to get out of the way, who can speak with clarity to the players. There is lots we can do to own the process and not be controlled by it.” Harry Kane, England’s first-choice penalty-taker, has already scored twice from the spot against Panama. Jamie Vardy has the responsibility for Leicester and, in theory, could be brought on as a substitute specifically with that in mind, whereas Kieran Trippier, Jesse Lingard, Jordan Henderson and Ruben Loftus-Cheek may be strong candidates. For now, however, Southgate is keeping his five names a secret. “We will have a more considered list of who has been finishing [the penalties] in training,” Southgate said . “If we have made [team] changes, we keep updating the list. There are the players who take penalties regularly, who have their own routine and who are able to change depending on the goalkeeper, and others who don’t take them as regularly and need to practice one or two stock penalties. With some, we shouldn’t be interfering. For others, we are giving them a process which we believe will help them.” Southgate, after all, knows how devastating it can be to lose this way and the infamy that led to him, Pearce and Waddle wearing paper bags over their heads for the Pizza Hut advert. “Gareth, you mustn’t blame yourself for this,” Major told him. But he did, inevitably, and the longer account from Woody and Nord, his 2003 joint autobiography with Andy Woodman, makes it even clearer why he does not want any of his players to suffer the same life sentence. Southgate describes himself as the man who shattered a nation’s dream. “I tell myself time has moved on, people aren’t bothered about the penalty any more. And then I’m in a hotel lobby and a girl turns to her boyfriend and says: ‘I think that’s the guy that missed the penalty.’ ‘Shssh,’ he says, but too late.”
4||Gary Cahill says England ‘are very aware’ of threat posed by Radamel FalcaoGary Cahill believes England will face a far more deadly Radamel Falcao when they play Colombia on Tuesday than the player who failed to make an impact in the Premier League. From Cristiano Ronaldo in Germany in 2006, to Mario Balotelli and Luis Suárez in Brazil four years ago, England are painfully aware of the damage that can be inflicted by Premier League alumni on the big stage. Whether it is a keener awareness of the opposition or some deeper motivation to prove a point to those who doubted them, each has contributed significantly to England’s exit from the World Cup in tournaments past. Arguably, the Colombia duo of Falcao and Juan Cuadrado have even more reason to bring misery to England after both endured a torrid couple of seasons in the Premier League. Falcao has an affinity with England and not just because of the two years he spent living in the country. The 32-year-old has British blood, his great-grandfather George King having been born in Selby, North Yorkshire, before moving to South America in 1932. In his home country, Falcao is known as El Tigre, a nickname first given to him by a teammate early in his career, in recognition of a ruthlessness in front of goal. It is a moniker that would have seemed almost laughable to those who closely watched his underwhelming spells at Chelsea and Manchester United. But Cahill, who played alongside Falcao at Stamford Bridge, remembers a player who worked hard despite struggling to make an impact. “It was a bit stop-start for him,” Cahill said, “Sometimes, you don’t get loads of opportunities, you’re in for one or two games, then you’re out or not even a full 90, that was his frustration for us. He never really got up and running, or got a good spell of games back to back to find any sort of form. Obviously the competition was there and I’m sure for him it was difficult but he showed his character to go on and find his goalscoring form again. He’s been banging goals in again ever since.” In France’s Ligue 1, Falcao has reignited his career at Monaco, scoring 54 goals for club and country since leaving England, and was nominated for the 2017 Ballon d’Or. “Outside of England he’s a very high-profile player,” Cahill said. “He’s scored many goals. He did have a difficult time in England, showed his character when he went to find his form again. He’s someone we’re all very aware of.”
4||England must be wary of ‘formidable’ Colombia, warns Lukasz FabianskiLukasz Fabianski has warned England that Colombia are formidable opponents and capable of tearing teams apart if they get control of the game. Reflecting on the way in which Poland were comprehensively outclassed and outplayed by Colombia during their 3-0 defeat in Kazan, Fabianski described José Pekerman’s side as “the team to avoid at this stage” and highlighted the quality of their midfield in particular. England face Colombia in Moscow on Tuesday after losing their final group game against Belgium on Thursday to finish second, with that 1-0 defeat putting Gareth Southgate’s side in the easier half of the draw in the eyes of some. Yet Fabianski, who made his first appearance at the World Cup finals in Poland’s 1-0 win over Japan, believes that England have made life a lot harder for themselves in another respect. “I think they [England] would have preferred to play Japan rather than Colombia,” Fabianski said. “Colombia is a much better side, much more dangerous. They lost the first game against Japan but I think if you look at the qualities, the team to avoid at this stage of the tournament would be Colombia.” Although James Rodríguez is a doubt for the England game after limping off during the first half of their 1-0 victory over Senegal in Samara, Fabianski pointed to other gifted individuals in the Colombia team, in particular Juan Quintero, who scored in their opening match against Japan with a clever free-kick and also played a delightful pass to set up Radamel Falcao for the second goal in the emphatic win over Poland. “Colombia have so much quality in the midfield, in [Juan] Cuadrado and James Rodríguez. But especially Rodríguez and [Juan] Quintero,” Fabianski added. “He’s a really good player [Quintero] with real confidence about himself. This midfield, with Rodríguez as well, has quality-quality.” Pekerman’s side are at their most dangerous when counterattacking. It was their greatest strength at the last World Cup, where Colombia racked up four straight victories before losing to Brazil in the quarter-finals, and held the key to their impressive performance against Poland, who were picked off as they chased an equaliser. “They tore us apart when we played against them, so I think you have to look [out] when you face them,” Fabianski said. “You have to try to make sure they don’t get a grip on the game. In games like this on the big stage things are often quite even until the first goal. Then you have to change. One team has to go for it and the other team feels much more confident because they know: ‘Thank you very much, now we’re going to open you up.’ That’s what happened in our game against Colombia.”
8||Sprinters taking aim at Linford Christie’s 100m British recordIt is one of the most prestigious and robust records in British track and field history. But shortly after tea-time on Saturday, Linford Christie’s national 100m best of 9.87sec – which has stood for 25 years – could finally be toppled. It speaks volumes for the strength in depth of British sprinting that there are three athletes with the speed in their legs, and the fire in their bellies, at the British Championships in Birmingham. Reece Prescod, who has run a wind-assisted 9.88sec and beat the world champion, Justin Gatlin, in May, said: “Everyone is raising their game and we have a really competitive field in Birmingham. It is probably the best ever 100m at trials. The record could definitely go on the right conditions and the right day.” Zharnel Hughes, who ran a personal best of 9.91sec this month, is even bolder. “The crowd will be in for something spectacular,” he said. “I’m not putting any expectations on myself but records are meant to be broken.” CJ Ujah, the reigning Diamond League 100m champion, is also gunning for Christie’s record, set in Stuttgart in 1993, as well as one of the three places on offer for the European Championships in August while Ojie Edoburun, who set a personal best of 10.04 three weeks ago, cannot be discounted. The expectation is that Prescod, who has kicked on impressively after finishing seventh in last year’s world championships, is the man to beat. Especially as he believes his recent performances only hint at his potential. “There is no limit to speed,” he said. “I still have so much to work on, so I know I can go faster than 9.8, so in the 9.7s. It won’t happen overnight but in a few years when I have got stronger and worked on my start a lot more, I feel like anything is possible. “If I told myself last year I would run 9.88 windy, I would have said no way, but you have to surprise yourself. Things happen.” In the past, the 100m was the ultimate mano a mano contest, with athletes glaring and talking the talk in the call room in an attempt to unsettle their rivals. But Prescod insists that there is no animosity among the new wave of British sprinters, who realise that if they get on with each other it can enhance their chances of a 4x100m relay gold at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. “Back in the day it was eyeballing, and who was the strongest man in the call room, but to me that is just a waste of energy,” Prescod said. “So I don’t go out there all angry. I have a little dance, set the blocks down and go. I am still young, I can’t be angry.” Even if Christie’s record does not fall in Birmingham there is a looming sense that it is on borrowed time, especially given that Prescod, Hughes and Edoburun are only 22, while Ujah is 24. The men’s 100m is the highlight of two days of competition that organisers hope will put British athletics back on the sporting map before next month’s World Cup – which a worryingly high number of big names are set to swerve – and the Anniversary Games a week later at the London Stadium. Last year, the UK trials had a distinct lack of stars – Mo Farah, Greg Rutherford, Laura Muir and Katarina Johnson-Thompson were all missing – and an absence of bums on seats. To make matters worse, when Ujah broke 10 seconds for the 100m, it took 10 minutes for his time to show because of technical problems. This time, though, most of the big names are back – although Rutherford misses out because of appendicitis and Farah has since quit the track – and UK Athletics insists that ticket sales for the two days are up. Other highlights of the weekend include Dina Asher-Smith and Muir in the women’s 100m and 1500m respectively, while Shara Proctor and Lorraine Ugen, who finished third and fourth in the Commonwealth Games, square off in the long jump. In a stacked men’s 1500m, Chris O’Hare is a slight favourite ahead of Jake Wightman, the NCAA champion, Josh Kerr and Charlie Grice. In the men’s 800m, Kyle Langford, who was fourth in the world championships last year, has a stiff challenge against Elliot Giles and Andrew Osagie, who is looking to put a long run of injuries behind him since running 1min 43.77sec in the final of London 2012 and earning bronze in the world indoors in 2014.
25||The Bridge recap: season four, episode eight – an emotional goodbye to SagaSPOILER ALERT: This is for people watching The Bridge at BBC Two pace. Don’t read on if you haven’t seen episode eight of the fourth series – and if you’ve seen further ahead, please do not post spoilers. You can read the previous recaps here Over the course of four seasons, Saga Norén has commuted between Malmö and Copenhagen countless times, usually in laser-focused pursuit of a lead, a vital witness or a promising suspect. Tonight she got to park her professional obligations and stop halfway along the Øresund Bridge to belatedly take in the view. It looked windy and chilly. Having just witnessed her empty a lock-up and set fire to much of her old life, seeing Saga stood at the guardrail, gazing out over the turbulent, slate-grey waters was enough to trigger a flutter of concern. But she was only here to toss away her police ID. No more of her unofficial catchphrase, “Saga Norén, Malmö CID.” From now on, she will simply be Saga Norén: have Porsche, will travel. The cumulative emotional agonies and steeply rising body count of the final season of The Bridge had seemed like doom-laden signposts en route to an inescapable unhappy ending. For good or ill, we have come to associate tragedy with dramatic weight. So to mark the climax of a story so saturated in pain and loss, surely something awful must happen to Henrik, or the long-lost daughter Astrid he had only just reunited with? Or Saga herself? What a relief that Hans Rosenfeldt and his team of writers managed to stick the landing. That meant Tasers, trauma and a final gut-punch twist. But it all resolved into something that felt like hope. What unlocked the case was the skeleton keyring belonging to Susanne Winter. Having twigged that pickpockets Julie and Ida were finally on to her, Susanne morphed from Niels’s efficient personal assistant into a full-on Terminator, stalking the streets around Nørreport station in search of the runaways before (correctly) deducing they would head for Henrik’s house. There, she stun-gunned poor Ida before pulling a giant silver handgun on the suspicious Saga and putting two rounds in her chest. Even with a bulletproof vest, that was enough to wind our hero, although her rather wild barrage of return fire managed to catch a tyre and foil Susanne’s escape. Winter was coming … to the interrogation room. For slippery Jonas, the newly appointed head of the case, this was a gift. Fingerprint evidence discovered by loved-up IT techs Barbara and John suggested that Susanne had coerced Silas Tuxen into retrieving Hans’s body. Winter also willingly confessed that she was the elusive “Steph”, Tommy Petersen’s old flame, and that she had masterminded the entire thing. Why theme your convoluted killing spree around methods of state execution? Because she thought Henrik, Lillian, Niels and the rest had condemned Tommy to death by abandoning him. With Susanne’s arrogant confession wrapping up the case with a bow on top, it was skols all round. Except for Saga who, instead of “blunting her mind” with celebratory boozing, preferred to plough on with her own investigations. This was Saga at her best, frowning her way through another therapy session and digging through her mum’s diaries in search of the truth about her late sister’s illness. With the help of the nameless pathologist – who, thankfully, did not meet his end last week – Saga was able to conclusively prove that her mother had Munchausen syndrome by proxy and had been dosing her late sister Jennifer. Consciously or not, this is the mystery that has been weighing on Saga throughout her police career and having it resolved was a moment of great catharsis, even if her attempt to share it with a distracted Henrik didn’t go particularly well. After all these revelations, seeing Saga roll up to a prison felt as if it could have gone several different ways. Was she there to exact some terrible vengeance on Frank, the man who essentially killed Henrik’s wife Alice and daughter Anna? Or was there going to be some attempted reconciliation with her beloved previous partner Martin, who we last saw getting dragged off in a police van at the end of season two? Instead, she had been summoned by Elsa, the timid prisoner who had unexpectedly stabbed Saga in the neck in episode one. Elsa divulged a crucial bit of evidence. Despite claiming to be a one-woman show, Susanne had an accomplice. But who? We need to talk about Kevin That’s Kevin, AKA Brian Petersen, AKA Tommy’s son, AKA Henrik’s wheelchair-using mate from Narcotics Anonymous. As a surprising amount of commentators predicted, Brian had been playing the very long game and was preparing to pull a Keyser Söze (or, as someone else called it, an “Andy from Little Britain”). His tragic backstory of throwing himself out a window was true, but his back had since healed. Turning up at the door with a bottle of non-alcoholic fizz, Brian clonked Henrik, tied up poor Astrid and then attempted to force Henrik to watch his daughter be executed by a one-man firing squad. This fraught scene seemed destined to escalate into tragedy until Saga and her deadeye aim stepped in. The end of Saga and Henrik Most of Henrik’s emotional energy and focus was, understandably, directed towards reconnecting with his daughter Astrid. That meant American pancakes, day trips to Sweden and a heartbreaking moment at the grave of his other daughter Anna. Yet his bond with Saga remained powerful. “We’re so fucked up, the two of us,” he mused, after one of their final assignations. Saga took a different, if typically direct view. “We’ve managed quite well considering the psychosocial difficulties we’ve had,” she replied. “I think we’re good.” That last observation could also sum up the mood in the closing minutes of the finale. Final thoughts and observations Elaborate serial killer stories can sometimes stumble when they pull their final, and often illogical, twist but I think the reveal of Kevin/Brian as an able-bodied angel of death worked. Even if there was no time to really track back through all six killings (and collateral damage) to show how he and Susanne jobshared the slaughter, his single-minded rage – especially in those final scenes – rang true. Not hugely important in the grand scheme of things, but Saga’s unnamed therapist – who helped guide her toward the self-knowledge that freed her from guilt – was rocking one hell of a cape in their final session. Still time to put together a bid for Saga’s 911S which goes under the hammer on 13 July at the Goodwood festival of Speed, with all sale proceeds to WaterAid. (The colour is officially described as “jager grun”.) And everything goes back to the beginning: this is, we’re told, the end of The Bridge. Was it a satisfying send-off? Are you happy for the curtain to remain down or do you already crave some sort of spin-off? Or a prequel? Finally, a big “skol!” to everyone who shared their thoughts on this and previous seasons of The Bridge. Your insights, theories, corrections and jokes have made these recaps feel like a proper community.
9||'How many IVF cycles an area offers isn't always clear'When Craig Minter and his wife Anne-Marie wanted IVF treatment on the NHS, they never imagined it would mean moving more than 200 miles from their home in Berkshire. But after several years of trying for a baby the couple have decided to make the move from south-east England to Bury, Greater Manchester. In the area where they live at the moment, the NHS only offers one treatment cycle of IVF, as opposed to the three that are available in Bury. “We wanted to give ourselves the best chance,” says Craig, 34, adding that he had not realised the disparity in the treatment on offer until he had initial testing at a clinic in Oxfordshire. He later found out that the clinic had stopped taking NHS patients. “We were told we could go to other hospitals in the area but our local commissioning group only offers one IVF cycle ... We spoke to a fertility charity and they explained to us that it was a bit of a postcode lottery. They sent us a list of clinical commissioning groups and what they offer.” Craig says that it was the first time his family had thought about the differing level of provision and they decided that moving might be the best chance they would have of success. “We were apprehensive at first because it is so far away from friends and family. But we are lucky the area is really nice and both our jobs are allowing us to work from home and be so flexible,” Anne-Marie, 33, says. Craig says that at first he was annoyed the patchy provision. “It’s harsh and it is the communication around it too ... what an area offers isn’t always clear. They don’t provide the information on a plate but you have to really ask about it.” His wife adds: “Everyone should have the chance to get three cycles because it means they have a fair chance to conceive. Infertility is becoming more prevalent than ever before due to environmental factors and people wanting to start families later in life and have a career first.” While Bury clinical commissioning group is one of just a small number of areas in England to provide three full IVF cycles, at a meeting of its governing body reducing the number of cycles was discussed. No formal consultation has been launched yet but the CCG said it would liaise with the chair of the health, overview and scrutiny committee about it at a later date. “The mental health aspect is often ignored. If you go from offering three cycles to just one or none then you have told a lot of people that it does not matter if you have kids or not... You have to deal with a lot of people getting depressed,” Craig says. He adds: “You don’t get a lot of help [with infertility] ... For me personally, when I found out that the problem was me, it’s not really something that guys talk about. I had sperm tests and in my second test the count had dropped significantly ... as a bloke you almost feel like you’re not a bloke.” Craig adds that lots of couples go through fertility problems but it’s not always discussed and he thinks it’s important the NHS takes it seriously. Anne-Marie says: “Those deciding to cut services should speak to fertility charities and find people like myself and Craig who are willing to talk about such a sensitive issue. To explain why it is an important part of the NHS and not everyone can afford to go privately ... I hope this encourages others to speak out and that they are not alone in their struggles.”
4||After a genuinely epic World Cup group stage, now for knockout dramaAnd breathe. After 48 matches, 116 goals and a thrillingly varied swag-bag of drama, big-name angst and rolling VAR-palaver, Russia 2018 has now reached its midpoint. These things invariably alter from week to week, the tone and texture of a tournament defined by a few key games. But as the World Cup takes a breath, hitches its shorts up and contemplates a final punt through the laces at the knockout stage, it already feels like a tournament with its own distinctive character. Yes, it’s that time already. Welcome to That Was The Russia 2018 Group Stage that was. Whatever your view on the ultimate quality of the football, it has been a brilliantly entertaining World Cup so far, with few of the mind-numbingly dull games that have occasionally dogged the group stage. From the high-ceilinged quality of Portugal and Spain battering away at each other like a pair of hall-of-fame Mexican middleweights; to the novel spectacle of simulcast video referee shenanigans; to the emphasis so far on team play over star power: Russia 2018 has found its own shapes, mushroomed into some unexpected areas and confirmed some well-honed truths. Some of the big notes were nailed at the start. The host nation has played well and remains fully engaged. The opening game at the Luzhniki Stadium was a brilliantly staged piece of theatre, complete with an enjoyably opaque address from Vladimir Putin, iconic alpha-dog shots of Gianni Infantino lurking like an overattentive blini-waiter between Putin and Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, and a 5-0 defeat of a wretched Saudi Arabia. The grounds have all been ready and fit for purpose. Russia’s volunteers have been friendly and accommodating. And around the edges the social spirit of the country has come to the fore. Rather than battering visiting fans about the head with knuckledusters, the Russian people have been excellent hosts on the whole, often to a fault. There are plenty of tales of unsolicited rescues from the wrong side of town, drinks bought in bars and lost property returned. Undoubtedly Russia has prepared a face to meet the faces, its cities carefully scrubbed and posed, as is usually the case. But the top line, entirely unsurprisingly, is that this is just another country like all the other countries, built to a larger scale but with the usual variety of all human life. The basic spectacle of Senegalese, Moroccans, Peruvians and South Koreans twirling their flags around Red Square felt like an arresting transformative moment in itself. On the pitch the football has been relentlessly moreish, to the extent a rest day now feels like a hardship to be grudgingly endured. Some stats thrown out by the Fifa machine: Russia 2018 has seen an average of 2.54 goals per game in the group stage, slightly down on Brazil 2014 but up on every other World Cup of the last 30 years except for France 98 and USA 94. Belgium are top scorers with nine. Uruguay have yet to concede at all. Forty-seven goals have come in the first half, and 75 in the second. One could go on. Javier Mascherano, whose World Cup has once again resembled the harrowing final scenes of a notably gore-stained 1980s Vietnam war movie, has committed the most fouls. Neymar has been fouled an astonishing 17 times, though this depends on one’s specific definition of the words “being fouled”. Lionel Messi and Victor Moses are among five players tied on most handballs so far (two), another strand to the never-ending Moses v Messi debate. The fastest player so far, with a top speed of 34kph, is Cristiano Ronaldo, who is, lest we forget, 33 years old and in his 16th season as a pro. Finally, and another tribute perhaps to the reach of VAR, only one player has been booked for diving. Surprisingly this is dear old Son Heung-min, who might just feel a little wronged on that score. When it comes to the best teams so far Croatia are the obvious choice. The 3-0 defeat of Argentina is the outstanding result along with Mexico’s surgical dismantling of Germany. Luka Modric is arguably the outstanding player of the tournament to date. Belgium have looked like the genuine contenders their depth of talent suggests. The arm-wrestle between Portugal and Uruguay on Saturday will see a meeting of two teams with the necessary tournament bastardy, plus elite attackers in form. Otherwise everyone is below the radar, still looking to come to the boil. France have looked stodgy for all their dazzling talent. Brazil still seem to be finding a workable groove. Germany had more shots than anyone else but finished bottom of their group, victims of the dedication to method and systems that served them so well but brought a strange kind of entropy at this tournament. Spain have looked slow and underpowered at times but showed moments of exhilaratingly pure champion quality in the exchanges between Isco and Andrés Iniesta. Beyond this there has been a refreshing refusal to bow to the star players of club football. Ronaldo has been productive as ever but a semi-fit Neymar has had 17 shots at goal, scoring only once, and made 24 failed dribbles. Messi has produced just the one otherworldly moment. This is a different game from the relentless numbers of club football, each team stacked with a greater variety of human talent. The knockout phase, with its fine point details, may provide a more hospitable centre stage. There have been obvious tactical changes, alterations to the game’s rhythm driven by technology. Aided by the video referee, and by a lack of defensive prep from some teams, set pieces have played a large part. There have been 24 penalties awarded, 18 scored and six missed, leading to fears the game is undergoing a fundamental alteration in its gravity. Some have suggested teams will now focus tactics on winning penalties, will employ specialist penalty-takers, that a kind of apocalyptic penalty fixation is the future. More likely teams will simply adapt how they defend as has already begun to happen during the tournament. Overall the lessons of VAR from Russia 2018 are that when handled brusquely, when consigned to simple howlers and obvious mistakes, a little VAR can be a good thing. Otherwise some things remain the same. The dance between possession football and counterattack continues. Predictably Spain embody one side of this, completing 400 more passes than anyone else so far. England are sixth on that list, a significant moment in itself. As the tournament winds down, as players tire and stakes grow ever higher, it seems likely the teams that pass and keep the ball best will prosper. One irritation: there has been a surprising amount of play-acting, players writhing in apparent agony holding the wrong body part or shrieking when briefly touched. No doubt this is a misguided side effect of a greater refereeing presence. Countermeasures are required to stamp it out, as they are to restrain a related rise in the haranguing of officials. A final bonus point: a total of 2,178,894 ticket holders have watched with an average attendance of 45,394. The grounds have been boisterously full, with lulls in the partisan noise often filled by sudden outbreaks of “Ross-iy-ya” from the locals. This has felt like a genuinely epic-scale World Cup, football in a big country, with a vast bloom of interest and history in every city. The weather will now change, with a more staccato feel to the more micro-managed drama of knockout football. Over to you, part two. It won’t be an easy act to follow.
9||IVF services slashed in England as NHS bosses cut costsA growing number of areas in England have axed IVF treatment on the NHS and the proportion offering the recommended three cycles of treatment has fallen to just over one in 10, the Guardian can reveal. The data, gathered by the Fertility Network UK, also show that a further one in 10 are considering restricting or axing fertility treatment, amid widespread NHS cuts and the rationing of services in an effort to save money. Despite guidance from the NHS group Nice (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence) that women under 40 should be offered three cycles if they have been trying to conceive for two years, the number no longer offering any cycles has increased from four to seven in the past 15 months. The number of clinical commissioning groups offering the recommended three cycles has fallen from 16% (33) to 11.5% (24) in a year Experts said patients now face a postcode lottery of services, with some families even moving across the country to find an area that offers three IVF treatment cycles. Others are travelling abroad for treatment Aileen Feeney, chief executive of the Fertility Network, said: “[IVF] seems to be seen as something that can just be cut. [Infertility] is not being considered as what it is, which is a disease that has massive impact on those suffering from it.” She added: “On top of all the emotional and physical stress of infertility then you have the unfairness of the fact that people cannot have access to something their neighbour could. Then there is the massive financial pressures of going private.” Feeney noted that people were now going abroad for cheaper treatment, which carried risks. “In the UK the general policy is there is a single embryo transferred,” she said. “But when people go abroad frequently they have multiple pregnancies because more than one embryo is transferred. The biggest risk factor to that is babies being born prematurely.” The Fertility Network UK had also heard of one family moving 200 miles from Berkshire, in the south-east of England, to Bury in Greater Manchester so they could get three cycles of IVF. Anne-Marie Minter, 33, and her partner Craig, 34, made the move to maximise their chances of having a baby because they were only entitled to one cycle of treatment at their previous address. “We were apprehensive at first as it is so far away from friends and family,” she said. “But we are lucky the area is really nice and both our jobs are allowing us to work from home and be so flexible.” Anne-Marie Minter added: “Everyone should have the chance to get three cycles because it means they have a fair chance to conceive. Infertility is becoming more prevalent than ever before due to environmental factors and people wanting to start families later in life and have a career first.” Craig said it was important the NHS took fertility problems seriously. “We are a healthy couple and put money into the NHS all the time ... when you need it you want it to be there. For us IVF would give us a chance at happy complete life and if you’re happy then better off in every sense.” Prof Simon Fishel, founder and president of Care Fertility Group, said he was surprised by the rise in cuts, adding that infertility was being targeted because people don’t understand it. “They don’t understand the pain of this disease,” he added. “It’s tragic for those who are in need and it’s unfortunate that we still have an iniquitous postcode lottery ... You could be in the same street virtually and have different criteria ... I accept NHS is strapped for cash but cuts have to be done in a fair and equitable manner across the UK.” Geeta Nargund, medical director of Create Fertility, which runs fertility clinics, said: “These level of cuts are simply unacceptable and go against the founding principles of the NHS to provide an equal and fair access to treatments.” Since last year, Herts Valleys and the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) have removed all IVF services. Southend and west Essex have cut the number of cycles offered from two to one. At the time of making the decision, Dr Jose Garcia Lobera, chair of Southend CCG, said: “It has been incredibly tough decision to make ... We are aware it will be a huge disappointment for people affected by fertility issues in Southend.” A West Essex spokesperson said: “The current climate means we are in the tough position where we have to evaluate every service we commission.” Other CCGs have introduced tighter access criteria. Bristol, North Somerset and South Gloucestershire have reduced the the age limit for prospective fathers and same-sex partners to 52, and will now fund treatment only for couples where neither partner has a living child. In London, Croydon last year became the first London borough to stop funding for IVF. The decision was made to help save £836,000 annually. NHS Clinical Commissioners, the organisation that represents clinical commissioning groups, said: “CCGs are led by GPs whose first priority is always to the patient. Wherever possible they want to give them what they need. Unfortunately, the NHS does not have unlimited resources ... there are some tough choices that have to be made. “With huge pressures being felt across the whole health and care system, the NHS has to review services to ensure they are sustainable and improve the health of the wider population.”
27||Families Belong Together: Hollywood stars to protest Trump policiesWhen hundreds of thousands of Americans descend on the nation’s biggest cities on Saturday to protest against the separation of migrant families at the southern border, A-list celebrities will be resisting alongside them. Donald Trump’s presidency has already galvanized enormous opposition in Hollywood, as entertainers came out in droves on the president’s second day in office to join the Women’s March last year, where between 3 and 5 million people took part in the largest single-day protest in US history. Hollywood has, in return, drawn the ire of the president, who frequently refers to celebrities, most recently Meryl Streep and Robert De Niro, as “liberals” and “elites”. And while Saturday’s protests, dubbed the Families Belong Together march, is not expected to turn out quite as many participants as the Women’s March, politically active celebrities like Julianne Moore, America Ferrera, Padma Lakshmi, Natalie Portman and Chelsea Handler are expected to demonstrate in opposition to the “zero-tolerance” policy implemented by the president at the US-Mexico border. Last week, amid widespread and bipartisan backlash to the separation of migrant children from their mothers, a result of the Trump administration’s decision to prosecute all undocumented immigrants crossing the border, Trump signed an executive order ending the policy. But his solution seeks to indefinitely detain families together, and the administration has thus far not been specific about plans to reunite the 2,300 children who have already been separated from their parents. “Are we really such monsters?” asked Jessica Chastain on Twitter, while Cher, a frequent critic of the president’s, expressed concern for “terrified” children “alone in a strange country where they don’t know the language”. The director Ava DuVernay, whose documentary 13th focuses on mass incarceration, called the administration’s policies “especially chaotic and destructive” while attending a separate protest at the Freedom Plaza in Washington DC. America Ferrera, the actor and activist who campaigned for Hillary Clinton, implored those “pissed off that Trump has made it official US policy to separate children from parents at our border” to visit the website Families Belong Together, which organized Saturday’s day of action demanding “an end to family separation and detention”. The actor Susan Sarandon, meanwhile, was among the 575 women arrested in Washington DC on Thursday after staging a sit-in at the Hart Senate office building. “Arrested. Stay strong. Keep fighting,” Sarandon tweeted shortly after being released. Saturday’s protests are a direct response to the administration’s immigration policies. Just last weekend, Trump suggested immigrants crossing the border illegally should be sent back to their home countries without due process, a claim he repeated when, at a rally in South Carolina, Trump rebuked the idea that more judges are needed at the southern border. “What other country has judges?” he asked, doubling down on a policy largely believed to be the product of hardliners such as the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, and White House adviser Stephen Miller. But while the separation of migrant families has mobilized many in Hollywood, Saturday’s protests are shaping up to be a repudiation of more than just the administration’s immigration policies. Its approach to gun violence and reproductive rights has also come under scrutiny, especially in the wake of Thursday’s shooting at the Capital Gazette newspaper in Annapolis and the announcement that Justice Anthony Kennedy is stepping down from the supreme court. His vacated seat allows Trump to appoint a second conservative justice to the bench, which has many worried about the future of abortion rights in the US. “We must fight fire with fire,” wrote Debra Messing on Instagram. “Civil Rights as we know them will be chipped away.” Olivia Wilde, who attended the gun violence-focused March for Our Lives rally in Los Angeles in March, addressed the future of Roe v Wade on Twitter: “It is not a question of abortions or no abortions,” she said. “It is only a question of whether women will die having them.” Others, like the comic Kathy Griffin, expressed hope that Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg would remain on the bench long enough to safeguard women’s rights to terminate unwanted pregnancies. Griffin, who last year was widely condemned for posing with a mask of Donald Trump’s “severed” head, has found herself a frequent target of the right in the Trump era. The response to the photo op, condemned by the president and his family members, exemplifies the contentious relationship between the president and the entertainment industry. Earlier this week, that relationship was further inflamed when the Republican National Committee released a new campaign advertisement called The Left in 2018: Unhinged. The video, made up of various clips of celebrities lashing out at President Trump, features Griffin, Samantha Bee, Madonna, Johnny Depp and Michelle Wolf, the comic whose jokes about the press secretary, Sarah Sanders, landed her in hot water. Where members of the entertainment industry have been especially vocal, and sometimes profane, in their criticism of the president, Trump has fought fire with fire on Twitter, calling De Niro a “very low IQ individual”, Wolf a “filthy comedian” and Alec Baldwin “unwatchable”. The president, however, will probably be watching on Saturday as thousands turn out for a protest that was initially focused on immigration and has grown to encompass a number of causes, including gun violence and women’s rights. Organized by the National Domestic Workers Alliance, the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, the ACLU, the Women’s March and MoveOn, the Families Belong Together march will take place in nearly 700 cities worldwide, with the main event taking place in the nation’s capital.
8||St Helens’ Regan Grace helps put match just beyond Wakefield TrinityIf the Super League title is indeed destined for St Helens this season, these are perhaps the moments the Saints and their supporters will look back on in a few months’ time and underline as season-defining. Make no mistake about it, with the way Justin Holbrook’s side are strolling on at the top of the table, these two points may not split them from whoever finishes second. But for the third time in a matter of weeks the Super League leaders found themselves in a position of jeopardy with minutes remaining and, yet again, they found a way to win. The script seemed as though it would be far more straightforward at half-time. Leading 20-6 after another irrepressible half of rugby, some St Helens fans may have been forgiven for thinking the job was done. But this Wakefield side are made of stern stuff and the way in which they fought back to lead 26-20 after an hour here illustrates they cannot be ruled out of the race for the play-offs yet. The fact they are one of only two sides to beat the Saints in 2018 also underlines that – but ultimately tries to Regan Grace, James Roby and Zeb Taia in the final 15 minutes secured victory. “I’m frustrated but equally proud,” the Wakefield coach, Chris Chester, lamented. Yet he should not be too disappointed because the manner in which they fought back with tries to Ryan Hampshire, Jacob Miller, Tom Johnstone and Mason Caton-Brown suggests there is still more to come from this side. It was fitting, though, that it was Roby who scored the try which put the hosts back ahead. After playing over an hour at high-altitude six days ago in Denver, the St Helens captain delivered another tireless 80-minute display here. It did not go unnoticed. “Nothing fazes him, does it?” Justin Holbrook, Saints’ coach, said of the hooker. “He’d play tomorrow if you asked him to.” And after he muscled his way over, Taia ensured there would be no way back for Wakefield - despite Reece Lyne’s try in the final minute which set up a frenetic final few seconds. This time, however, the Saints would not fall behind again. The scenes at full-time were all too familiar: and the scale of the celebrations illustrated just what a battle the Super League leaders had been in. Wakefield, you can guarantee, will not fall away from this play-off race quietly though. St Helens Barba; Makinson, Morgan, Percival, Grace; Lomax, Richardson; Douglas, Roby, Thompson, Peyroux, Taia, Wilkin. Interchange Fages, McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Knowles, Lees. Tries Grace 2, Lomax, Richardson, Roby, Taia. Goals Richardson 5 Wakefield Hampshire; Caton-Brown, Tupou, Lyne, Johnstone; Miller, Finn; England, Randell, Fifita, Batchelor, Ashurst, Arona. Interchange Wood, Pauli, Hirst, Annakin. Tries Johnstone 2, Hampshire, Miller, Caton-Brown, Lyne Goals Finn 3 Referee J Child. Attendance 10,008
21||Black hairstreaks found miles from their heartlandThe black hairstreak is a dark, elusive and rather plain little butterfly. And yet it inspires great passion, and not just because of its rarity. There’s something deeply restful and lovely about this midsummer insect, especially when it lets you creep close and admire it sunning itself on blackthorn. It only flies for a couple of weeks in June, and guidebooks say it is only found in middle England woodlands, roughly between Cambridgeshire and Oxfordshire. But this butterfly has bamboozled experts since it was belatedly discovered in 1828 and this June has seen a glorious population explosion. Black hairstreaks have been discovered on many new sites, including miles from their heartland – in East Sussex. It was undoubtedly moved to East Sussex by a butterfly breeder (some butterfly-lovers secretly drop their favourite species into random places) but locals believe it’s been there, undiscovered, since the 1980s. Many butterfly recorders report lower-than-average numbers of common species this year but fine weather has boosted another normally elusive wood-and-hedge resident, the purple emperor. The emperor obsessives Matthew Oates and Neil Hulme this week recorded 349 sightings in one day at Knepp, West Sussex – a world record, if anyone keeps such things!
11||General Motors warns Trump: tariffs could lead to 'smaller GM' and fewer jobsGeneral Motors warned on Friday that expansive US tariffs on imported vehicles being considered by the Trump administration could lead to “a smaller GM” and risks isolating US businesses from the global market. The car giant – which employs 180,000 people worldwide – became the second famous US brand this week to warn of the dangers of Trump’s escalating trade dispute. This week Harley-Davidson said the levies would force it to relocate some production overseas – a warning that drew a furious response from Donald Trump. The Trump administration launched an investigation into whether imported vehicles posed a national security threat in May, and Trump has repeatedly threatened to quickly impose a 20% import tariff on vehicles. The largest US automaker said in comments filed on Friday with the US commerce department that overly broad tariffs could “lead to a smaller GM, a reduced presence at home and abroad for this iconic American company, and risk less – not more – US jobs”. GM said the tariffs could hike vehicle prices and reduce sales. Even if automakers opted not to pass on higher costs “this could still lead to less investment, fewer jobs, and lower wages for our employees. The carry-on effect of less investment and a smaller workforce could delay breakthrough technologies.” Toyota filed separate comments opposing the tariffs on Friday saying they would “threaten US manufacturing, jobs, exports, and economic prosperity”. The company noted that Trump has repeatedly praised the automaker for investing in the United States, including a new $1.3bn joint venture assembly plant in Alabama with Mazda. “These investments reflect our confidence in the US economy and in the power of the administration’s tax cuts,” Toyota said in its submission. Toyota noted that international automakers assembling vehicles in the United States are based in countries including Japan, German and South Korea “that are America’s closest allies”. The company added it “is difficult to foresee a situation in which any of them would engage in an armed conflict with the US or cut off supplies of defense materials, and if they did, the United States would have an easy recourse of simply seizing their US plants”. The car companies’ comments come after groups representing America’s largest retailers, car manufacturers and the agriculture industry warned of the “serious negative economic impacts” of the trade dispute and called on Congress to support a bill that would rein in the president’s power to impose tariffs by invoking a threat to national security. “It is now also increasingly clear that the way the steel and aluminium tariffs have been used will result in retaliatory tariffs from our largest trading partners and closest allies, and that retaliation will have serious negative economic impacts on the United States,” they wrote in a letter to US senators. Reuters contributed to this article
6||More than a dozen Ice agents call for agency to be disbandedNineteen senior investigators at the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) have called for the law enforcement agency, responsible for both national security investigations and deportation of undocumented migrants, to be disbanded. In a letter to the homeland security secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen, the 19 agents express concern that Donald Trump’s hardline crackdown on undocumented migrants has made it harder for them to conduct effective investigations into significant national security issues. The sprawling federal law enforcement agency, which employs more than 20,000 people, is split into two primary divisions: enforcement and removal operations (ERO) focused on deportations, and homeland security investigations (HSI) focused on national security investigations into areas including drugs and arms trafficking. The 19 investigators, all from the HSI division, wrote that their investigations, “have been perceived as targeting undocumented aliens, instead of the transnational criminal organizations that facilitate cross border crimes impacting our communities and national security”. The letter continues: “Furthermore, the perception of HSI’s investigative independence is unnecessarily impacted by the political nature of ERO’s civil immigration enforcement.” It adds that certain local jurisdictions in America have refused to work with HSI because of a “perceived linkage” to deportations. The agents suggest splitting Ice into two separate agencies. Ice did not respond to a request for comment on the letter, which was first reported by the Texas Observer. The letter is likely to bolster the growing movement in Democratic politics and activist circles to abolish Ice. In recent days a number of high-profile Democrats, including the New York City mayor, Bill de Blasio, and New York senator Kirsten Gillibrand, have called for the agency to be disbanded with a new immigration enforcement program brought in in its place. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the 28-year-old who stunned the country when she unseated the Democratic heavyweight Joe Crowley in a primary for New York’s 14th congressional district earlier this week, has also campaigned on abolishing Ice. The calls are unlikely to sway Donald Trump who, since assuming office, has taken extraordinary measures to bolster the agency’s powers. In January 2017, the president signed an executive order to increase the agency’s staffing by a further 10,000 employees. The order also vastly expanded Ice’s immigration enforcement powers, enabling agents to target essentially any undocumented migrant in the country. Annual immigration arrests have soared since January 2017, from 110,568 in 2016 to 143,470 last year, although they still remain below the height of annual arrests under Barack Obama’s administration.
9||Up in smoke: new California law could send $350m worth of cannabis to incineratorAbout $350m worth of cannabis products could be destroyed as new regulations take effect on Sunday in California. New rules stipulate that all cannabis products must be sold in child-resistant packaging, and must be lab-tested for potency and a variety of contaminants. Additionally, edibles will be limited to 100mg of THC per package, divided into 10mg servings. The long-anticipated switch has prompted California dispensaries to sell non-compliant products at steep discounts. Amid the buyers’ market, dispensaries that overstocked the items are feeling the brunt of the rule change. The United Cannabis Business Alliance estimates the damage from products that have to be destroyed could exceed $350m. “We’re sort of at the point where the rubber meets the road,” the Los Angeles marijuana business attorney Ariel Clark said. “It’s a rough transition for a lot of people across the state.” The switch highlights the difficulties California faces in bringing its vast, multibillion-dollar market for the federally illegal drug out of the shadows. With so much product heading for the incinerator, there has been speculation about product shortages following the changeover. “We just don’t have enough labs” to test products, said David Hua, CEO of Meadow, an online cannabis purchasing platform. “A lot of the brands we know may not get through in time to get on shelves.” Alex Traverso, spokesman for the state bureau of cannabis control, said there were 31 licensed testing labs throughout the state. “We’d obviously love to have more, but I think we’re cautiously optimistic,” he wrote in an email. In the six months since California’s legal recreational marijuana market opened on 1 January, stores have been allowed to sell products which don’t conform to the new requirements. For businesses, whether the transition is a welcome development depends on factors like what they do and where they are located. Hezekiah Allen, executive director of the California Growers Association, which counts more than 1,000 members, said under the new rules, his members would not be “competing with growers who cut corners and sell dirty product”. However, the new rules do not help growers who operate in areas that have not yet allowed them to obtain licenses, notably Los Angeles, the state’s largest market. Those companies cannot legally bring products to market. For some in the industry, the new rules highlight an even more significant problem: businesses that try to follow the law are still competing against those that have no intention of obtaining a license and can afford to sell for less. Adam Spiker, head of the Southern California Coalition, an industry group, said the switch and its attendant bottlenecks benefited unlicensed businesses, in effect rewarding bad actors. “In my estimation, 80% of the market is still being captured illegally,” he said. For some, though, the transition to a more tightly regulated market represents an opportunity. “Our warehouse is filled with tested product and we’re ready to go to market,” said Kenny Morrison, CEO of the edibles company Venice Cookie Company. With so much demand for compliant merchandise, he said, customers “are buying boxes without knowing what’s in them”. “The cannabis industry is nimble,” he said. “You’ve got to be able to turn a cruise ship on a dime.”
0||How long a shadow will Labor's bout of doubt cast over Shorten?Because politics is laced with ego and is in many ways the institutionalised projection of (mainly) masculine self-confidence, people forget about doubt. Doubt is one of the least interrogated yet most fundamental drivers of ambitious political actors. People with the self-belief to be leaders of their political parties wake up every day wondering how they will get there, and once they get there, they default to wondering who is plotting to snatch the opportunity away from them. When driving ambition is there, doubt exists in equal measure. Doubt is Canberra’s dark side of the moon. Over the past few weeks, Bill Shorten has washed up in the doubt zone, largely because the people around him are doubting, shifting, reflecting, worrying, chattering. At its simplest level, that’s what’s going on. That’s the static you can see coming from the Labor side of politics. That’s why political journalists are leaning in with their ears pricked – not because we are addicted to crass spectacle or can’t be bothered following policy debates, but because we are close enough to detect the shift in the barometric pressure. So why the doubt? Labor is ahead in the polls and has been since the last federal election. Labor in 2018 is a campaign machine, with formidable message discipline and institutional strength the Liberal party would kill for. But some believe the contest is closer than it looks, and not everyone thinks the pitch is in sync with the times. Others, who suspect it is possible to win with the current pitch, worry it won’t set Labor up with solid foundations for government. The fretfulness behind the scenes has been in evidence intermittently since the party’s underperformance in last year’s Bennelong byelection. Doubt always intensifies as you get closer to crunch point, and Labor as a collective is convinced Malcolm Turnbull will call a federal election this year, not next. In the minds of the opposition, we are five minutes to midnight. So last week, Anthony Albanese provided a public focal point to an undercurrent that has existed for some months. Albanese missed his chance of being federal leader in 2013 when he won the grassroots ballot but lost the job because of a left split within the Labor caucus. Last week’s speech was about saying, as diplomatically as possible: I’m not sure we are where we need to be to win; It looks like we are just activating our base; We can’t rely on the Liberals to lose; and PS, I’m here should anyone want to draft me. Albanese’s alternative manifesto, as I noted earlier this week, was in part a bit of signalling for the benefit of the New South Wales right, a group not much enamoured with the class warfare, and a group that has, historically speaking, determined who leads the Labor party. Sign up to receive the latest news in Australian politics every weekday Some in Labor will tell you the NSW right isn’t what it used to be; that the once-mighty faction of Paul Keating doesn’t make or break Labor leaders in 2018 because they are too busy hating on each other – and that’s even true for the most part. But it’s also true that the NSW right will determine whether the current excursion to the dark side of the moon is a transient blip or a harbinger. If the NSW right as a collective loses confidence that the incumbent can lead Labor to victory, that the long march ends in triumph, then we are in a very different place, and Shorten knows it. The Victorian right doesn’t trust the NSW right. That’s just a resting disposition. But there’ve been some specific tensions of late. Shorten has copped it recently from some quarters of the right in NSW over Katy Gallagher, a leftwinger returning to the Senate at the expense of rightwinger David Smith, and over the preselection of leftwingers in Western Australia. Tantrums have been had. Things have been touchy. So now let’s enter the specific events of the week. Shorten on Tuesday blurted out a position that had been cooked up in the shadow expenditure review committee – that Labor would repeal the company tax cuts for businesses with turnovers of between $10m and $50m. Given that decision hadn’t gone to shadow cabinet and certainly not to caucus, it caught most colleagues on the hop. The leader’s office didn’t issue MPs lines to help them explain what had just happened: a rarity in an internal communications operation geared to rapid response. There was a collective rabbit in the spotlight moment before MPs started extemporising on live radio, and critics seized the opportunity of briefing against the leader’s office. Given it was not the plan to announce the position to a handful of journalists loitering outside a business conference of a freezing winter morning, Shorten’s brain snap also caught the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, on the hop. An unkind soul might say it hung Bowen out to dry. There are a few things to know about Bowen. The shadow treasurer tries to walk a line between being entirely unapologetic about Labor having the most assertively progressive economic policy in a couple of decades (which he is) and also keeping the business community broadly onside. This is a delicate line to walk, and certainly Shorten lobbing surprises – like suddenly confirming Labor’s policy on company tax before it has gone through internal processes, and before there is time to frame and war-game the announcement and soften up the stakeholders – could be considered unhelpful. The other thing to know about Bowen is he is the most senior figure in the NSW right – that faction that will ultimately determine whether events this week are just a blip or a prelude to something bigger. Punching Bowen in the nose, albeit inadvertently and accidentally, was pretty brave of Shorten in the Sir Humphrey Appleby sense. It’s fair to say some remedial action may have been required – and pronto. So now we reach the clean-up session on Friday. Shorten squared his shoulders and lifted his chin, and recanted part of what he’d said on Tuesday, citing new information. He emphasised the importance of leaders leading by listening, which was not only an apologia to the outraged underpants mogul who had featured as the case study on the front page of the Sydney Morning Herald, but also a crow-eating homily largely for internal consumption. (Sorry guys, Bill bad.) In the process of eating some of his own words, Shorten made life a bit easier for Bowen. Bowen then returned the favour by magnanimously making a public declaration of loyalty to Shorten. “I can assure you that Bill Shorten has my full support and will continue to do so,” he told the hyperventilating hacks. Asked whether that was true of his faction, Bowen said he was “sure that all my colleagues in NSW, regardless their factional arrangements, agree with what I just said”. All stirring stuff, but the real crunch point here will be the looming byelections on 28 July. Labor is looking at those results with a collective intake of breath. If the ALP holds Braddon and Longman, that’s one thing. If they don’t, that’s another. Labor still wears the scars of the Rudd-Gillard-Rudd period. This is a political party that has picked itself up and glued itself back together after disintegrating into shards in full public view. Everyone, true believers and waverers, knows from bitter lived experience that short, sharp movements against incumbent leaders against their wishes carry huge transaction costs. But in the end, it all comes back to doubt. When doubt takes hold, when we all travel to the dark side of the moon, the experience of the last decade in Canberra tells us anything can happen.
29||Corrections and clarifications• We were out by a day in some World Cup match listings: France v Argentina and Uruguay v Portugal are on Saturday; Spain v Russia and Croatia v Denmark are on Sunday (29 June, page 52). • Our review of Leave No Trace was missing a star due to an editing error. As the online version correctly noted, the reviewer awarded the film five, not four stars (29 June, page 14, G2). • Other recently corrected articles include: Fastjet shares nosedive as cash crisis threatens survival Where to move for... eco-living Gennady Rozhdestvensky obituary County cricket roundup
12||Jacinda Ardern is the very hero the global left needs right nowAs social media birth announcements go, Jacinda Ardern’s handheld Facebook Live of herself and her newborn Neve Te Aroha Ardern Gayford is charming. New Zealand’s prime minister introduces her new baby with radiant sincerity. She thanks her midwife and the hospital staff for their generous professionalism, and New Zealanders for their kindness and gifts. With a quick cutaway, she even jokes with the baby’s father about his “dad jumper”. But as a political communication, the video is matchless. In an epoch overcast by growing shadows of reenergised rightwing authoritarianism, Ardern’s public hospital nativity offers a luminous symbolic affirmation of her leadership not just of New Zealand, but of the western electoral left. The leader of the first Labour government in New Zealand for a decade shares the explicit left agenda for investment in health, education, climate action, public housing and social justice. Ardern’s pledge to build “a kind and equitable nation where children thrive, and success is measured not only by the nation’s GDP but by better lives lived by its people” is the ancient standard of our side. Yet while recent celebrity left leaders have failed to win elections, or even nominations, Ardern gained the leadership of her party seven weeks out from an election, and she won. She nearly doubled the Labour vote, wrangled herself into office with a complex multiparty coalition, and just passed a social democratic budget. Polls have held. The most recent gives her party and one coalition partner, the Greens, enough votes to govern between them. Her personal approval rating is a thumping 76%. To understand why is to look beyond policy and into her representation of it. What distinguishes Ardern is her active embrace of what Walter Benjamin referred to as “the time of the now” and the diverse and complex identities of a community that no longer sees itself as by, for and of propertied, straight white men. Doing so shatters a traditionalism that imprisons the left even as much as it inspires today’s right. Ardern is the first elected world leader to ever go on maternity leave. Of this, former NZ Labour prime minister Helen Clark noted: “These are the kinds of practical arrangements working women make the world over – the novelty here is that it is a prime minister who is making them. The signal this sends, however, is that this is life in the 21st century.” But the insight is enhanced by considering theorist Stuart Hall’s old observation that “Politics does not reflect majorities, it constructs them.” Local NZ commentator, Michelle Duff, lauded the events of Ardern’s maternity as a national achievement, writing, “Let’s just take a moment to appreciate that we, as a nation, have pushed the boundaries and created an environment where this can happen.” Clark said for New Zealand, this was merely “evolution”. Observe, also Ardern – who is Pakeha, not Māori – meeting the British queen wearing a Kahu huruhuru: a Māori feathered cloak “bestowed on chiefs and dignitaries to convey prestige, respect and power”. It was a demonstration of a status conferred, and not stolen, and a representation of a New Zealand unafraid to show pride in its indigenous past even as it engaged in diplomatic pleasantry with its colonial one. Little wonder that “the prime minister’s empathy with and interest in the indigenous people of New Zealand [is] improving relations between Pakeha [European] and Māori faster than at any other point in history,” a spokeswoman for Ngati-Haua, of the Tainui federation of tribes, has said. In this case, the spokeswoman was responding to Ardern’s choice of “Te Aroha” as her newborn’s middle name, which refers both to a mountain where Ardern grew up an a Māori language word for love. “Everybody knows what aroha means,” says Ardern in her baby video. Even though“everybody” doesn’t, every New Zealander certainly does. Ardern’s grasp of the local – from giving birth in a public hospital, to announcing her pregnancy on Instagram – is exemplary. The town of Te Aroha is planning a celebration of their namesake baby’s birth; plans are to paint its buildings pink. The achievement here is Ardern’s marriage of the old left economic program with the new explicitness of identity politics – and it resonates because it’s sincere. Failure to bridge these positions will doom all of us. Theorist Wendy Brown explained this in her 1999 essay of prophetic relevance to today’s particular political moment. Brown writes of a “left melancholy” as a state of wilful, purist political nostalgia, in which the left “has become more attached to its impossibility than to its potential fruitfulness, a left that is most at home dwelling not in hopefulness but in its own marginality and failure, a left that is thus caught in a structure of melancholic attachment to a certain strain of its own dead past”. It’s hard not to see this melancholy in the celebration of electoral defeats as somehow moral victories, when across the world the present, visible reality for women, indigenous people, the LGBTQIA+ community, refugees and so many others is that electoral outcomes represent life and death stakes. The alternative proposition is to remember “that the people closest to the pain should be closest to the power” – and they should pursue power, without shame. This statement was quoted by the victorious Alexandria Ocasio-Cortes, who delivered a shock upset to the established order when she won a Democratic primary in New York this week. In a party where the top three positions are held by septuagenarians, commentator Dana Milbank saw Ocasio-Cortes’s election not as a disruption to the Democratic trajectory but an event of happy augury. “The emerging electoral majority that already dominates the party and will soon dominate the country, [is] progressive, young, female and nonwhite. It is no accident that Ocasio-Cortez, a 28-year-old Latina, is all four,” he observed. If today’s left is going to stand a chance against an ascendant, muscular right, my hope is that she and other avowed socialists emerging within her electoral generation eschew the stale temptations of left melancholy for energising examples of a visionary left that looks as different to its past as a pregnant woman in a feathered cloak does to a room of suited men. “Strong men” of the right are now lining up governments from Italy to Turkey to the United States. The times of the now are ones in which we can construct majorities of a diversity they cannot – and do not wish to – represent. We can hope the influence of Jacinda Ardern and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortes spread, or we can ensure that it does. The stakes for the marginalised remain life and death. Van Badham is a Guardian Australia columnist
16||Former race adviser who was Tasered cleared of racial abuseA former police race relations advisor who made headlines around the world after he was Tasered by a constable has been found not guilty of racially abusing a man in a betting shop. Judah Adunbi, a community elder in Bristol, was accused of calling a man “white scum” and threatening him. Adunbi denied that he had threatened the man or used racist words. He told the court: “I would never, never insult people on the colour of their skin. It is impossible.” Deputy district judge Steven Jonas was provided with references for Adunbi by Bristol’s lord mayor, Cllr Cleo Lake, as well as Alex Raikes, strategic director for the charity Stand Against Racism &amp; Inequality. Jonas said it had been a very odd case, adding: “Having had the benefit of watching the CCTV, and seen the hand gestures you were making, I was sure you’d behaved in such a way that would make you guilty. “But then I heard you give your evidence – or rather, I watched you give your evidence, as you were very animated with your hands. “It became clear that there is an interpretation issue here. I cannot be sure – and I find you not guilty.” The Taser incident unfolded last year outside Judah’s house in Easton, Bristol. A video taken by a passerby was widely shared on social media and made headlines around the world. Last month a court was told acting sergeant Claire Boddie shot 64-year-old Adunbi with a Taser after mistaking him for a man wanted on drugs charges. The officer had told Adunbi that he looked “familiar” and, after he refused to give his name, a scuffle broke out and she discharged the stun gun, hitting him in the jaw. She told the court she discharged her weapon believing Adunbi had taken up a “fighting stance” and said had not known whether he had a weapon. Boddie was found not guilty of assault after a one-day trial.
4||Still fancy going to Russia for the World Cup? All you need to knowCan I still buy tickets for World Cup matches? Tickets for six of the eight round of 16 games are still available to varying degrees on the Fifa late availability website. There is still high availability for France v Argentina in Kazan on Saturday, which might be useful for those fans already in Russia. Are there tickets available for England v Colombia? Yes, the FA has sold only 1,500 of their 3,500 allocation for Tuesday’s match. Having said this, Fifa has sold out of tickets for this match and the Brazil v Mexico knockout game. How do I get tickets for the England match? The best way is through the official England Supporters Travel Club. I thought barely any England fans had travelled? This is one of the worst-attended major tournaments in recent times with England not even filling their modest allocation for the Tunisia and Panama group games. But people are starting to get more interested with the team performing better than expected. Is there a loyalty scheme for future games? Yes. If the FA sells out its allocation for the Colombia game or any future England games at Russia 2018 those fans who regularly follow England abroad will be given priority. Do I need a visa? Not if you have a ticket. With every ticket you get a Fan ID, which allows visa-free travel. You still need to give detailed information which is stored by the Russian authorities but it is not as complicated as getting a visa which requires a trip to the Russian embassy. What happens to that data afterwards? That is unclear. Asked yesterday, Fifa simply said it was subject to data protection. Is it too late to get a visa to travel for the Colombia game if I don’t have a ticket? Almost certainly because of the wait time for a standard visa but the Football Supporters Federation have devised a way round this issue. They discovered you can get multiple Fan IDs with the same ticket reference number, allowing you visa-free travel without buying a ticket. What is the point of coming without a ticket? There are fanzones around Moscow with big screens to watch the game and where beer and food is relatively cheap.
4||The best passers, hardest workers and slowest players of the World Cup so farThe group stage is over, 48 of the 64 matches have been played, 122 goals have been scored and after the first rest day of the tournament this is the perfect time for a statistical analysis of the World Cup so far. So let’s take a deep breath and dive into a worryingly deep but also enjoyably refreshing sea of stats. Passers Spain may have only a few survivors of the tiki-taka generation that won the competition in 2010, but they still pass the ball more than anyone else. Passing is of course a good thing: eight of the tournament’s top 10 passers qualified from their groups, the exceptions being Germany, whose statistical excellence was not reflected on the pitch. They were out-passed only by Spain and Saudi Arabia, who were No4 in the pass charts (though tellingly they were joint fourth at backwards passes and just joint 14th at forward passes). Most successful passes in a game 1. Spain (v Iran) 701 2. Spain (v Portugal) 700 3. Spain (v Morocco) 678 4. Argentina (v Iceland) 673 5. Brazil (v Costa Rica) 645 Fewest successful passes in a game 1. Iran (v Morocco) 127 2. Iceland (v Argentina) 132 3= Iran (v Spain) 139 4= Iran (v Portugal) 139 5. Sweden (v Mexico) 147 Long balls In general, teams that play a lot of long balls don’t also play a lot of short balls. So Spain attempted the most short passes, but were 24th in the long-ball charts. Brazil were third on the short-passing statistics, but 31st on long passes. Saudi Arabia however enjoy long and short passes equally, ranking No2 on short passing and No3 on long passing. As for individuals, of the 15 players who have played the most long balls, 14 are goalkeepers. The other is Toni Kroos. The good news is that Toni Kroos played very good long balls. The bad news is that Germany were still rubbish. Most long balls attempted 1. Navas 69 (48% successful) 2. Halldorsson 63 (46%) 3. Olsen 62 (39%) 4. Ochoa 61 (59%) 5. Schmeichel 58 (45%) 6. Ndiaye 57 (35%) 7. Beiranvand 56 (30%) 8. Akinfeev 55 (58%) 9. Kroos 53 (91%) 10. Penedo 52 (38%) Hard workers Three of the five teams that ran the furthest during the group stages qualified for the knock-out stages, though so did two of the five teams that ran the least. But there is an enormous disparity between how hard some teams work to defend their area and win back possession, and the more laid-back attitude preferred by others. Denmark, the tournament’s hardest grafters, collectively outran Argentina, the most indolent side, by almost 250m per minute spent without the ball. Serbia, Costa Rica and Egypt were rewarded for their hard work by being among the top five teams ranked by ball recoveries. Spain were in last place, but tellingly no team won the ball more often in their opponents’ half than their 13. Distance run by teams in metres per minute out of possession – the top five 1. Denmark 735.8 2. Serbia 719.1 3. Costa Rica 713.6 4. Egypt 704.1 5. Australia 668.6 Distance run by teams in metres per minute out of possession – the bottom five 32. Argentina 497.4 31. Spain 505.1 30. Germany 522.8 29. Croatia 556.1 28. Saudi Arabia 557.2 Shooting Germany only scored two goals in their group games, the joint lowest tally (along with 12 other teams). This may not come as a complete surprise to those who watched them labour through their matches but the statistics say otherwise: they had the most shots, the second-most shots on target, the most shots blocked and the most shots that hit the woodwork (level with Costa Rica). Nobody had more shots from inside the area, and not from outside the area either. When it came to shooting the only area where they didn’t excel (other than actually scoring, of course) is from set pieces: they only had one such attempt, the joint lowest. England and Portugal were joint top on that ranking, with seven. Crosses Another area in which Germany’s numbers are bizarrely high. This was traditionally England’s forte, but in Russia, Germany have hit 2.5 times as many crosses as the English, and not far off twice as many as the next crossiest team. But their flank-focused forays were very one-sided: while the average team at the World Cup attacked 27 times down the left flank, 28 times down the right and 21 times through the middle, Germany attacked a bang-average 27 times down the left, a slightly below-par 19 times down the middle, and a wildly excessive 49 times down the right, where Joshua Kimmich was the tournament’s top crosser. No other team attacked down either side more than 39 times (Brazil, down Neymar’s favoured left side). England, meanwhile, are beautifully balanced, with 24 attacks down each flank and 21 down the middle. Lop-sided sides Germany 73 right-wing crosses/35 left-wing crosses Sweden 29/15 Senegal 28/16 Belgium 27/12 Denmark 24/9 Russia 19/39 Losers The two players who have lost the ball most often are Neymar and Lionel Messi, the Brazilian being dispossessed fully six times more often than the comparatively saintly Cristiano Ronaldo. Neymar and Messi are also the players who have attempted the most dribbles, but the others at the top of those rankings have been better at keeping the ball. Neymar is clearly a highly skilled footballer, but he’s no Nordin Amrabat. Most dispossessions per 90 minutes (minimum 200 minutes played) 1. Neymar 6 2. Messi 4.7 3. Rogic 4.4 4= Ruiz 4 4= Milinkovic-Savic 4 Most dribbles per 90 minutes (minimum 200 mins played) 1. Neymar 9.7 2. Messi 9 3. Isco 7 4. Al Dawsari 7 5. Amrabat 6.7 Referees Sergei Karasev, from Russia, and Uzbekistan’s Ravshan Irmatov are the officials who enjoy booking players the most, both considering more than one in five of all the fouls they award card-worthy (neither, it’s worth noting, officiated Senegal, the only team eliminated because of their disciplinary record). At the other end of the scale, when Poland’s Szymon Marciniak and America’s Jair Marrufo are in charge, only 4% of fouls lead to a caution. In total there have been 1,571 fouls, leading to 160 yellow cards (and a single straight red, for Colombia’s Carlos Sánchez) at the rate of one card per 9.77 fouls. Fouls awarded per yellow card shown 1. Karasev (Russia) 4.33 2. Irmatov (Uzbekistan) 4.6 3. Brych (Germany) 6 4. Sikazwe (Zambia) 6 5. Rocchi 6.43 Speed demons Cristiano Ronaldo is the fastest player at the World Cup so far, having been clocked at precisely 34km/h. England’s Raheem Sterling and Marcus Rashford are among seven players tied in sixth place, with a top speed of 33.1km/h. But the slowest outfield player at the tournament – counting only those who have played 15 minutes or more, long enough to launch into a sprint or two and thus excusing the slothful Danny Welbeck, whose top speed was just 22.7kmh but whose appearance against Belgium was conveniently timed at four seconds less than our minimum – is also very familiar. Slowest outfield players 1. Vincent Kompany (Belgium) 20.7kmh 2. John Guidetti (Sweden) 22.1kmh 3. Wilder Cartagena (Peru) 22.1kmh 4= Filipe Luis (Brazil) 22.9kmh 4= Paolo Dybala (Argentina) 22.9kmh England update England have not often featured in these charts, but that doesn’t mean that they haven’t excelled at anything, or indeed disappointed. Here’s a quick run-down: England lead the way at: Average number of passes in attacks that lead to goals (15.3). Tunisia are second with 14.7, followed by Spain and Belgium on 11.7. England’s average goal-scoring attack lasts for an impressive 37.8 seconds. Goals scored from set pieces England have scored six times – 75% of their total – from set pieces. Passing accuracy with 91% (level with Spain). England are also pretty good at: Not losing the ball inside their own half – they are third, one behind Japan and two behind Germany, and also third on ball-losing overall, behind Spain and Japan. Winning aerial duels – only Russia (63%) and Serbia (61%) can better England’s 60%. Brisk, accurate passing. At 16.3 passes per minute of ball possession England are just behind Poland and Brazil, with Spain’s passes the zappiest of all at 18.8 per minute. But they are not so good at: Avoiding the offside flag – only Senegal have been caught offside more than England’s nine times. Winning loose balls – England are rock bottom at this, with 43. Their round of 16 opponents Colombia are top, with 70. Interceptions – with 28, England only better Spain’s 25. Throwing themselves into tackles – no team has tackled less than England, though Senegal and Belgium are also stuck on 17. Iran, Argentina and Peru lead with 51.
8||Chess: Trio of young English experts impress at Pula Open in CroatiaThe unlikely backdrop of the Pula Open in Croatia has seen a splendid performance this week by three young English experts, who have dominated the event as it reaches its final round (of nine) on Saturday. Their games are viewable, live and free with move-by-move computer commentary, on chess24.com starting 3.30pm. Joseph McPhillips, 20, of Bolton, Andrew Horton, 20, of Didsbury, Manchester, and Ravi Haria, 19, of Elstree, Hertfordshire, are aiming to qualify for global titles. Haria is already an international master with one of the three required norms for grandmaster, and now looks to improve his Fide world rating to the 2500 GM level. McPhillips and Horton are close to the IM title. They both have the stipulated 2400 rating and two of the three IM norms, so are hoping to complete the job in Croatia. With just Saturday’s ninth and final round left, Haria, England’s youngest grandmaster, Dan Fernandez, 23, and two others lead on 6.5/8, while McPhillips and Horton are in the group half a point behind. All four Englishmen still have a chance for first prize in what could be a lively and nervous decider. Monday’s fourth round was brilliant for the English trio, who all won, kept their 100% scores, and shared the lead. McPhillips crushed the No 1 seed, GM Ante Saric, while Horton outplayed the No 2 seed, GM Robert Zelcic. Readers who follow international chess might imagine this performance as even better than it was, but Ante Saric is a different person from the reigning European champion Ivan Saric. Horton’s previous two IM norms were at the 2017 British Championship and the 2017-18 4NCL league, but McPhillips has had a long journey. He was a promising Bolton footballer in his mid-teens, and after he opted for chess one of his IM norms was cancelled due to an obscure rule. He has one valid norm from Coulsdon, Surrey, in 2017, so decided on a big push this summer, and scored his second norm at Budapest earlier this month. Then a final round win at Balaton would have made him an IM, but he overreached and lost a drawn ending. McPhillips’s marathon should reach the tape this weekend. Success in Pula reflects well on the English Chess Federation’s elite programme, which provides an annual grant to the best talents to be spent on coaching, books, or travel to tournaments and which has benefited all the winning group in Croatia. Not all title norm stories have a happy or an easy conclusion, so spare a thought for James Adair. The 25-year-old is Yorkshire’s No 2 player, and in practice the No 1 since the British champion, Gawain Jones, has a full international programme. Adair easily qualified as an IM and looked set for the higher GM title when his strong performances for White Rose in the 4NCL gave him the required three norms in the 2012-13, 2014-15 and 2015-16 seasons. He lacked only a 2500 rating, but this has proved stubbornly difficult to achieve although he has not been below 2476 at any time in the past two years, with a peak of 2489 in December 2016. This month Adair, currently rated 2485, travelled to the Hersonissos Open in Crete in search of the 15 points needed. But the tournament was not the strongest, he was the No 2 seed and was paired against several much lower-rated opponents. He tied first with 7.5/9, but this was not enough. Adair will now play in the 2018 British Championship at Hull starting on 27 July. He is the No 9 seed, so weak opponents will not be a problem and the GM title can be his with an optimum performance. A plausible opening error gave McPhillips his chance for his emphatic victory over the top seed. White’s 13 e3? (13 dxc5 or 13 Re1 were equal) was met by Ba6! and Nb4! when the double attack on d3 and a2 won a pawn. Saric’s 18 Qe2?! (18 Rc1) let in b5! and Qf6! when Black was in cruise control. McPhillips’s only inaccuracy in a fine game was 24…Nd2?! when Ng5! is quicker. The final error 25 Rc2? allowed Black’s queen and knight duo to perform a deadly dance against the white king. Remember the strength of the queen-knight combination, they are much more effective than the nominal equivalent of two rooks and a bishop. Ante Saric v Joseph McPhillips 1 c4 e6 2 g3 Nf6 3 Bg2 d5 4 Nf3 Be7 5 O-O O-O 6 b3 c5 7 Bb2 Nc6 8 cxd5 exd5 9 d4 Ne4 10 Nc3 Bf6 11 Na4 Re8 12 Rc1 b6 13 e3? Ba6! 14 Re1 Nb4! 15 Bf1 Bxf1 16 Rxf1 Nxa2 17 Ra1 Nb4 18 Qe2?! Nc6 19 dxc5 Bxb2 20 Qxb2 b5! 21 Nc3 Qf6! 22 Nd4 Nxd4 23 exd4 Qxd4 24 Rfc1? Nd2?! 25 Rc2?!. Nf3+ 26 Kh1 b4 27 Nb5 Qg4 28 Kg2 Nh4+ 29 Kg1 Nf3+ 30 Kg2 Qe4 31 Re2 Ne1+ 0-1 3573 1...Qh6! wins with the double threat Qxd2, winning a rook, and g6-g5, trapping the queen.
4||Thiago Alcântara: ‘The most important thing in football is thinking fast’Iker Casillas lifted the World Cup coated in olive oil. He did from where Thiago Alcântara was sitting anyway. Spain against the Netherlands in Johannesburg in July 2010 is the biggest TV event in the country’s history and among the 15,605,000 people watching when the ball sat up in front of Andrés Iniesta 8,000km away were the country’s under-19s, together in the dining room at the Federation’s Las Rozas HQ north-west of Madrid, where they were preparing for the European Championship. Thiago remembers it well; he tells it well too. He stops, takes a deep, theatrical breath. Huuuh. “The pause,” he says. “That was the moment. “Both teams were tired. Holland had their chances: we still had the fear from the Arjen Robben chance Iker had saved. There were nerves. You’re thinking: ‘Bloody hell, this is going to penalties.’ Suddenly, the ball’s there, and Andrés, and the goalkeeper is there, and everyone freezes. And then it turns out the way it turns out … “Total ecstasy,” Thiago calls it. “Plates fly into the air, food goes up, the olive oil flies, the knives and forks too. It was some party. Shirts off, jumping up and down on the tables. And when the final whistle went, everyone threw themselves into the pool. After the goal, we could barely see the rest of the game because the telly was covered in water and olive oil.” He grins: “They passed us the bill for the damage.” That was the second time Thiago had celebrated a World Cup success. In 1994 his dad, Mazinho, won the tournament with Brazil, a mini World Cup sitting atop the television ever since. Thiago was only three but recalls the celebrations. “I don’t remember the games but I remember my dad arriving in Brazil because all the family was waiting for him. It was huge. Football’s a religion there. He’s loved, idolised. At that age you have no idea why people are reacting like that. I remember them being very excited, and I was just happy my dad was home. “I always loved football so much and I knew from a very young age I was going to be a footballer; I used to watch the way they did everything really closely. I lived with it.” Thiago’s father joined Celta, bringing the family to Spain, and so, in 2010, he was celebrating again. “When we watched the 2010 final I wouldn’t say we felt part of the team as such but nor were we just fans. The sensation was that our colleagues had done something that, bloody hell, we want to do that as well. It generates a joy in you and also a desire, a hope that one day it could happen to you.” Eight years on, it really could. Thiago arrived in Russia ready, loaded up with box sets. The midfielder arrived with high hopes and two of his fellow food-throwers from 2010: Rodrigo and Koke. Koke has been before, in 2014, but this is Thiago’s first World Cup; against Morocco he made his first start at a major tournament. At 27, the outstanding player of his generation, runner-up at that 2010 Euros, an under-17 champion in 2008 and at under-21 level in 2011 and 2013, when he was the player of the tournament, it feels a little late. Yet he has no sense of lost time. “I feel a much more important player now than before but that’s also because there’s been a generational change. There’s a group of players from the under-21s who are now a big part.” What has not changed is his football, or Spain’s. That, at least, is the theory. But the start to this World Cup has, for the first time in a decade, brought a debate. Thiago played with Julen Lopetegui in the under-21s and he prefers to pass over all that happened, but the manager’s sacking and Spain’s unconvincing progress through Group B have created an uncertainty about their identity. The new manager, Fernando Hierro, asked whether they needed “more muscle”, then insisted that muscle was not really their thing but the fact the question was even posed was striking. Some are advocating a revolution. It can be hard to stick to a style when things are going wrong. “But it’s our way of playing,” Thiago says. “We have footballers to play that way. We also have a lot of footballers who are versatile and can play other styles: counterattack, longer balls. There’s variety.” Thiago admits Spain, who play Russia in the last 16 on Sunday, are “not exactly where we wanted to be” and that five goals conceded are “too many” and that they have an “enormous margin for improvement”. They also topped the group and are on a theoretically easier side of the draw. “We have to focus on generating our football,” he says. If others have doubts, there is a remarkable clarity about him. Listening to Thiago, it is easy to be convinced. Eloquent, analytical, direct, he not only symbolises Spain’s style; obsessed with the game, he also believes in it. Yet he welcomes in variety too and if there is a recurring word in conversation it is “adaptability”; he, after all, is a symbol of cross-fertilisation, too. Born in Italy to Brazilians, a volleyball player and a footballer, raised in and representing Spain, enamoured of English football and playing in Germany for Bayern Munich, the question then is what is he? A Brazilian footballer? A Spanish footballer? A German one? “A footballer,” he says. At heart, he says his game is about one thing: making his teammates better. It’s about ideas, intelligence. “Football’s always been cerebral. The most important thing is thinking fast. I have my personality, my style, but my development’s been about adapting. I’ve always wanted to learn in the areas where I’m most lacking.” There is a breadth and authority to his analysis, a warmth as he talks about how the game is played elsewhere, the differences he sees. There is even a warning. “I’m generalising here,” he says. He knows there are nuances. “Barcelona’s football education has concepts different to the Brazilian game and at Bayern you grow physically. I have my own way of playing but I showed from the start I could handle it. Physically I’m strong. What there is less of in Germany is technical quality, so that allowed me to make the difference. And I’ll always play according to the team’s needs. In Spain everything’s more tactical, more technical, with more possession. In Germany it’s more physical; it’s about the runs you make, the counterattacks and the German mentality is unique: whatever the score, you go to the 90th minute.” And England? Even if he says the birth of his son means he is less likely to watch a Bournemouth-Huddersfield match these days, he is an avid viewer. “In England it’s as physical as Germany but it’s about the duels you win: defender against forward, midfielder against his opposite number. There’s more long balls, more players arriving in the area too. It’s not so much speed as strength. I love watching English football. It’s the league I most enjoy. And the national team have undergone a good transition: they have a very good team.” Don’t they lack a certain control in midfield, though? A player like him? “That’s your problem, not mine,” he says, grinning. “And anyway look at Liverpool’s midfield: Henderson, Milner, Chamberlain, they pressed like animals in the Champions League. They ate up the midfield. They were fantastic.” Spain’s approach is different, and has been since Thiago watched them win the World Cup from Las Rozas. “Spain started to generate a very good playing style from Pep Guardiola’s arrival at Barcelona,” Thiago says. “Vicente del Bosque is intelligent and he takes the footballers that have that grounding with Pep and instils that: the way we train, the way we see football, and from there you see a style. He adds Xabi Alonso, Sergio Ramos, David Silva, players with quality to adapt. They start to have more of the ball, to lose that fury, which hadn’t been much use to them anyway. “There was a difference between what is original – what was happening at Barcelona – and the concept that already existed with the Spain team but I remember the under-15 and under-17 Spain teams and there were already good footballers who treated the ball well. The difference comes when you insist on that regardless of whether it brings [immediate] results. Spain play that way because we’re brought up with it, we feel more comfortable. More than us having an idea, it’s the clarity, the certainty. This is our style and we stick with it until the end.”
1||Morrissey postpones July concerts amid racism rowMorrissey has postponed all his UK and European tour dates in July, his management has said. A statement from representatives of the former Smiths frontman said concerts in the UK, Germany and Sweden had been postponed “due to logistical circumstances” beyond their control, but promised to reschedule the events. The announcement comes after Morrissey’s manager, Peter Katsis, attacked plans to hold an anti-racism party near the singer’s concerts in Manchester on 7 and 8 July organised by former Hacienda nightclub DJ Dave Haslam. Reacting to the postponement of Morrissey’s UK dates, Haslam said: “I sympathise with fans who made plans to see him, we know what it’s like to be let down by Morrissey.” Earlier this month, Morrissey voiced his support for the former English Defence League leader Tommy Robinson after he was jailed for breaking contempt of court laws, criticising the “shocking treatment” of Robinson, whose real name is Stephen Christopher Yaxley. Morrissey has denied accusations of racism and Islamophobia after several controversial comments, including the claim that “halal slaughter requires certification that can only be given by supporters of Isis”. In a Facebook post on Thursday before the postponements, Katsis wrote: “The Guardian Gets It Wrong Again! Let’s get real. ‘Former Morrissey fans’ have not organized anything. That ‘Has-Been Haslam’ character was never a Morrissey fan. “And his agenda, stated as using music to spread peace, could not be any further from the truth. He is simply using the situation to gain some much needed attention to himself.” But Haslam said Morrissey’s management team were clearly “rattled” by the planned Love Music Hate Racism event. He added: “If dates are rescheduled, we’ll be happy once again to provide an alternative event in the city, one that counters Morrissey’s support for Tommy Robinson and the far right.” A statement released by Morrissey’s management announcing the postponement said: “All original purchasers from official ticket outlets will have the full ticket fee refunded, including booking fee, to their credit/debit cards. “Refunds from ticket agents will be actioned from midday on Monday 2 July. The LIHS [Low in High School] World Tour will continue, starting back up in Mexico City on 23 November.”
21||First great white shark in decades spotted near Spain's Balearic IslandsA great white shark has been spotted near Spain’s Balearic Islands for the first time in at least 30 years. Conservation workers saw the five-metre predator as it swam across Cabrera archipelago national park on Thursday morning. Bite marks on dead whales and unconfirmed sightings of have long fuelled rumours of great white sharks in Spanish waters since the last confirmed sighting in 1976. But this time scientists with Spanish conservation group Alnitak were able to record and track the shark for over an hour. “We saw a black fin and straight away could see it was a very big shark,” said documentary director Fernando López-Mirones, who was on the boat with researchers. “The conditions in the sea were amazing and we had the specimen around three metres from the boat, and we could watch it up close for 70 minutes,” he told El País. The conservation group, which is recording data on turtles, sperm whales and other wildlife in the Mediterranean, announced the sighting on its social media page with a photograph of the great white, and said it would also release video recordings. In 1976 fisherman Xisco Lopez caught a six-metre great white off the northern coast of Majorca. According to a 2007 documentary on the history of great white sharks around the Balearics, around 27 were caught by local fishermen between 1920 and 1976.
5||UN snubs Trump by rejecting US pick for migration agencyUnited Nations member states have emphatically rejected the US candidate to lead the organisation’s migration agency, despite the risk of financial reprisals from the Trump administration. Ken Isaacs finished a distant third in the last round of voting for the position of director general of the International Organization for Migration (IOM), a position that has been held by an American since the 1960s. The decisive vote appeared to be a response to Donald Trump’s policies on migration as well as the rejection of a candidate who had tweeted Islamophobic comments and cast doubt on climate change science. António Vitorino, a Portuguese Socialist party member who is close to the UN secretary general, António Guterres, was elected despite a determined and well-resourced campaign by the US mission to the UN. Welcoming Vitorino to the job, the UK’s ambassador to the UN, Karen Pierce, noted in a tweet: “This is one of the most important jobs for the UN and the world today.” The loss of such an important UN post reflects the latest in a long series of steps – some unintentional but most deliberate – by which the Trump administration is peeling away from multilateral institutions, agreements and diplomacy. In recent days it has emerged that Donald Trump severely disparaged Nato and the European Union, and reportedly told aides he wants to withdraw from the World Trade Organisation. The Trump administration could well retaliate by cutting funding for the IOM, for which the US is the biggest donor. Earlier this month it pulled out of the UN human rights council, which it said had ignored its calls for reform. In January, the US cut its funding for the UN agency for Palestinian refugees, UNRWA, by more than half, as a punitive measure aimed at the Palestinian political leadership. According to Mark Goldberg, editor of the UN Dispatch website, Isaacs’ campaign was probably lost before it began because of Trump’s policies, but the candidate’s views contributed to the scale of the defeat. “I would say the biggest blow came before Isaacs entered the race, when the Trump administration said it would leave negotiations on the Global Compact on Migration, which the head of the IOM would be expected to implement,” Goldberg said. “And there is the Trump position on migration, with the separation of children from their parents, which Isaacs hasn’t repudiated in any public way.” After he was nominated in February, past tweets came back to haunt Isaacs, who works for a Christian charity, Samaritan’s Purse. “Islam is not peaceful,” he wrote in one, and called on Austria and Switzerland to build a wall in the Alps “to control their borders from refugees”. He also shared online conspiracy theories and claimed that climate change was a “hoax”. Isaacs has apologised for the anti-Islam tweet and insisted he believes in climate change. Jeremy Konyndyk, a former head of US foreign disaster assistance, said: “The defeat of the United States’ candidate, Ken Isaacs, is a sad statement on US global credibility.” Konyndyk, now senior policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, added: “Isaacs was a capable relief expert, but carried significant baggage due to offensive prior statements about refugees and migrants, and apparent climate denialism. “Putting forward a candidate with this profile was an unwise move by the Trump administration.”
5||EU's migrant centres could breach human rights, say campaignersSecure migrant processing camps that may be set up in Europe under a deal reached by EU leaders risk becoming de facto detention centres breaching basic human rights, campaigners have said. The summit’s vaguely-worded conclusions after marathon talks in Brussels gave no details of what the “controlled centres” would look like or which states might volunteer to host them, but diplomats said they could resemble “improved versions” of existing – and heavily criticised – EU “hotspots” set up in Greece and Italy. “Rapid and secure processing” at the proposed EU-funded centres would allow economic migrants to be identified and returned home, the statement said, while those identified as “in need of international protection” would be resettled in EU states which agreed to take them “on the principle of solidarity”. Arrivals across the Mediterranean have fallen by more than 90% compared with 2015, but a political crisis has erupted across the bloc, with deep divisions emerging among member states about how to handle the problem. Steve Valdez-Symonds, the refugee and migrant rights programme director for Amnesty International, said the latest plan looked like “more of the same”. The proposals made the prospect of “lengthy and indefinite detention” look more likely, he said, in potential breach of EU and international law and the convention on human rights. Catherine Woollard, the secretary general of the European Council on Refugees and Exiles, said her organisation’s prime concern was that the centres could become permanent detention hubs, particularly for migrants whose asylum claims have been rejected but cannot be returned. “We would also be concerned about them possibly becoming magnets for smuggling and trafficking groups,” she said, adding that some potential host countries the EU might approach, such as Albania, Kosovo, Macedonia or Serbia, had “serious problems” with organised crime. Further issues, including ensuring refugees’ rights to legal assistance and appeal, could arise if the EU gets into the business of processing asylum claims under EU asylum law in countries outside the EU or trying to join. The European commission introduced its controversial hotspots – intended as hubs where arrivals in so-called frontline states would be fingerprinted, identified, registered and moved on – as part of an effort to streamline the reception of asylum seekers at the height of the 2015 migration crisis. Ten centres, five in Italy and five in Greece, were opened, but EU member states failed to accept even a small fraction of the refugees they had pledged to take, so the centres rapidly turned into squalid, overcrowded camps. According to an official EU audit last year, migrants’ lives were plagued by a shocking lack of basic security, water, decent food, blankets and medical facilities. Sexual abuse and exploitation of the large numbers of unaccompanied minors in the camps was widespread, adding to concern about fundamental human rights violations including the deprivation of liberty. “In Greece, people have been held for a very long time, in terrible conditions, basically trapped and with no progress at all to resolve their asylum claim … or establish who is responsible for them,” Valdez-Symonds said. The Danish Refugee Council last year found evidence of a broad range of rights violations, including de facto detention. Humanitarian standards were branded appalling in some hotspots: the Moria camp in Lesbos, built to house 1,800 people, was holding 6,250 migrants and asylum seekers at one point, but only had one functioning latrine. Dunja Mijatović, the Council of Europe’s commissioner for human rights, said on Friday after a five-day visit to Greece that the country must process asylum claims significantly faster and relocate asylum seekers from its islands, where many continue to live in cramped and dangerous conditions.
4||Uruguay and Portugal cross swords in fascinating reboot of el clásicoGo on, admit it: one of the first things you thought of when the draw put Portugal and Uruguay together was the kind of thing nobody wants to see but everybody wants to see really. OK, maybe not everybody, and maybe you didn’t. Plenty, though, did. Just try typing Portugal, Uruguay and “shithousery” into Google. On Friday though, Uruguay’s manager, Óscar Tabárez preferred to recall a different story and a whole different set of values, going back to the 1954 World Cup to tell a parable and question the “myths”, as he put it. Alongside, Luis Suárez sat captivated, silently gazing at him. “There is not so much history between us so far, so history will be marked by tomorrow’s game,” Suárez had said. What awaits in Sochi is spectacular. European champions in 2016 v South American champions in 2011; three of the world’s great strikers, men who scored 344 league goals over the last four years; the winner of four of the last five Ballon d’Ors, and probably a fifth this year too, voted the planet’s best player again – “not just a great player, their leader,” as Tabárez said; and the defender Diego Maradona calls a “superstar”. Then there is the other stuff this clash brings – and clash is the word. That, at least, is the assumption. The Madrid derby and the clásico recreated. Pepe v Suárez, Godín v Ronaldo. There is plenty of previous. There’s Ronaldo and Godín battling in the area, Ronaldo punching Godín in the back of the head. There’s Suárez catching Pepe with a hand across the face one time and a boot across the shin another, the defender rolling round the turf with hand in the air, calling for the priest to deliver his last rites after both of them. And then there is that Camp Nou meeting where Suárez pushes the centre-back, who bumps into the back of him, treading on his foot. Suárez turns and shouts something about his “mother’s shell”, which probably doesn’t really require a proper translation, to which the defender responds: “You pushed me first.” At which point Suárez swears at him again and warns him that he’s “saving one” for him. But here’s the thing: the defender he clashed with on that occasion was not an opponent on Saturday, it was a teammate, José María Giménez. Just as the defender he gave a black eye was not Pepe, it was Godín. All of which says something about the competitiveness that has helped make Uruguay football’s great overachievers; it certainly says something about Suárez – a superb footballer who plays as if he was no good at all, who talks about a nation who may not have the talent that others do but who will not be beaten for courage, fight, that garra charua of legend. As Godín puts it: “Luis has got where he is because of the way he is: you see he gets angry, wound up, he fights, he protests.” He might not for much longer. There was a moment here on the eve of meeting Portugal when the Uruguay striker was asked about the impact of VAR: yellow cards are down, red cards are down and penalties are up. “The players talk about it,” Suárez said. “Players are protesting less.” And with that he grinned and raised his hand: players like me. He also said that, having worked with a fitness coach before the tournament, he felt better now than in the opening game, adding with a smile: “Which isn’t hard.” Still, the anticipation is that this will be tough indeed, a confrontation between some of the best, most competitive, most uncompromising strikers and defenders there are. Yet that version of events was challenged here; there was something deeper. Uruguay have collected only one yellow card at this tournament; while their central defenders are tough there is a nobility about them; and, when it came to their final group game, they were in a similar situation to England but there was no doubt: they defeated Russia. “We don’t play with the results: our objective is to win every game, that’s our mentality,” Suárez said. It has also, Tabárez suggested, too often been their obligation, a “heavy load to carry in your backpack” – one that conditioned their characteristics. It was then that Tabárez talked about myth and reality; then too that he told the story of the 1954 World Cup. He had mentioned that this team has been together with him for 12 years. And, asked about the continuity within the team, the thread that runs through it as seen through the central defenders and leaders, from Diego Lugano to Diego Godín and Diego Godín to José María Giménez, he traced a line further back. As he told the tale – slowly, quietly, at length, so out of keeping with his surroundings yet so like him – it took you. They call him Maestro for a reason. “Fifa talk about fair play but that was there before. People talk about Maracanã, the “best in the world”, and that’s a weight. The idea that being second is no good. All those things that are said as if Uruguay was a country of 50m, like Colombia or Argentina, and that’s not the way it is,” he said. “That can create a feeling of impotence and the first reaction to that is the culture on the pitch. We always wanted to see beyond that.” “When Uruguay lost in 1954, when they lost their status as an unbeaten team, they were defeated 4-2 in extra time by Hungary. An Italian journalist wrote an article afterwards quoting the Hungary player who said: ‘I had to mark the best player in the world. Schiaffino was clearly better than me but because of those things that happen in football, we won the game.’ And the Uruguay captain said: ‘We have been beaten by the best team in the world.’ We have to recover that. These players have shown that they have that, and those values have been transmitted to the next generation.” Win or lose. “We have prepared well,” Tabárez said. “But football teams are made of glass. It can break. A player can’t sleep because the baby cried. Another is fighting with his girlfriend. It breaks. The World Cup is always special but we don’t know what will happen until the game starts.” There was a suggestion that the answer to that question might be: not very much. That this game would be boring, bar the battle. “I don’t know,” Tabárez said, “but, if it’s boring and we win, we’ll celebrate.”
5||Police study UK rendition report amid pressure to investigateSenior Scotland Yard officers are studying a parliamentary report that revealed the true scale of the UK’s involvement in torture and rendition after 9/11, as pressure mounts for a police investigation or judge-led inquiry. Parliament’s intelligence and security committee (ISC) recommended that police should consider investigating the role that an MI6 officer and a military interrogator played in the torture of detainees. However the committee’s investigation, chaired by the former attorney general Dominic Grieve, detailed a mass of other human rights abuses, including 598 instances of UK intelligence officers being involved in torture, and 31 rendition operations that were either planned, agreed or financed by the UK. A Scotland Yard spokesman said: “The Metropolitan police service is aware of the publication of the intelligence and security committee’s report on detainee mistreatment and rendition and is reviewing its contents.” There were warnings from a former senior military lawyer that if any of the rendition operations were conducted during armed conflict, they would amount to war crimes – and that the international criminal court at The Hague might step in if the UK does not investigate. Lt Col Nicholas Mercer, who was the British army’s most senior army lawyer in Iraq after the 2003 invasion, said: “The revelations about the security services and others and their complicity in rendition and torture are deeply troubling for the government. “Where these offences took place within the context of an international armed conflict, they amount to war crimes, and if the British government fails to prosecute then The Hague is able to do so instead.” Meanwhile, senior Labour figures also began to call for an independent and judge-led inquiry into the human rights abuses, which all happened during the New Labour era. They are angry that Theresa May prevented the ISC from questioning junior and middle-ranking MI6 and MI5 officers, which Grieve said had hampered his committee’s inquiry. The shadow attorney general, Shami Chakrabarti, said: “It is now clear from the published reports that the intelligence and security committee was denied access to individuals, severely limiting its ability to give as comprehensive a resolution to this scandal as it would have liked. “Its criticisms of ongoing inadequacies on guidance relating to torture and rendition also makes a judge-led inquiry – that the government is so keen to avoid – inescapable.” Clive Lewis, the shadow business secretary, said an inquiry would need to establish what those in the government at the time knew, including Tony Blair and the then foreign secretary, Jack Straw. He said he was concerned that May had prevented the ISC from interviewing key witnesses. Lewis, who was asked about torture and rendition on the BBC’s Question Time on Thursday, said on Friday: “If the investigation was hampered by Downing Street, we really do have to get to the bottom of this.” He added that the issue should go to a security-cleared judge. He said it was important to resolve, because the UK portrayed itself as a rules-based society and there were authoritarian countries around the world that would be looking at how the UK responded. “Straw has questions to answer. People will want to know who else in the cabinet knew and you know where that leads to. That is a legitimate question to ask. “No one is above the law. It is not about a witch-hunt of Tony Blair or Jack Straw. It is about getting to the truth.” The ISC investigation began more than four years ago after David Cameron, then prime minister, shut down a judge-led inquiry into the UK’s involvement in rendition and the mistreatment of terrorism suspects. The judge-led inquiry had been set up following a series of disclosures in the Guardian and the courts. In a second report, the ISC expressed concern that too few safeguards and policies were in place to prevent the UK from again becoming embroiled in human rights abuses. Grieve said: “We find it astonishing that, given the intense focus on this issue 10 years ago, the government has failed to take action. There is no clear policy, and not even agreement as to who has responsibility for preventing UK complicity in unlawful rendition.” Last month May issued a public apology to two victims of a UK-US-Libyan operation, Abdel Hakim Belhaj and his wife, Fatima Boudchar, who was pregnant when MI6 assisted in their kidnapping.
5||UN report criticises use of facial recognition by Welsh policeThe use of facial recognition by police in south Wales during a peaceful demonstration has been criticised as disproportionate and unnecessary in a report by the UN special rapporteur on the right to privacy, Joseph Cannataci. He issued the interim report at the end of a two-week visit to the UK to investigate privacy rights. South Wales police began experimenting with facial recognition in June last year, deploying it at various public events, including sporting and music venues. The civil rights group Liberty is supporting a Cardiff resident, Ed Bridges, who wrote to the chief constable of South Wales police alleging he was tracked at a peaceful anti-arms protest and while out shopping. In his report, Cannataci said concerns were expressed to him by civil society organisations that the use of facial recognition technology was not only violating privacy but may also have had a chilling effect on the fundamental right to association. He wrote: “In addition to the admitted lack of precision of the technology, I find it difficult to see how the deployment of a technology that would potentially allow the identification of each single participant in a peaceful demonstration could possibly pass the test of necessity and proportionality.” He recommended the government and police conduct strict privacy impact assessments before deployment, even as a pilot, of technologies potentially affecting the enjoyment of the right to privacy. A spokesman for South Wales police said it would respond in due course to the correspondence from Bridges and Liberty. He added: “The force has been very cognisant of concerns surrounding privacy and are confident that our approach is lawful and proportionate.” The rapporteur, whose job was created in response to the disclosures of mass surveillance by Edward Snowden in 2013, produces individual country reports on levels of privacy around the world. He will give UK organisations mentioned in his report until September to respond. He will produce a final report in December for submission to the UN human rights council early in 2019. During his two weeks in the UK, he visited Cardiff, Edinburgh, Belfast and London, speaking to parliamentarians, officials, civil rights groups, members of the judiciary, MI6, MI5 and the surveillance agency GCHQ. Speaking at a press conference in London, Cannataci said there had been a marked improvement by the intelligence agencies on privacy rights since he described draft legislation on surveillance in 2015 as “worse than scary”. He described the creation of a new oversight body, the Investigatory Powers Commissioner’s Office (IPCO), as a significant improvement on what had existed before. However, he expressed concern the IPCO had the dual task of authorising surveillance requests by the intelligence agencies as well as being responsible for oversight of how that surveillance was carried out. “To many observers, and especially people outside the UK, the new law seems to create a situation whereby somebody is expected to be marking his own homework,” Cannataci said. Security minister Ben Wallace said: “We have some of the best police and security and intelligence officers in the world. They work day and night to keep us safe from terrorists, paedophiles and other criminals that have no regard for the law. “The special rapporteur’s overarching conclusions on the system of safeguards and oversight we introduced in the Investigatory Powers Act are welcome. “Through this ground breaking and world leading legislation, we have made sure those charged with protecting us have the powers they need to keep us safe but that these powers are used in a way that does not undermine our privacy.”
4||Russia prepare for ‘match of a lifetime’ against Spain after satisfying fansThe bell tolls for Russia, the country’s first national team to make the knockout stages, and to say the fans are fatalistic would be an understatement. Sunday Stanislav Cherchesov’s side come up against Spain, a squad loaded with more star power than Moscow has seen in the past half-century. “At least we’ll go out against the best,” one fan said after Tuesday’s 3-0 defeat by Uruguay when Russia’s round-of-16 opponents were confirmed. Russia rolled over Saudi Arabia and Egypt to genuine surprise from home supporters who considered this squad one of the worst in the country’s history. But, as many Russians noted, grass does not grow in large swaths of those two countries and, when it came to playing a team like Uruguay, things took a turn for the worse. After that reality check the Spain match looks like being more of the same. But far from being condemned, Cherchesov’s side has received praise. For a Russian squad that risked being one of the tournament’s main punchlines, the Spain match is almost a kind of valedictory, final lap; the players did their duty and scored some lovely goals along the way. “Our boys are just fantastic,” said Yelena Iskayaeva, a 45-year-old former administrator who attended the match at a fan zone this week with two female friends. “Nobody can really blame them if they lose and they’ve already given us a lot of happiness. Football isn’t our sport anyway.” There are few illusions about beating Spain. “Honestly, it’s hard to imagine how we could overcome a team like this,” Dmitri Alenichev, the former footballer and now coach of Yenisey Krasnoyarsk, told Sport Express. “Only if there’s a miracle. But I don’t believe in one.” Many Russian fans recognise the Spanish players better than Aleksandr Golovin or Artem Dzyuba. For the squad it is a bit like sizing up Goliath without a slingshot. Dzyuba compared the game to a boxing match between one “veteran, experienced” fighter and another “young and bold”. A journalist suggested Rocky Balboa as a model. “You could say that,” Dzyuba said. Rocky lost that one. “This might be like an everyday match for the Spanish but for us this is the match of a lifetime,” Dzyuba added. “We need to die on the pitch, play at 200-300%, and only in that case will we have a chance. Right now our thoughts are only tied to playing our best game.” The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has said he will be watching the match though it is not clear whether he will be there in person. He has attended only one match, taking in the 5-0 rout of Saudi Arabia in the opening match of the tournament. For the hosts it has been a mostly drama-free group stage, with transport infrastructure and stadiums dealing with an unprecedented influx of fans. The one blemish has come from revived concerns about doping after the former head of the Russian anti-doping lab said he recognised one of the squad as a former patient. Russia’s team doctor shot back: “I’m ready to bet on a bottle of milk that the English have not given samples as often.” On Friday the Russian squad’s official Twitter feed announced doping specialists from Fifa had come for a surprise inspection of the team before Sunday’s match. “We’ll quickly give the tests and return to preparing for our extremely important match against Spain!” the message said. The World Cup has had the impact that the Sochi Olympics might have. But that competition’s legacy was overshadowed by the annexation of Crimea and the invasion of east Ukraine. Later doping allegations cast doubt on Russia’s medal count. To the Russian press the recent doping allegations look like sour grapes from the West, the latest in an Us v Them death match that seeks to undermine Russian achievements. Asked whether he was surprised at the Russian squad’s tournament-leading record for the kilometres run during the group stages, Alexey Sorokin, the head of Russia’s organising committee, said: “That sounds like a leading question. They’ve been tested several times for doping. The results are clear, everyone is clean.”
16||Sheffield strip club protesters triumph in judicial reviewEquality campaigners in Sheffield have succeeded in forcing a local council to admit that it failed to consider the impact on the community when it licensed a strip club, paving the way for activists across the country to challenge similar venues. In a judicial review in Leeds high court, campaigners argued the council had only considered the impact on women and gender equality at the branch of Spearmint Rhino, and had failed in its legal obligation to consider the impact on the wider community – the so-called public sector equality duty. The council conceded partway through the case that it had not consulted properly, and must now go back to the drawing board. The new consultation exercise could lead to Spearmint Rhino being forced out of Sheffield. However, the council said the strip club operator’s current licence still stands and would not be removed as a result of the court case. A Sheffield resident referred to as Irene mounted the legal challenge, supported by campaigners against strip clubs. Her solicitor, Louise Whitfield of Deighton Pierce Glynn, welcomed the news. “This victory is recognition of the very serious concerns about how strip clubs normalise the commodification of women’s bodies,” she said. “This case could have wider significance for other councils around the country who are considering licensing strip clubs.” Around 10 local authorities have approved policies not to allow any more strip clubs in their area, but the campaigners hope this victory will set a national precedent. The judge in the case, Mrs Justice Philippa Whipple, criticised the council, saying it was the second time its policy on strip clubs had been successfully challenged in court. “This is the second judicial review the council has conceded on the same issue, and conceded on public sector equality duties grounds on both occasions,” she said. “That is disappointing. I hope council will take it seriously.” Spearmint Rhino, which has been open in Sheffield for 16 years and is the only strip club in the city, was an interested party in the judicial review. Its licence was renewed last year despite almost 100 objections. In a submission to the council when the licence was under consideration, the club’s manager said it was run to a very high standard and the welfare and safety of dancers, staff and customers were his main concern. The council had previously argued that if it refused to grant any licences to strip clubs they would simply operate unregulated, which would lead to more exploitation of women. When the council consulted on the issue, various women came forward to say they had experienced harassment by men visiting the club. One woman, who had a studio opposite the venue, said one of the reasons she gave it up was because of her negative experience of working so close to Spearmint Rhino. She said she was “harassed by men hanging around outside the club” and it made the area feel “unsafe, testosterone-filled and unpleasant to move around in”. A spokeswoman for Not Buying It Sheffield, a campaign group that supported the legal challenge, said: “We welcome the council’s concession. However, it is regretful that this was not done earlier, which would have saved a lot of work and money. Irene is very relieved and hopes that other local authorities will also take note.” A Sheffield city council spokesman said: “We understand that we could have been clearer about how the consultation had affected our final policy. We welcome the feedback from the court and are committed to re-running the consultation, including a new equality impact assessment. We really hope all those with an interest in this area will take the opportunity to have their say, as we work to get the right policy for Sheffield.”
12||Mass shootings show why we must stop pandering to white male fragilityApparently it’s important to be civil. Whatever pageantry of violent intolerance is playing out in the news, liberals and women and people of colour must moderate our language so that certain sensitive Caucasian gentlemen in the room aren’t made uncomfortable. We must remember that their feelings matter. We must not, for example, point out that violent misogyny – from online harassment and stalking to domestic abuse – is the live wire running through the machinery of mass murder, white supremacy and far-right mobilisation in Trump’s America and beyond. Yesterday, Jarrod Ramos allegedly murdered five journalists at the offices of the Capital Gazette in Maryland. Ramos had sent countless threats to the paper, after one journalist reported on his harassment of a former classmate. The woman went through what she called a “year-long nightmare” of intimidation and threats before Ramos was convicted of misdemeanour harassment. Ramos was apparently furious that the Capital Gazette wrote about him as if he’d done something wrong. Of 95 mass shootings carried out in the US between 1982 and 2017, 92 of the perpetrators were male, and 57% of mass-shooting perpetrators from 2009 to 2015 included a spouse, former spouse or other family member among the victims. “In many of these mass shootings,” Jennifer Wright observed at Harper’s Bazaar, “the desire to kill seems to be driven by a catastrophic sense of male entitlement.” That sense of entitlement may well be the greatest threat to what remains of civil society. I’m sorry if that hurts to hear. I know that calling prejudice by its name makes people uncomfortable, and whatever happens, those of us who believe in silly things such as shared humanity are supposed to be civil, to be polite, to mitigate and manage hurt male feelings. After all, we know what might happen if we don’t. Six weeks ago, Shana Fisher was murdered by Dimitrios Pagourtzis in Santa Fe, Texas. For months beforehand, according to her family, the 16-year-old was harassed by her killer: “He kept making advances on her and she repeatedly told him no.” Finally, she stood up for herself. Days later, he came to school and shot her, along with nine others. Robert Lewis Dear, who killed three people at a Colorado Planned Parenthood clinic in 2015, was accused of domestic violence by two of his ex-wives. Omar Mateen, who massacred 49 people at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida, in 2016, had a long history of domestic violence. Nikolas Cruz, who murdered 17 people, 14 of them teenagers, in Parkland, Florida, in February, was allegedly so abusive to his ex-girlfriend that she could not travel alone to school. He was also a member of a white supremacist group. So was Dylann Roof, who murdered nine black people at a church in Charleston, South Carolina, in 2015, telling his victims: “You’re raping our women.” That same swivel-eyed paranoia about a perceived threat to white femininity stretches from street-marching European fascist groups to the White House, with scaremongering about “Mexican rapists” being used to justify the inhumanity on American’s southern border, where thousands of children remain in holding camps, torn away from their families. Mere days before the Capital Gazette killings, rightwing “provocateur” Milo Yiannopoulos quipped that he could not “wait for the vigilante squads to start gunning journalists down on sight”. Yiannopoulos insists that this was just a joke. Like many grifters in the gig economy of modern rightwing extremism, Yiannopoulus has long been regarded as a harmless clown, even after a protester was shot at one of his rallies. His ugly harassment of women of colour such as Leslie Jones won him a reputation as a valiant free-speech defender. Of course women and people of colour may not exercise our free speech to call out oppression and abuse. That would be uncivil. For years, Yiannopoulos and others like him, spurned by the mainstream, polished their personal brands in the trenches of the online culture wars, whipping up hate-mobs against female games journalists before expanding their franchise to stage-managed attacks on trans women, women of colour and “social justice warriors”, which is an odd thing to call your enemy, unless social justice itself makes you uncomfortable. This was the demographic courted by Steve Bannon, Trump’s former right-hand manchild and svengali of Breitbart news. Bannon was not the first to recognise the power of wounded male pride and sexual entitlement as recruiting tools. It’s the theme that connects the “incel” movement with Islamic State, the refrain that runs from 1930s Berlin to Washington in 2018. There is nothing in men’s nature that obliges them to behave like this. The problem is not masculinity but misogyny. There are plenty of shy, lonely men living in their parents’ basements who have not taken up violent woman-hatred as a way to relax after work. There are plenty of worried, white, straight chaps nursing private anxieties about their place in the world who have somehow managed not to drink the crypto-fascist Kool-Aid, refreshing though it surely looks to anyone lost in the directionless desert of modern masculinity. Racism and misogyny are chosen. You don’t catch them like a cold; you catch them like you catch a train to somewhere dark and terrifying. And a great many men seem to have bought their ticket long ago. Not all misogynists are violent, but most modern recruits to the diffuse male supremacist movement seem extremely comfortable with the spectacle of violence being done in their names. These are the people for whom a Hillary Clinton presidency truly would have been “just as bad” as a Trump regime that is doing everything it promised and more. These are the people for whom an administration bent on persecuting migrants and religious minorities, destroying the free press and tearing up the fabric of American democracy remains a fair price to pay so long as nobody has to say the words “Madam President”. And yet, somehow, it is women who are being implored not to get angry in public, lest we make these men uncomfortable. It is people of colour who are being shamed for being insufficiently civil. It is liberals who are castigated for not showing enough empathy with those who long ago decided that basic respect for other human beings is “political correctness”, and it’s evil, and it must be rooted out at gunpoint. In times like these, a demand for civility is a demand for complicity. We must not allow our society to be held hostage to white male fragility any longer. • Laurie Penny is a journalist and feminist activist
16||Virgin airlines says it will no longer help to deport immigrantsVirgin airlines has said it will no longer assist the Home Office in deporting people classed as illegal immigrants, following pressure from LGBT campaigners and rising unease over the wrongful removal of Windrush people to Caribbean countries. Virgin Atlantic said it had already informed the Home Office of its decision, which it said was taken “in the interest of all our customers and staff”. Migrant rights campaigners said the announcement reflected “a profound shift in public opinion on deportation since the emergence of the Windrush scandal”. For years, Virgin airlines has provided seats on its commercial flights to detainees and security staff accompanying them. A charity in Jamaica that helps resettle deported people from the UK said detainees regularly arrived as passengers on Virgin flights. British Airways has also deported individuals to Jamaica. The home secretary, Sajid Javid, admitted last month that at least 63 Windrush generation people had been wrongly removed to the Caribbean, despite having lived in the UK since before 1971, and consequently eligible for British citizenship. A Virgin Atlantic spokesperson said: “Last month we made the decision to end all involuntary deportations on our network, and have already informed the Home Office. We believe this decision is in the best interest of our customers and people, and is in keeping with our values as a company.” The decision emerged after campaigners from an LGBT campaign group working on securing migrant rights contacted Virgin, pointing out that the company’s decision to sponsor next week’s Pride march in London was at odds with its policy of helping the government deport asylum-seekers. Virgin is understood to have removed some LGBT asylum seekers to countries where same-sex relationships are illegal. Sam Bjorn, a spokesperson from Lesbians and Gays Support the Migrants, said: “Virgin’s role in enforcing deportations has been devastating to people taken, against their will, to countries where they risk persecution, or have very little connection to. Not only did the airline unflinchingly put people’s lives in danger for many years, it also made their staff unwillingly complicit in the brutality of the UK’s hostile environment policy. “Public attention will now be turning to other airline companies like British Airways who are still involved in transporting deportees.” Responding to an approach from the campaigners, Virgin said the airline had already decided to end its involvement with deportations. Staff said the decision had not been made in response to one particular issue, but that it was made after the company concluded that it would be better “overall” if it no longer assisted with deportations. Caroline Lucas, the co-leader of the Green party, said: “I welcome Virgin’s decision but now BA has to follow suit. How can any airline justify working with the Home Office to deport people when in all too many cases they are being sent back to face discrimination and persecution.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “We do not comment on operational matters.” Officials would not comment on contracts with specific airlines, adding only that the department “seeks to develop strong working relationships with our partners and strives to work collaboratively with air carriers to return those who are in the UK illegally”. Officials added that if an asylum seeker was found to be at risk of persecution or serious harm in their country of origin because of their sexuality or gender identity, refuge in the UK would be granted. British Airways was approached for comment. Transport of detainees is becoming an increasingly politically sensitive issue. Last week, in the US, American and United airlines said they would refuse to fly migrant children separated from their parents on behalf of the US government, saying the policy ran “counter to their corporate goals”. Almost 1,000 seats on flights were booked to deport people suspected of being in the UK illegally to Caribbean countries in the year to March 2018, official figures show. Deportations to the Caribbean were “deferred” after the Windrush revelations; it is not clear whether they have been restarted. In the two years 2015-17, the government spent £52m on all deportation flights, including £17.7m on charter flights. Anthony Bryan, who had lived in the UK for 50 years since he was eight, was booked on a flight to Jamaica in November, but an intervention from his lawyer meant he avoided deportation. The government has apologised to him, and to the others wrongly deported, although their identities remain unclear. Colin Yeo, a barrister specialising in immigration law, said the 1971 Immigration Act made not co-operating with the Home Office a criminal offence for the airline captain or owner. The Home Office was unable to say whether it might attempt to use this legislation to force airlines to carry out deportations. Zita Holbourne, national chair of Barac UK, which campaigns against deportations, said: “The tide has changed, forcing organisations to get behind the public. They will be concerned about their image; they don’t want to be associated with the failures of the government and that fact that people have been wrongly deported.”
6||Donald Trump claims tax cuts have led to 'economic miracle' as trade war loomsDonald Trump used an address at the White House on Friday to tout his six-month-old tax cut package and its effect on the US economy. The president also paid tribute to victims of a shooting on Thursday at a Maryland newspaper and issued a rare defense of journalists, whom it is his custom to attack. “Journalists, like all Americans,” the president said, “should be free from the fear of being violently attacked while doing their jobs.” But the bulk of his speech was a victory lap to mark the passing of the tax cut bill last December. “Six months ago we unleashed an economic miracle by signing the biggest tax cuts … in American history,” Trump said. It is accurate that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act reduced the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% – the biggest such cut in history – and lowered the tax rate for top earners from 39.6% to 37%. But according to an analysis by the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget the overall package is the eighth-largest since 1918. The speech touted low unemployment, a growth in manufacturing optimism and growth in economic optimism in general. In a statement, the White House claimed more than $300bn was repatriated back to the US in the first quarter of 2018. Trump made a series of exaggerated claims about the US economy, which has continued on a trajectory of growth that began in Barack Obama’s first term. He also skipped recent signs of less healthy developments. US gross domestic product grew at 2% in the first quarter, the commerce department said on Thursday, missing an earlier estimate of 2.2% growth. Meanwhile, an escalating trade war set off by Trump’s aluminum and steel tariffs, which have been reciprocated by the country’s largest partners, including Canada, Mexico, the European Union and China, could stall the economic engine, economists warn. According to a forecast by economists at Oxford Economics, the tariffs, which are already squeezing farmers in the midwest, could cost hundreds of thousands of jobs. Analysts also warned that the tax cut was designed to benefit the wealthiest Americans, including Trump personally. But it has nonetheless proven popular among Republicans and perceptibly lifted Trump’s approval with voters outside his political base. The legislation also increased the amount that can be passed tax-free to heirs and, in a blow seemingly aimed at blue states with high taxes such as New York and Connecticut, eliminated significant state and local tax deductions. Republicans have claimed Americans in all lines of work, including low-wage service jobs, have reaped the benefits of the tax cut. The long-term consequences of the cuts, which expire after eight years, are unclear. Economists have warned that the cuts will blow up the national debt – despite Republican austerity talk.
5||EU leaders defend migration deal as doubts emergeEuropean Union leaders have defended a migration deal struck during talks in Brussels as doubts emerged about whether they would fulfil their promises to build secure centres for processing asylum claims of people rescued at sea. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said Europe had made “a step in the right direction” on migration as she prepared to return to Germany to meet her coalition partners ahead of Sunday’s deadline to find a solution to stop flows of asylum seekers arriving from southern Europe. Shortly before daybreak on Friday, EU leaders ended 10 hours of fraught talks on migration with a vague accord to set up “controlled centres” in Europe to assess asylum claims of people rescued in the Mediterranean. The centrepiece of the deal is an unspecified promise for more EU countries to open “control centres” on a voluntary basis to process asylum claims. But Austria, France, Germany and Italy made clear they had no immediate plans to open secure centres on their soil. Asked if Austria would open a centre, the prime minister, Sebastian Kurz, said: “Of course not … we are not a first-arrival country, unless people jump with parachutes.” Nonetheless, Merkel said the overall agreement was more than she had envisaged before the summit and said she believed it surpassed demands laid down by her coalition partners. Her hardline interior minister, Horst Seehofer, had threatened to close Germany’s borders to migrants, sparking a dispute that some feared would bring down Merkel’s government. Merkel was due to brief Seehofer’s CSU party on Friday night about the EU deal, as well as about bilateral agreements she had struck with Spain and Greece, which will require the Mediterranean countries to take back asylum seekers who had arrived in their country first before moving on to Germany. Under EU asylum rules, first-arrival countries are responsible for processing asylum claims, putting a disproportionate burden on southern states nearest north Africa and Turkey. Italy wants to tear up the first-country principle, but the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said he did not want to change the rule, setting the stage for more confrontation over the overhaul of EU asylum rules, a process that has stalled after two years of talks. Central European countries claimed they had buried the idea of mandatory refugee quotas for all EU countries. “Now everyone has dropped the topic,” said the Czech prime minister, Andrej Babiš, hailing that as a “a big success”. Donald Tusk, the European council president, told reporters in Brussels that it was “far too early to talk about a success”. Diplomats were left uneasy about the negotiating method of Italy’s new prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, who pushed the summit to the brink of collapse by threatening to veto the entire summit communique, including unrelated parts on trade. When Conte, according to a source, told his fellow leaders: “I am a law professor,” the Bulgarian prime minister, Boyko Borissov, replied: “Well, I used to be a fireman and this is not how you negotiate.” Sweden’s prime minister, Stefan Löfven, added that he used to be a welder and he did not agree with the Italian’s way of making his point, either. Borissov described the Italian threat as “unpleasant” but conceded that leaders had at best reached a “fragile consensus that does not solve the whole problem”. Several EU leaders stressed they wanted to work with international agencies who were willing to set up migrant camps in north Africa to process asylum claims. However, a paper released by the UN agency for refugees and the International Organisation for Migration on Friday strikes a different tone. They called for “strong leadership from European Union member states on upholding the right to asylum and the rights of migrants”, while stressing that the EU could not outsource the problem. The agencies say they oppose closed detention centres.
14||John James obituaryThe sensual brevity of John James’s poetry reflected his personality. John, who has died aged 79, was stylish, casual, elegant, unstudied. His Welsh-Irish origins, too, underpinned his work. The only child of Lil (nee O’Reilly), from Cork, and Charlie James, a royal marine, John was born in Cardiff, not long before the outbreak of the second world war. To avoid the blitz on Swansea’s refineries, the family upped sticks for Portsmouth, only to be bombed there. On their return to Cardiff, John was taught by the Lasalle Brothers at Saint Illtyd’s College. His father returned from war service in 1946, when his son was seven, to become an insurance subs collector, while Lil worked in a biscuit factory. John studied literature and philosophy at Bristol University, at night working as a dance hall bouncer. He got a job with the Somerset water board and early poems began to emerge. He had met Ann Dorman at university; they married in 1961. With their children, Sebastian and Rebecca, they moved to Cambridge, where from 1966 John taught at the Cambridgeshire College of Arts and Technology – the “Tech”. His local pub, the Panton Arms, was a den for poets including JH Prynne, Andrew Crozier, Wendy Mulford and Tim Longville. After his marriage ended in divorce, he shared a home with Mulford, and their daughter Rhiannon was born in 1969. John wrote poetry in response to visual art, including the pamphlet Lines for Richard Long (1988), and wrote about his friend the sculptor Barry Flanagan for the Tate. He also collaborated with Tom Phillips, on In One Side &amp; Out the Other (1970, with Crozier), and with Bruce McLean, whose original linocuts were paired with John’s poems in On Reading JH Prynne’s Sub Songs (2016). Sarments: New and Selected Poems, was published this spring. John and his last partner, Patricia Coyle, slogged hard to found the first communication and media studies degree programme at Anglia Ruskin University, where John taught literature and film. His translation of Kleist’s Prince of Homburg was staged at the Cottesloe theatre in London in 1982. A former communist, a formidable trade unionist, John was an attentive listener, his instincts quick and generous. Students sought his company, and invited him to family weddings, and he retained deep friendships. He loved wines and ciders, cooking, fishing, ferrets, reading French and gardening. After Patricia’s death in 2010, he divided his time between Cambridge and the Languedoc in France. He is survived by Sebastian, Rebecca and Rhiannon, and nine grandchildren.
5||Unesco names three new world heritage sitesThree new sites have been awarded world heritage status by Unesco, including a remote Kenyan settlement and an ancient city in Oman. The 42nd session of the World Heritage Committee made the announcement on Friday afternoon following a meeting in Bahrain. The first to be named was Thimlich Ohinga in Kenya, north-west of the town of Migori. Unesco said the dry-stone walled settlement was probably built in the 16th century. It said the settlement seems to have “served as a fort for communities and livestock, but also defined social entities and relationships linked to lineage” and was the “largest and best preserved of these traditional enclosures”. “It is an exceptional example of the tradition of massive dry-stone walled enclosures, typical of the first pastoral communities in the Lake Victoria Basin, which persisted until the mid-20th century,” it added. Also listed was the ancient walled city of Qalhat in Oman, located on the east coast of the sultanate. Unesco said: “The city developed as a major port on the east coast of Arabia between the 11th and 15th centuries CE, during the reign of the Hormuz princes. Today it bears unique archaeological testimony to the trade links between the east coast of Arabia, east Africa, India, China and south-east Asia.” The last to be added on Friday was the Al-Ahsa oasis in Saudi Arabia, described as “an evolving cultural landscape in the eastern Arabian peninsula”. Unesco described the Al-Ahsa Oasis as “a serial property comprising gardens, canals, springs, wells and a drainage lake, as well as historical buildings, urban fabric and archaeological sites.” It added: “They represent traces of continued human settlement in the Gulf region from the Neolithic to the present, as can be seen from remaining historic fortresses, mosques, wells, canals and other water management systems. With its 2.5m date palms, it is the largest oasis in the world. Al-Ahsa is also a unique geocultural landscape and an exceptional example of human interaction with the environment.” The committee will make decisions on dozens more nominated places over the weekend.
17||Sanju review – biopic of Bollywood bad boy Sanjay Dutt drowns in self-evasionThe career of Bollywood megastar Sanjay Dutt has been the rockiest of rides. Born to Nargis, iconic figurehead of 1957’s Mother India, Dutt’s initial breakthrough was stymied by drink, drugs and womanising, and subsequent comebacks separated by stretches of prison time. His air of disrepute bolstered 2006’s terrific comedy Lage Raho Munna Bhai, where Dutt played a heavy nagged towards virtue by Gandhi’s ghost: the gags there had the ring of hard truth. That film’s director Rajkumar Hirani now brings us a decidedly soft and authorised-looking biopic featuring boyish pin-up Ranbir Kapoor as the roguish colossus, which to British eyes seems like recruiting, say, Men’s Hour lynchpin Tim Samuels to play Ray Winstone. In actuality, Kapoor proves a lightweight film’s strongest suit: he’s accumulated enough muscle mass, the bags under the eyes that speak to late-night licentiousness, even a measure of Dutt’s bad-boy swagger. Everything else about this hagiography intends to make the character look good. Sanju opens with Dutt’s third wife Manyata (Dia Mirza) persuading an initially sceptical journalist (Anushka Sharma) to tell her suicidal hubby’s side of the story, and that’s exactly what this script does, generating nigh-on three hours of self-justification. The drugs were the actor’s way of escaping his father’s control and his mother’s decline. The women? He was irresistible and broken-hearted. The guns? There for protection. The infamy? Blame the press. There’s a certain old-school comic nous about an early mix-up involving women and whisky (“I was enjoying an 18-year-old on the terrace…”), but it’s otherwise sad to see an irreverent talent like Hirani tidying up generally unruly legend, and trying to reframe a lot of grimly male misbehaviour as simple misunderstanding. At a moment when film industries worldwide are having an overdue rethink of their relationship to star privilege, an ambiguous life such as this might have offered up a cautionary tale, or at the very least some learning curve. What we get instead is a patchwork of feeble evasions and celebratory elaborations.
11||Pubs and retailers hope for end to CO2 shortage next weekPubs and retailers are hoping for an end to the carbon dioxide crisis next week after one major producer of CO2, which is used in brewing, animal slaughter and food packaging, reopened its plant on Friday. The production of crumpets, beer, fizzy drinks, fresh chicken and pork has been affected by shortages of CO2 over the past 10 days, amid longer than expected shutdowns at ammonia and ethanol plants, key producers of the gas, across Europe. Three out of five key UK producers have been shut down, hitting the country particularly hard. The shortages also come at a time of high demand prompted by the hot weather and World Cup football, leaving some businesses short of stock. Ensus said its ethanol plant in Wilton, near Redcar, had already begun producing CO2, a by-product of its fuel production process, which it supplies to Praxair, a major distributor of food-grade gas and dry ice to food and drink firms around the country. The plant produces 340,000 tonnes of CO2 a year. An ammonia and fertiliser plant run by CF Fertilisers, based in Billingham, Teesside, which is another key source of CO2 in the UK, is expected to restart on Monday. JD Wetherspoon anticipates it will return to normal early next week. Currently, a small number of its pubs do not have John Smiths ale or Strongbow cider, both brewed by Heineken, on draught. Heineken said its breweries were working at “full capacity” to serve customers as soon as possible. However, meat producers warned that some production lines had been suspended because there was not sufficient gas for packing. CO2 is used to help preserve fresh meat in sealed packs.
4||Didier Deschamps hopes France’s La Liga trio can muzzle Lionel MessiIf a manager’s demeanour in front of the cameras is an indication of the state of his team then France risk staring into the void. The auditorium inside the Kazan Arena is cavernous but after 20 minutes in the presence of Didier Deschamps it seemed to have been sucked dry of air. Nobody present came away feeling remotely illuminated as to how his team may galvanise themselves to overcome Argentina on Saturday, although they did, at least, depart reassured Deschamps knew the identity of their bete noire. “Messi is Messi,” pronounced Deschamps, an observation he repeated later on for good measure. “We’d like to mark and neutralise him but we know very well he can make the difference with very little. We have to take that into account.” France will look to keep Messi quiet with three defenders – Samuel Umtiti, Raphaël Varane and Lucas Hernandez – familiar with him from La Liga and the most salient point in Deschamps’ show of monotony came when he was invited to reflect on whether such knowledge may count in their favour. “I hope to be able to answer after the match with a yes,” he said. “I’m not sure it’s an advantage but it’s not a disadvantage. If you’ve played against him already, you may be aware of some situations that repeat themselves.” One state of affairs seemingly stuck on an eternal loop is France’s inability to get the most from a wealth of talent that, now Germany have departed, is rivalled only by Spain for depth. France never threatened to go the same way as the Germans in the group stage and ended up qualifying with ease; it was largely stultifying fare though and more than once Deschamps felt compelled to defend their performances on account of their relative inexperience. “I’m not looking for excuses,” he said. “On the contrary. But as you know, we have 14 players who’ve never competed at a World Cup. Five played for the first time against Australia, another five against Denmark, so whatever their individual abilities I think this should allow some indulgence.” It still fails to explain adequately why France’s attacking players appear so inhibited. Antoine Griezmann has been among those to start uncertainly, although it presumably does not help that Deschamps cannot settle on whether to play him as a No 9 or No 10. “The beginning was a bit difficult,” Deschamps admitted of a player France desperately need to pick up some form. “He played 65 minutes against Denmark and that was good for him because he picked up some rhythm, some momentum. It’s true the French team needs Antoine Griezmann at the top level and he’s doing everything for this to be the case.” It was, in the manner of his other contributions to the session, neither a ringing endorsement nor a kick up the backside. Hugo Lloris, taking the floor before Deschamps, had been a fittingly stiff warm-up act but he did point to the potential impact of another France forward, Kylian Mbappé, whose early-career exploits have drawn inevitable comparisons with Messi. “Kylian has huge potential,” Lloris said of the Paris Saint-Germain player, who scored the winner against Peru and has been France’s liveliest player so far. “He’s fast, explosive, needs space, and I think he will have more space than in the first three matches. We will have to step up our level and Mbappé has the ability to make the difference at big moments.” Lloris said several times that Saturday marks the start of a new World Cup, a knockout tournament of clean slates and new possibilities. It at least brings hope that, should they break with the habit of their spokesmen and stop going through the motions, France may just click after all.
7||Chequers dinner could end in murder on the Brexit expressAn English country house, a polite but inscrutable host and an ill-assorted band of guests, each with a motive to stab each other in the back. Theresa May’s Brexit house party at Chequers next Friday sounds more like the set-up for an Agatha Christie mystery than a cabinet meeting. But drumming up a sense of drama has become another tool in the prime minister’s battle to unite her scrapping ministers. So, a full two years on from the referendum, she will gather them for a day-long summit and a working dinner next Friday. So many crunch moments and make-or-break meetings have passed without the anticipated showdown since article 50 was triggered last March, that one Brexiter has taken to calling Downing Street “Old Mrs May’s fudge shoppe”. However, ministers are being carefully prepared, with face-to-face meetings with David Davis – or May’s chief of staff, Gavin Barwell – increasing speculation that Chequers could be a more decisive meeting than most. Government insiders say May’s direction of travel is becoming increasingly clear – and it’s towards a softer Brexit. The question swirling at Westminster is how much further she can push the leavers in her cabinet in that direction, and whether some could choose to walk out rather than sign up. Her chief Brexit negotiator, Olly Robbins, is expected to guide the discussion, by setting out the broad options the UK faces – and the tradeoff. With time growing increasingly short, insiders say he is likely to focus on off-the-shelf models – from an intimate, Norway-style relationship, with single market membership for goods, and signup to EU rules and regulations, to a far looser, free trade deal – what David Davis has called “Canada plus plus plus”. Spooked by dire economic warnings about the risks of economic damage from Greg Clark’s business department and Philip Hammond’s Treasury (the “heart of remain”, as Boris Johnson was recorded calling it recently), the prime minister is widely believed to be moving towards the former. But single-market membership – even just for goods – would ride roughshod over the government’s red line on European court of justice oversight, and leave the UK as a “rule-taker” in key areas. It would also require the UK to make a very generous offer on migration. Such a package would stray perilously close to what the leavers call “BRINO” – Brexit in Name Only – and some could find it hard to reconcile with the reasons they backed leave in the first place. By assembling her full cabinet, rather than the finely balanced Brexit strategy and negotiations committee, on Friday, May will increase the chance that she can carry the room – though the stance of several of her most ambitious ministers is far from clear. Sajid Javid and Gavin Williamson have both previously sided with the Brexiters over future customs arrangements, an issue that has still not yet been resolved. And Jeremy Hunt raised eyebrows last week by joining criticism of Airbus for intervening in the Brexit debate. All are regarded as potential future leadership candidates. Brexiters are girding their loins for a fight. They feel they have already accepted a string of compromises, from the £40bn “divorce bill” to the transition period – and now potentially a “temporary customs arrangement” even after that, when the UK would continue applying the EU’s external tariff to imports. “If they try to go down the Norway route, and push it hard, she’s got a real problem,” said one senior government source. In Brussels, where May faced criticism from a string of leaders on Thursday, which continued on Friday after she left, puzzlement about Britain’s indecision has turned to exasperation. The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, who held a series of meetings with senior figures in Brussels earlier this week, says: “They’re getting fed up with the idea that there are ‘party management issues’ that have to be dealt with.” Negotiators long for a clear answer from May next week – and in the white paper she will publish a few days afterwards – about the future relationship. Senior Brussels officials say that, with direction from London, they could be ready to work up a deal well before the October deadline. But they fear December looks increasingly likely. They are anxious too that May could expend precious domestic capital on winning round truculent leavers to a solution that will still be simply unacceptable in Brussels. The commission is adamant that a single market for goods alone is not on the table, even alongside customs union membership. Aside from repeating Michel Barnier’s familiar refrain about the “indivisibility” of the single market, they point to the high service content in many goods (design, engineering and so on). They fear the UK would thus be able to undercut the EU27 by giving favourable tax or regulatory treatment to services. As the UK itself used to acknowledge when pushing to deepen the single market, a “level playing field” is about much more than just tariffs. Downing Street continues to hope there is an outcome that falls short of a Norway arrangement, but avoids some of the pitfalls of Canada. In Brussels, they say no chance. The two sides also remain miles apart on how to avoid a hard border in Ireland. Barnier told reporters on Friday that “huge and serious divergence remains, in particular on Ireland and Northern Ireland”. The UK’s backstop proposal – hard-fought in cabinet – has been rejected outright. Sidestepping a row is one of May’s greatest skills, and next week’s house party could yet be a convivial one. But so deep are the fissures in her cabinet – and so poisonous the mood – you don’t have to be Agatha Christie to imagine it could end with blood on the carpet.
7||Brexit: EU leaders say single-market access for goods a nonstarterTheresa May has been told by European leaders that an attempt to protect the UK’s industrial base by gaining single market access for goods alone after Brexit is a nonstarter, as the Irish prime minister warned: “We are not going to let them destroy the European Union.” After being given a “broad brush approach” presentation at a Brussels summit of May’s long-awaited paper, yet to be signed off by her warring British cabinet, the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, told her that unless the final document presented a departure from the UK government’s thinking over the last two years, it would be dead on arrival. The British government is continuing to push the idea of keeping frictionless trade on goods, claiming that it would be a good deal for Europe, given the large trade surplus it enjoys. May has promised to publish her vision for the future trading relationship after a cabinet meeting at Chequers on Friday. Speaking at the end of a summit dominated by a row over migration, Donald Tusk, the European council president, said that “quick progress” in the Brexit negotiations was needed for there to be any hope of an agreement in October, at what is increasingly being billed as a make-or-break summit. “This is the last call to lay the cards on the table,” Tusk said, of the EU’s call for a workable plan. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said: “There is a clear message in this respect – we can no longer wait. “I cannot speculate as to the possibility of an agreement. I would like an agreement now but it is not in our hands ... We need a clear proposal in compliance with our values. The British prime minister is well aware of our treaties because they signed them and ratified them. Brexit can only happen in compliance with our values. “We are doing what it takes to stick to the deadline but we had no British proposal. Depending how realistic and compatible they are with the rules we have set from the beginning, we will see how we can move forward.” Belgium’s prime minister, Charles Michel, said he was “not very optimistic at this point”. He added: “Feeling that dominates is the impression that the Brits continue to negotiate with the Brits and not with the EU. The red lines set by the UK are globally incompatible with the fundamental principles of the EU.” May told Europe’s leaders, during a 15-minute presentation on Thursday night, that following the publication of her paper she would visit the EU’s capitals to explain her thinking. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said she would welcome “a longer debate”. “We are waiting for the white paper because time is of the essence now,” Merkel said. Varadkar said the prime minister had, however, taken time in the margins of the summit to give a briefing on her plans. He told reporters: “What she said to me was that she hoped it would form the basis of negotiations on the final status treaty. “I did say, and she understood me, that there really isn’t any point in putting forward something that wouldn’t possibly form the basis of negotiations, and that would be anything that would engage in cherrypicking, would have one of the four freedoms but not all four. Trying to have some of the benefits but not the responsibility and costs. If it is still in that space it isn’t going to be the basis of a negotiation ... There would certainly be no point in producing papers similar to those produced last summer.” Varadkar added: “If that principle were to be conceded there would be Eurosceptics and right-wing populist parties in every second country of Europe who would say cannot we have the same deal. While we really regret that the UK has decided to leave the European Union, we are not going to let them destroy the European Union.” Earlier in the day, the EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, focused on what he described as the “huge and serious divergence” between the UK and the bloc on avoiding a border on the island of Ireland. Barnier, who gave the EU leaders a presentation on the state of the talks, added: “Now we are waiting for the UK white paper and I hope it will contain workable and realistic proposals, but let me mention once again that the time is very short.” According to Bloomberg, one unnamed prime minister was said to have told aides that he believed there was now a 50% chance of the Brexit talks failing, after listening to May on Thursday evening, up from 20%. The EU27 subsequently signed off on a joint statement warning in grave terms about the need to prepare for a no-deal scenario. Spain insisted on the insertion of a warning that the UK also had to come to an agreement on the future of Gibraltar after Brexit if the rock is to be covered by the terms of the transition period, in which the UK will stay in the single market and customs union until December 2020. The leaders also repeated their offer to reconsider their own proposal of a limited free-trade agreement, in which customs and single market checks would act as a burden for both sides economies, if “the UK positions were to evolve”.
0||Ex-MLB star Josh Hamilton charged with assault of 14-year-old daughterFormer All-Star slugger Josh Hamilton has been charged with injury to a child after his 14-year-old daughter told his ex-wife that he’d struck her. Hamilton, 38, turned himself Wednesday to the Tarrant County Jail in Fort Worth, Texas, and was released on $35,000 bond. According to an affidavit by a Keller Police Department detective, Hamilton’s daughter told police that he went on a rampage on 30 September. She says she made a comment to Hamilton that upset him, so he threw a full bottle overhand at her, hitting her in the chest, then began cursing and shouting at her. He pulled away the chair on which she rested her feet and threw it, breaking the chair. It didn’t hit her, but he then grabbed her by the shoulders and lifted her from the chair on which she sat. She fell to the floor from which he lifted her, threw her over his shoulder and carried her to her bedroom. The girl said at this point she was telling Hamilton, “I’m sorry.” Upon reaching her bedroom door, he tossed the teen onto her bed, pressed her face onto the mattress and began hitting her legs with an open hand and closed fist. She said that after he finished striking her, he told her, “I hope you go in front of the fucking judge and tell him what a terrible dad I am so I don’t have to see you anymore and you don’t have to come to my house again.” As he left the room, he told her to gather her things for school. When she replied that she had already put them in the car, he responded, “Well, aren’t you just the perfect child.” The Dallas Morning News reports Hamilton’s ex-wife Katie Hamilton, the mother of the children, had sought a protective order for the girl against Hamilton earlier this month. Hamilton played for the Texas Rangers, Cincinnati Reds and Los Angeles Angels. He has an unlisted telephone number and couldn’t be reached for comment. It was unclear if he has an attorney.
1||Baghdadi raid video released as US general warns of Isis reprisal attacksThe US military has said it expects a retribution attack in the wake of the killing of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, as it released the first footage of the raid by commandos on the Isis leader’s hideout. The Pentagon showed brief black-and-white aerial footage on Wednesday night of the raid and the subsequent bombing of Baghdadi’s compound in northern Syria. One video showed small black silhouettes of US soldiers approaching the walls of the compound. In another bombs could be seen falling on the site followed by a flash and the screen turning grey. The head of US Central Command, General Kenneth McKenzie, said the bombing took place after all the attackers and survivors had been evacuated, and was carried out so that the compound near the Turkish border did not become a shrine. McKenzie was unable to confirm Trump’s claim that the Isis leader was “crying, whimpering” in the moments before his death. He said Baghdadi’s remains – collected after he blew himself up in a tunnel, killing two children he had taken with him – had been buried at sea. McKenzie said initial reports said three children, but later analysis showed two. Both were under 12 years old, he said. McKenzie said the US was under no illusions it had destroyed Isis, and warned the group would try to take revenge. “They will be dangerous. We suspect they will try some form of retribution attack,” he said. “We don’t see a bloodless future because unfortunately this ideology is going to be out there.” However McKenzie predicted that the campaign against Baghdadi would grind down Isis capabilities. “We think there’s a way to get to a point where it’s going to be less and less effective over time,” he said. “It will take them some time to reestablish someone to lead the organisation and during that period of time, their actions may be a little bit disjointed.” The CentCom commander denied that the timing of the Saturday night raid on Baghdadi’s compound, which he described as “exquisitely planned”, was dictated by Trump’s order for US troops to withdraw from the border area. “We chose the time based on a variety of factors: weather, certainty, lunar data,” McKenzie said. “While it might have been convenient to use bases there, the US military has the capability to go almost anywhere.” He acknowledged that the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) provided “early intelligence” which had been very helpful, and the SDF were therefore part of the operation, but did not participate in the raid. He did not comment on SDF claims and media reports that the Syrian Kurds had a spy inside Baghdadi’s inner circle, who led US troops to the compound. McKenzie said that four women and one man were killed in exchange of fire as US forces assaulted the compound. Two men were taken prisoner. “After this engagement, and once established inside the compound, US forces discovered Baghdadi hiding in a tunnel. When capture at the hands of US forces was imminent, Baghdadi detonated a bomb, killing himself, and two young children that were with him,” he said. “Following collection of samples for formal DNA analysis, Baghdadi’s remains were buried at sea, in accordance with the law of armed conflict within 24 hours of his death.”
2||Jürgen Klopp says Liverpool could pull out of Carabao Cup over fixture clashesJürgen Klopp has threatened to withdraw Liverpool from the Carabao Cup should the EFL and Premier League fail to find what he considers “a proper date” for their quarter-final. Liverpool reached the last eight of the competition after a penalty shootout with Arsenal that followed a remarkable 5-5 draw at Anfield. The quarter-finals are scheduled for the week commencing 16 December – the same week the European champions will be in Qatar to play in Fifa’s Club World Cup tournament. The Premier League and Football League have been in talks with clubs over switching a potential quarter-final involving Liverpool to the week commencing 6 January, currently scheduled for the Carabao Cup semi-final first leg. Klopp insists Liverpool will not play any further part in the Carabao Cup should the eventual date complicate an already demanding workload. “I’m not concerned, somebody else has to be concerned because we didn’t make the fixture list, we didn’t make the schedule,” said the Liverpool manager. “Fifa told us the Club World Cup will be there [Qatar] and we have to go there and we will do. The Premier League tells us we have to play in the Premier League, which we do obviously. The Carabao Cup, what we did tonight, if they don’t find an appropriate place for us, not 3am on Christmas Day, then we don’t play it. “They have to make that decision. You have to think about these things. If you have a fixture list where one team cannot be part of all the games, then you have to think about the fixture list. Hopefully it starts now. We will not be the victim of this problem. We play tonight, we wanted to win it, we did that, and if they don’t find a proper date, then we cannot play the next round and whoever is our opponent will go through. Or Arsenal play them. We are going to ignore that problem completely for tonight. A lot of people from the Premier League were sitting in front of the television hoping that Arsenal can do it. But – sorry!” Klopp’s main focus, however, was on the young players who guided Liverpool into the last eight despite trailing 3-1, 4-2 and, in stoppage time, 5-4 to Arsenal. Five youngsters made their Anfield debuts in the fourth-round tie and Klopp said: “You know, I just enjoyed it. I enjoyed each second of the game. I don’t know the last time I had so much fun in a football game. I saw so many really good performances. I was so happy for the kids that they will remember the first night for the rest of their lives. They made it a proper, special football night. Everyone who came tonight saw 19 goals – pretty special. “As a manager maybe I should worry more about the goals we conceded but I couldn’t care less to be honest. I could not care less. The mistakes that we made were obvious but it’s not important. The most important thing for development is that you react in the right way. All these boys need to play in difficult football games – and it was a difficult football game. They worked their socks off and left their souls on the pitch. I really loved it.”
3||Halloween fruit: ditch pumpkins, Australia can carve its own spooky traditionsOne of the small things that separates baby boomers from younger generations is an irrational hatred for Halloween. “It’s American!” “It’s cultural imperialism!” “It celebrates the occult!” “It encourages small children to ask strangers for lollies!” (they may have a point on the last one). In response, I try to point out that many traditions, which were once foreign, become localised through the passage of time and small adaptations, and Australian culture is all the richer for it. It was in this spirit of adaptation that in recent years, I’ve begun to carve fruit rather than pumpkins. It’s also because, like most dads, I am a natural tightarse. In North America, pumpkins are cheap and plentiful in October. In Australia, farmers need to use special tricks to force them to grow outside their normal season, so they’re not cheap at all and you can’t even eat the insides (seeds don’t count). When you are forced to pay $15 for a 5kg inedible pumpkin, it’s a bad equation. There are some squashes and pumpkins that are in season in Australia in October, like the Queensland blue, but they’re just not as good for carving as the classic giant Atlantic pumpkin. Butternut pumpkins, which are also in season right now, are almost impossible to cut open, let alone carve. Interesting enough, the pumpkin was not even the first thing to be carved. Halloween has its origins in the Celtic traditions of Britain and Ireland, according to Carole Cusack, professor of religious studies at the University of Sydney, and until the discovery of the New World, they didn’t have pumpkins. “They mostly carved small things, like turnips,” Cusack says. In fact, the origin story of the jack-o’-lantern is a Christian morality tale of a man called Jack who, to cut a long story short, cheats the devil numerous times but ends up doomed to walk the Earth in the afterlife with a turnip lit by a hot coal, cast out of hell by the devil. Pumpkins only came on the scene after the Halloween tradition was brought to America. “Turnips are a lot harder to carve than pumpkins because they’re very hard and not hollow,” Cusack says. So with the pumpkin itself an adaptation, there’s no need to stick to an impractical, American tradition. How do the alternatives fare? Pineapple The pineapple I bought was $4 – this was at Harris Farm so check out Aldi or your local grocers for a cheaper one. You need to get the ones that still have tops (technically called a crown) for full effect. Cut off the top, use a knife to cut out the flesh and a spoon to scrape it out, then carve a face in there. Its flesh is delicious … try walking around saying that in a creepy Halloween voice. Verdict: Scary and easy! 10/10 Rockmelon Everyone likes eating rockmelon. They’re also easy to carve and cheap at $2 each (Harris Farm) but they lack some of the pizazz of the pineapple and end up looking like George Costanza if he were a jack-o’-lantern. Verdict: Not quite a rockstar. 6/10 Papaya $4 for a large one. Papayas are like U2, a lot of people hate them for reasons I don’t quite understand. Even if you don’t like eating the insides, the strength of a papaya is that it’s really easy to carve out being both soft and firm. It also looks cool once lit up because the skin is semi-translucent and glows from the candlelight. You need to buy a decent-sized one to have room to fit the candle. Verdict: Eerie and excellent. 8/10 Coconuts $3 each. This carving is inspired by the Kakamora in the Disney film Moana. The film based the Kakamora on the mythical Solomon Islands creatures but took a few artistic liberties along the way, so there’s a chance these might end up in the problematic basket at some point – the film also had a mixed reception among Polynesian communities. They’re not easy to make because coconut shells are impossible to carve. Only try this if you are comfortable with power tools. If you want to take the risk, take a drill-mounted circular saw, clamp the coconut down on a workbench and drill out the eyes, perhaps a pair of nostrils. Then saw the top of the coconut off. I found a stiff box saw was best. Then grab your hot glue gun and stick on the other accoutrements like hands, legs and teeth. Power tools, children and cultural appropriation might not be the best mix, on reflection. Verdict: Halloween cancelled. 2/10 Watermelon I have used whole watermelons in previous years but this year I was looking at paying $25 for an 8kg one, which was the smallest I could find. In years past I have found it at Aldi for 99c a kilo. Watermelon is a childhood favourite, so it’s great if you’re hosting an after-school Halloween party. It’s easy to hollow out and carve and looks pretty good lit up at night. The only downside is that it doesn’t last well in the heat – the skin tends to melt, another problem which they don’t seem to have in most of North America at this time of year. Verdict: big and beautiful, like a Trump wall. 7/10
4||Political controversies overshadow Facebook's strong financial reportFacebook’s myriad political controversies overshadowed a strong financial quarter on Wednesday as the chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, delivered an impassioned defense of his company on a conference call with investors. The company reported strong revenue and profit growth for the third quarter of 2019, beating analyst expectations and prompting the share price to jump as much as 4% in after-hours trading. Revenues grew 29% year-over-year to $17.7bn, and profits grew 19% to $6.1bn. Facebook also reported continued user growth, with 2.45bn monthly average users of Facebook, and 2.8bn across the company’s full stable of apps, which includes WhatsApp, Instagram and Messenger. The strong business performance appeared almost an afterthought to Zuckerberg, however, as he delivered a lengthy and emotional defense of the company’s “principles”, particularly in connection to the ongoing controversy over its policies on political advertisements. “Over the next year of the campaign, we’re going to be at the center of the debate any time there’s a policy that people believe may advantage their side,” he said. “I expect that this is going to be a very tough year.” Facebook has been harshly criticized in recent weeks over its decision to exempt posts by politicians from its third-party factchecking program and to exempt ads by politicians from a policy banning false or misleading statements in advertisements. “Some people accuse us of allowing this speech because all we care about is making money,” Zuckerberg said. But the controversy far outweighs the profit, he added. “We estimate that these ads from politicians will be less than 0.5% of our revenue next year … We believe deeply that political speech is important and that’s what’s driving us.” Zuckerberg’s diatribe included rebuttals to several critical arguments that he attributed to “some people” or “critics”. He referenced critiques of the company’s algorithmic news feed, which amplifies certain content according to opaque calculations. Facebook has made “huge sacrifices” in order to weight the algorithm toward “meaningful interactions”, he asserted, including one change that reduced the amount of viral video that users were watching by 50m hours every day. “Some people say this is all a cynical political calculation, that we’re just trying to appease conservatives – that’s wrong too,” he said. “Frankly, if our goal were to make either side happy, we’re not doing a very good job, because we’re making everyone frustrated with us.” One group of critics that Zuckerberg did not address was his own employees, hundreds of whom have signed a letter objecting to the political ads policy. The earnings call took place less than an hour after the Twitter chief executive, Jack Dorsey, announced that his company will ban all political advertising, in a tweeted statement that included multiple veiled critiques of Zuckerberg’s position. Zuckerberg did not directly reference Twitter’s decision, but did say that he will continue to consider his position. “Would we really want to block ads for important political issues like climate ads or women’s political empowerment?” he asked. The day also saw the disclosure of another major foreign influence campaign using Facebook’s, and a shakeup to the company’s board of directors. On Wednesday morning, the company announced that it was taking down three networks of inauthentic pages and accounts targeting eight African nations. The networks were linked to Yevgeny Prigozhin, the Russian businessman who has been indicted by the US government for his alleged role in backing the Russian troll farm that interfered in the 2016 US presidential election. Zuckerberg argued the takedowns were a victory because they demonstrated the efficacy of the systems the company has built to detect inauthentic behavior. Some of the inauthentic accounts purchased ads from Facebook as early as May 2014. Sue Desmond-Hellmann, Facebook’s lead independent director, announced her resignation from the company’s board on Wednesday. Desmond-Hellman is the CEO of the Bill and Melinda Gates foundation, and she cited “increasing demands from my CEO role, my extended family, and my own health” in a statement announcing her departure. The company said the next lead independent director will be announced in the coming months.
5||The World According to Putin review – sex, lies and state-approved videotapeThis is the era of the dead cat. It’s Boris Johnson’s fault. Back in 2013, he wrote an article advising that if you are a politician facing embarrassment over, I don’t know, allegations you funnelled public money to a pole-dancing American businesswoman, slap a dead cat on the table and your problems are over. Noticed how few cats have crossed your path recently? Now you know why. In The World According to Putin (Channel 4), a beguiling compilation of foreigner-bashing, fiercely nationalistic Russian state telly, we were told that Theresa May is a virtuoso at dead cat politics. It was she who ordered the poisoning of Russian double agent Sergei Skripal in Salisbury last year, to misdirect the British people from her Brexit debacle. Or so Dmitry Kiselev, whom Vladimir Putin appointed in 2013 to head the new Russian government-owned international news agency, told viewers of his popular evening news show. You can see why Vlad gave him the job. Untruth did not begin with us; nor will it end with us, wrote Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn in 1971. Quite so: in 2019, Kiselev, like Trump, is a post-truth virtuoso, and his values dominate Russian TV as Trump’s have set the tone on Twitter and Johnson’s have made British democracy an oxymoron. “The time for detailed, unbiased journalism is over,” Kiselev told a staff meeting. “It is time to use it to create values. Editorial policy will be based on love of Russia.” He didn’t need to say there would be nightly broadcasts from the former Soviet republic of Arslikhan eulogising the leader’s achievements. That was implicit. The Salisbury attack obviously had nothing to do with Ruslan Boshirov and Alexander Petrov, Scotland Yard’s leading suspects, Kiselev insisted. They were wide-eyed Russian tourists drawn to the city out of love for English gothic architecture. Cut to the hilarious Russia Today interview with the two men, in which they detailed their fondness for Salisbury, citing its cathedral’s 123m spire and other attractions definitely not cribbed from Wikipedia. Did you have a bottle of Nina Ricci perfume, which the UK presents as evidence of your crime, asked the interviewer. “Don’t you think it would be kind of stupid for two straight men to be carrying perfume for ladies?” replied Boshirov, smiling as if his rhetorical question was knock-down defence. I don’t know how you roll in heteronormative Russia, Ruslan, but as a straight man in the Sodom and Gomorrah that is north London, I have often carried perfume for ladies. Hell, I have even worn it. More to the point, unlike the 72% of Russians who get their news from TV and nightly fixes of their leader being butch and outdoorsy in his scanties, I’ve never seen the attraction of Putin’s nipples. Surely only deep personal inadequacy can explain his need to get his kit off so readily for the cameras. (You had to be Russian, too, to find the footage of Putin’s karaoke interpretation of Blueberry Hill anything but chilling.) Only five minutes into this documentary, the president of the Russian Federation was photographed with his top off as he fished. Did his media lackey Kiselev question this ludicrous sexual display? No. Instead, Kiselev – like much of the state-run Russian media – focused on May’s breasts. I have never thought about May’s breasts until this programme, but now I can think of nothing else. Kiselev compared May to berserker warriors and Femen protesters, both of whom went into battle topless. Cut to May arriving to make a speech in an evening dress with sleeveless gauze bodice. Her speech denounced Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea, and she adorned it, Kiselev suggested unpleasantly, “with her tired white flesh”. When May resigned, one Russian presenter lamented her departure: “We’ll miss her deep cleavage.” Russian television – not just fluent in dead cat, but also in the international language of misogyny. If this compilation was anything to go by, Russian TV is akin to what would happen if the Daily Mail necked a bottle of Stolichnaya and offered it to all-comers in an after-hours pub car park. In one show, a bravura mashup of Jeremy Kyle and Newsnight, a Ukrainian guest told a Russian that Russians lived in shit and were red fascists. “Comrade,” replied the Russian from across the studio, “I say to you as a man of peace, you call my ancestors fascists one more time and I’m gonna come over there and smash your face in.” Various stern yet sexy presenters indicted Britain as a public toilet, bewailed how western primary school kids are forcibly taught to be gay and masturbate, and explained Trump’s fear of carrots. My delight was slightly diminished by the thought that if Russia was given right of reply, it could make Channel 4 look equally silly. Only at the end did we learn what Russian TV’s fake news and scatter-gun racism are really about: distraction from Putin’s struggling economy and vainglorious Syrian adventure. Meanwhile, winter is coming. What kind of fur hats will on-trend Russians wear to stave off the chill? Let’s just say, I believe these dead cats are yours, comrade.
6||Sydney airport worker gouged in eye by falcon living in Qantas hangarAn aircraft worker has been gouged in the eye by a falcon that lives in a Qantas Sydney airport hangar, creating what the union has called an “unsafe work environment”. Multiple peregrine falcons – including at least one small family – live, nest and hunt in the hangar. Falcons have been there for at least 20 years and have turned it into a “known roosting site”. But on Tuesday last week, one of the falcons attacked a worker, causing significant damage to his eyes, neck and face. The worker “may lose sight in one eye”, the Transport Workers Union said. The birds cannot be easily removed because they are a protected species, and Qantas has allowed them to stay because they keep mice, rats and pigeons away. Guardian Australia has obtained an internal safety warning issued by Qantas that confirmed the attack and told staff to wear safety goggles until the end of breeding season in November. “Maintain clearance from any falcon activity,” the warning said. “If you are swooped or observe the falcon, please report the location and activity observed.” Staff in the hangar provided images of the falcons to Guardian Australia. Peregrine falcons are the world’s fastest animal and can swoop at speeds of up to 300km/h. According to the safety notice, the falcon “attacked the worker when they were in the vicinity of the falcon’s food source”. The New South Wales secretary of the TWU, Richard Olsen, said the union did not want the birds removed, but rather wanted Qantas to move cleaners away from the falcon-inhabited areas. He said staff were asked to keep cleaning aircraft in the hangar after the attack, and that not all staff were given safety equipment. “We are not calling for the birds to be removed, rather that Qantas have aircraft cleaned before the aircraft are moved to the particular hangar where these birds of prey roost and hunt,” he said. He said Qantas never warned union members about the falcons. “TWU members are not aware of any communication from Qantas about the possible unsafe work environment that the presence of these birds create,” he said. “Members now fear for their personal safety if they are required to enter the hangars where these birds reside.” A Qantas spokesman said the falcon attack was the first in the hangar. “Aircraft hangars make attractive homes for large birds due to their height and plenty of space to roost,” he said. “It’s probably not that well known that peregrine falcons have been living in our engineering hangars at Sydney airport for at least the past 20 years … They actually help keep smaller birds, rats and mice out of the hangars. “We’re making sure employees who work in and around the hangar are reminded of the falcons’ presence.” According to the internal safety warning, a second worker was also swooped while walking through the hangar. “Falcons have greater activity during their breeding cycle September through to November,” the warning said. It advised staff to “keep clear of bird carcasses as they could be a potential food source”. The wildlife rescue group Wires said it was “often called around this time of year” to the Qantas hangar, as the fledglings made their first attempts at flying. Wires noted as long ago as 2010 that the Qantas hangar was “a known roosting site” for the peregrine falcon. Rob Crawford, a Wires volunteer who specialises in raptors (birds of prey), said he had been visiting the airport falcons for years. “Every year, they generally have one or two chicks that come through,” he told Guardian Australia. “Over six or so years we’ve been going there, there would be almost 20 birds … It’s the same cycle every year. “There have been incidents. We’ve heard of them swooping, and that is completely normal behaviour for them. We’ve heard stories from the Qantas guys that they have been swooped before, maybe one has been scratched. “But as far as we are aware, this is the only time that anyone has been unlucky enough to have a serious injury.” He said that with eyeglasses and hats, the chances of more injuries were now “very, very slim”. “It’s generally not too much of a big deal. The birds don’t care about humans for nine months of the year. For the three months they have chicks and fledglings they tend to be defensive. “The staff love these birds, they are their friends, their colleagues. They perform quite the service. A pair of peregrines will take at least one pigeon a day – those peregrines are responsible of clearing out hundreds of feral pigeons from the airport. It’s actually a service to the greater good for the whole facility”. As of Wednesday afternoon the peregrine falcon was coming 25th in the Guardian/Birdlife Australia bird of the year poll.
4||Twitter to ban all political advertising, raising pressure on FacebookTwitter will ban all political advertising, the company’s CEO has announced, in a move that will increase pressure on Facebook over its controversial stance to allow politicians to advertise false statements. The new policy, announced via Jack Dorsey’s Twitter account on Wednesday, will come into effect on 22 November and will apply globally to all electioneering ads, as well as ads related to political issues. The timing means the ban will be in place in time for the UK snap election. Twitter had previously implemented rules and restrictions for political advertising. The announcement comes as Facebook is embroiled in a controversy over its decision to exempt ads by politicians from third-party factchecking and from a policy that bans false statements from paid advertisements. Dorsey explained the motivations behind the change in a lengthy Twitter thread that appeared to include several references and responses to the convoluted arguments that Facebook has put forward in recent weeks. The organic spread of political messages online “should not be compromised by money”, he wrote. The advanced state of digital advertising technology, including “machine learning-based optimization of messaging and micro-targeting” and deepfakes – fake or manipulated videos that appear real – combined with the pollution of the online information ecosystem with misinformation, “present entirely new challenges to civic discourse”. “This isn’t about free expression,” he added, in a seeming riposte to the Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg’s recent defense of online political advertising in a speech billed as a “stand for voice and free expression”. “This is about paying for reach. And paying to increase the reach of political speech has significant ramifications that today’s democratic infrastructure may not be prepared to handle. It’s worth stepping back in order to address.” Dorsey tweeted another counter-argument to Facebook with an accompanying winking emoji, writing: “It’s not credible for us to say: ‘We’re working hard to stop people from gaming our systems to spread misleading info, buuut if someone pays us to target and force people to see their political ad…well...they can say whatever they want!’” That argument appears to mock Facebook’s recent attempts to justify its decisions to exempt posts by politicians from its third-party factchecking program, and ads by politicians from a policy that bans false statements from paid advertisements. Together, the policies have created a situation in which Facebook is simultaneously asserting its commitment to reducing misinformation while allowing incumbent politicians and political candidates to lie in paid campaign ads. Dorsey called for “forward-looking political ad regulation”, noting that transparency requirements that have been proposed by US lawmakers are “progress but not enough.” “The internet provides entirely new capabilities, and regulators need to think past the present day to ensure a level playing field,” he said. Trump’s campaign manager, Brad Parscale, called Twitter’s decision “another attempt by the left to silence Trump and conservatives” while Hillary Clinton called it “the right thing to do for democracy in America and all over the world” and the New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez deemed it “a good call”. Daniel Kreiss, an associate professor of journalism and media at the University of North Carolina, argued that companies should focus on restricting the use of personal data in ad targeting rather than banning all political ads, which he said “favors incumbents and media appointed elites vis-a-vis challengers”. J Nathan Matias, an assistant professor of communication at Cornell University, said that the ban could have a number of unintended consequences, including pushing campaigns to use more bots and “hybrid human-software coordination on Twitter”. “It’s very hard to define ‘political’ things from non-political discourse,” he added. “If their policies are too loose or their enforcement too clumsy, Twitter could do real damage to public health, the uptake of government services and civic life.”
2||Liverpool 5-5 Arsenal (5-4 pens): Carabao Cup fourth round – as it happened!Bonus Jürgen Klopp quotes: “I loved it. We could talk about tactics but why on a night like that? What they did tonight, how they played, I loved it. In the end I encouraged them to keep going. With the team we had tonight, having 60% possession is crazy. We made mistakes. It’s not too smart but it can happen. You have to stay brave. It’s like a dream to play the first time at Anfield. You have to stay on track and I really loved it that they wanted it at the end. All the goals they scored were lovely. Arsenal’s goals – apart from Willock’s – were a bit scrappy, but who cares? it’s about being a hero on a night like this.” I’m going for a stiff drink now. So I’ll leave you with this match report from Anfield by Any Hunter, who probably needs more than one stiff drinks. Thanks for your emails, tweets and Mizzy Night remembrances. Good night! In the other matches tonight, Aston Villa beat Wolves 2-1. You can read that report here: And Manchester United won 2-1 at Chelsea. Marcus Rashford scored a belter, by all accounts. Rob Smyth is handling the afterparty there: “Is it just me, or does Unai Emery remind anyone of Alan Partridge sporting a Ray Reardon (snooker) haircut?” offers Graham S Timmins. It’s not just you Graham. We’ll have the match report up shortly, by the way. But as you can imagine, it was not an easy game to file on. “How has Kelleher managed to concede five goals and still come out of the game as a hero?” asks Eoin Jones. Football’s just ridiculous isn’t it? They are just showing a replay of Liverpool’s celebrations after Curtis Jones’s winning penalty. They reacted like they had won the World Cup. And that’s how it should be shouldn’t it? It’s the best moment in football to date for many of these youngsters and it was lovely to see. Harvey Elliott, who didn’t take a penalty, was down on his knees and fist-pumping, while Jones was involved in a pile-on with his teammates in the corner. We have an answer to more goals in regular time than penalties – and it’s a match I was at. “Istanbul 2005,” writes Henri du Périer. It was 3-2 to Liverpool on penalties, of course. “We always have special nights at Anfield,” says Divock Origi, whose injury-time volley forced penalties. “We always keep on going. That’s our mentality. Ox’s goal was amazing but the whole team – everybody fought. We just maximised.” They certainly did. “We want to go for every cup. For a lot of guys it was their first game. It’s a game against Arsenal at home. So we want to make a special night.” Yes, they did that. “When was the last time there were more goals in the game than in the penalty shootout?” asks Neil Hattersley. I have no idea, Neil, but I feel like Mustafi’s own goal happened three years ago. Even when Arsenal score five goals they don’t win away. Different but same old Arsenal? And even when Liverpool can’t defend, they win games. Same old new Liverpool? Curtis Jones, the scouser, clips his penalty in off the left post and gives Martinez no chance. Liverpool are through to the quarter-finals after a ridiculous match. And what a moment for Jones. Maitland-Niles holds his nerve and scores into the top corner with incredible calm. Origi hammers home into the left corner, sending Martinez the wrong way. Kelleher guesses right and leaps to his right to save Ceballos’s penalty! Brewster holds his nerve and drives it low to Martinez’s right. Martinelli sidefoots to Kelleher’s left. He’s been red-hot tonight. Lallana hammers it into the top corner. Guendouzi sneaks it in the bottom corner. Milner rattles his home low to Martinez’s right. Bellerin finds the top left with ease. Very cool. What a ridiculous game of football, eh? The Kop belts out You’ll Never Walk Alone while the two managers decide who is going to take the spot-kicks. Arsenal will take the first kick and they’ll be down at the Kop end. “You think this Mizzy Night match is crazy, Gregg, get this: Manchester United have actually scored from the penalty spot in the other game!” Justin Kavanagh brings the giggles. My word! We’re heading to penalties. I need a quick lie down. Wow! Williams lofts a cross in to Origi, who pulls away from his marker and volleys on the turn into the corner of the goal. Oh Arsenal! Oh football! Oh Fizzy Cup, how we love you! 90+3 min: Arsenal look like they might just be able to see this out. 90+1 min: Jones catches Tierney with a forearm after clashing in midfield. The Scottish full-back is made of tough stuff, though, and is soon back up on his feet. “Imagine how exciting the Premier League could be if it was under 22’s,” writes David Lwason. Under 22s and rusty old-timers. It’s the future. Or is that what the MLS is? 90 min: There’ll be five minutes of injury time, which is surely enough time for another 12 goals. 88 min: A chance for Liverpool. Brewster mistimes a header after a lovely inswinging cross from Milner from the left. Jones picks up the scraps and lays the ball back to Chirivelli, whose shot is blocked. 87 min: “What a strange yet great game. Not strange enough to fully distract from the pitch side ads though,” writes Julian Smith. “It’s great to see LFC inching back up to that perch, especially as we now have our very own Official Coconut Milk Partner and LFC branded child seats. We envied Man Utd for two decades but isn’t this going a little far?” You don’t win anything without an Official Coconut Milk Partner, Julian. 86 min: Milner hooks the free-kick to the back post but Mutafi clears not once, but twice. Ceballos then has a fine chance to set Willock free but he fails to get any height on his attempted through-ball and Liverpool come back looking for an equaliser that would force penalties. Well, it would if there weren’t any more goals – and that’s not guaranteed. 84 min: Holding plays a square pass to absolutely no one. Curtis Jones picks it up and springs a Liverpool attack on the left that eventually fizzes out. Then moments later, Saka hauls Brewster down and Liverpool have a free-kick 35 yards out. 82 min: Kolasinac looks to have taken a knock and is replaced by Tierney. Can Arsenal hold on for eight minutes. I wouldn’t bet on it. But I also wouldn’t bet on this Liverpool backline holding out either. What must Virgil van Dijk be thinking watching this? 79 min: Lallana is robbed on the halfway line by Martinelli but Arsenal fail to make the most of a promising situation. Oxlade-Chamberlain has run his course. He’s replaced by Chirivella, who cost Liverpool hard cash by playing in the last round against MK Dons. 78 min: Liverpool are ramping up the pressure here. Elliott finds a load of space on the right (who on earth was marking him?) but his cross is straight at Martinez and a very good chance to find an equaliser goes begging. 76 min: Brewster is cynically taken out by Kolisinac on the halfway line as Liverpool attempted a break. You don’t get all up in Kolasinac’s face though do you? You just don’t. 74 min: Origi finds Oxlade-Chamberlain with a nice dink forwards, but the midfielder’s cross towards Brewster is cleared by Mustafi. Even if Arsenal win here, the backline have done themselves absolutely no favours in trying to force their way bak into the first XI on a regular basis. 73 min: I’ve had a few emails, but they’re already out of date. Meanwhile, Ceballos is on for Torreira. 72 min: There hasn’t been a goal. I’m disappointed. It’s another screamer! Willock picks the ball up just inside the Liverpool half, glides past Lallana and then unleashes a viciously whipped right-footed strike into the top-left corner that Kelleher can get nowhere near. This is ludicrous. Brilliant, but ludicrous. 68 min: … Milner fizzes it into the near post, but Holding heads clear. Liverpool are cranking up the pressure again, though. 67 min: Kolasinac fails to deal with a cross-field pass to Elliott, who runs on to the botched header and wins a corner. It’s whipped in and cleared behind for another … 66 min: Maitland-Niles races to the byline and cuts a low cross back to Martinelli, who wallops well over. That was a fine chance to complete his hat-trick but he lacked composure. 63 min: Emery has taken Ozil off. That’s odd isn’t it? He needed the minutes and was playing well. He’s replaced by Guendouzi, who will undoubtedly add energy but it feels as though this was a night to get 90 minutes out of Ozil, who would have found more holes in this makeshift Liverpool backline. And here we go again! Jones pops a lovely outside-of-the-foot pass into Origi’s feet on the edge of the box. The striker spins away from Mustafi with a delicious Cruyff turn and hammers a shot at goal that Martinez can only get a few fingers to. The Kop roars behind the goal. Incredible stuff! 60 min: This could be 8-8 by full-time. Every time either side goes forwards they look like scoring. My word! Oxlade-Chamberlain pounces to nick the ball away from Maitland-Niles after some half-hearted attempts at clearances from Arsenal’s defence and absolutely wallops a 25-yarder past Martinelli and into the net. Almost through the net, in fact, it was struck so ferociously. What a match! 57 min: Klopp hooks Keita, who has done very little, for Curtis Jones, a local lad who was man-of-the-match in the last round against MK Dons. Well this is unexpected. The ultra-reliable James Milner is to blame. He plays a short back pass to Kelleher that Maitland-Niles is alert to, getting to the ball ahead of Kelleher and then almost overrunning it past the goal, only for Ozil to keep the ball in play with a delicious flick back to the Arsenal winger who taps home into the open goal. 51 min: Saka blasts over from 25 yards as Arsenal try to get the upper hand early in the second half. Van Den Berg has looked particularly nervy for Liverpool tonight – and Kelleher has looked a little overawed too. I suppose if Matip were fit Lovren would have played in this. And why Adrian isn’t playing, I don’t know. He’s second-choice now isn’t he and surely needs gametime again should Allison pop a hammy? 49 min: Everything about this match is scrappy – but in a great way way. There are flakes of rust coming off the senior pros and overexuberance from the young whelps. The result is a load of errors which makes it feel like anything could happen. 47 min: Holding makes a hash of dealing with a high ball and flicks a header back towards Mustafi that the Arsenal defender doesn’t expect. Brewster is switched on and runs on to it, shoving off the Gunnrs defender but then getting the ball stuck under his feet. He’s played in again after laying the ball off to Lallana only to sidefoot wide from 12 yards when the angle was never really on. 46 min: It’s not a good start by Liverpool. Kelleher gives Gomez a short pass that he doesn’t really want – and the Liverpool centre-back hoiks it out of play. 45 min: It’s the second half. Let’s hope it’ as wildly entertaining as the first half was. The players are out for the second half. In the matches elsewhere tonight it is: Aston Villa 1-0 Wolves Chelsea 0-1 Manchester United You can look in on that game with rob Smyth here. “Liverpool’s substitutes’ kit numbers add up to 427. Surely that must be a Carabao Cup record,” writes Ted Lee, in one for the Knowledge. “Though the young Liverpool boys have been punished for passing at all costs it would help them if Naby and Lallana can put their forward striding heads on,” reckons Ian Copestake. “I’m sure Klopp will put them right. The score might end up divisible by nine.” Jamie Carragher has just made a point about Liverpool’s senior players needing to step up. Origi has been particularly poor. “Kane on the bench? He hung around after VVD removed him from his pocket on Sunday? I jest. In seriousness, I‘m not on board with the idea of not taking the League Cup seriously. For all the brilliant football over the last few years, there haven’t really been any domestic Cup runs from Liverpool. Yes, give youth a chance, and take some of the load off the first team, but go out to win,” writes Matt Dony. “Gregg, why isn’t the VAR applied?” asks Jukka Itäkylä. “Not that I am missing it, being an Arsenal supporter, you see, but just want to know why.” It’s just not in use at this stage of the League Cup. We should be grateful. We may not have seen two goals but no one can say that the scoreline is not a fair reflection of a rollicking game and we have mercifully been free of lengthy, confusing interruption. It’s like 2017 all over again! That was a crap year but at least VAR didn’t exist in England then. “In parts of the ol’ US of A we do have ‘mischief night’,” whoops Matt Turner. “It’s called Devil’s Night and the people of Detroit especially embrace it. By trying to burn down their own city every year!” I’m making a half-time cuppa. I’ll be back with your emails shortly but in the meantime read this lovely piece about a man who Liverpool could do with tonight, or any night. … because Origi almost levels the game with a header from eight yards out after Elliott stood up a lovely ball to the forwards after a burst down the left. Peep! And breathe … 45+1 min: … from which Torreira slams a shot at goal that is blocked. It falls to Martinelli, but he shoulders the ball straight at Kelleher after failing to make contact with his noggin from eight yards out. And we’re not done yet … 45 min: Lallana is caught dawdling on the ball and Arsenal break with Ozil. He slips Martinelli in down the inside-right channel, but the forward’ cross is blocked by Van Den Berg for a corner … 44 min: Arsenal win a free-kick on the edge of the box after Saka, I think, is fouled. Ozil and Torreira stand over it … and Torreira hammers it over the bar. Ozil should have been on that, surely. The captain hammers it low into the left corner. What a mad game this is shaping up to be. Who needs Mizzy Night for thrills and spills? Martinelli appears to catch Elliott’s toe in the box and Marriner points to the spot. It was minimal contact but it’s been given. 37 min: Liverpool are on the ropes now. Maitland-Niles bangs in a low cross that Van Den Berg scrambles clear. And then moments later, Ozil nutmegs Elliott with an insouciant flick to set Maitland-Niles free down the right again. This time, his cross is cleared with no alarms and no surprises. Oh dear! Liverpool’s inexperienced right-hand side costs them. Williams plays a short pass up to Elliott, who doesn’t look inside as he lays the ball off. Saka nicks it before Gomez can rescue the situation, then races away down the left and squares the ball for an unmarked Martinelli to crash home from 10 yards. 34 min: Milner slips a lovely disguised pass behind the Arsenal defence for Keita, who takes a heavy touch but forces a corner out of Arsenal. Oxlade-Chamberlain is subjected to an earbashing from the away fans as he hooks in a corner to the near post that Arsenal clear. 31 min: Both defences look likely to be breached a few more times before the night is out. They look far from assured. Elliott crosses to Brewster, who does well to flick a header at goal having sneaked between Mustafi and Holding. 29 min: There is no VAR tonight. Had there been, Torreira’s first goal would have been chalked off. A replay shows that Torreira’s heel was offside when Saka shot at goal. Not that anyone should be complaining. It’s a blessed relief not to have the VAR breaking up the lovely ebb and flow of this game. The Gunners are in front! And it’s Martinelli’s sixth goal of the season! Torreira sends a short free-kick out to Maitland-Niles on the right, who sees his first cross blocked by Milner but then picks up possession again and ghosts past Origi far too easily to drill a low cross at the near post. Van Den Berg makes a block and then Martinelli smashes the ball high into the roof of the net from a yard out. 23 min: “Given it’s Mizzy Night with all that egg and flour around, let’s ‘ope Arsenal don’t get battered,” honks Chris Brock. It’s not happening at the moment, Chris. This is shaping up to be a ding-dong battle between reserves. 21 min: … but Liverpool win back possession after Ozil’s attempt to split the Liverpool defence with a reverse pass is cut out. The German playmaker is finding a few more pockets of space now and dragging Liverpool out of shape. 20 min: In a surefire sign that this game is going to be a lot of fun, Liverpool race straight back up the other end, where Origi pops a clever pass inside Maitland-Niles towards Brewster who just needs to stick his toe out a few more inches to get a free shot on goal from wight yards. Arsenal break … Arsenal are level! It came after Martinelli battled gamely down the left and squared to Saka, who forced a smart save out of Kelleher, but from the rebound Torreira tapped home. Liverpool’s defenders appeal for offside but he was just level. Game on! 15 min: It appears I’ve been up to mischief with my Mizzy Night missive. “Oh Gregg... you trample on Yorkshire culture,” sighs Rebecca Smith. “Mischief night is the 4 November! Celebrated for when Guy Fawkes (one of Yorkshire’s own) and crew were plotting their mischief for parliament. I have fond memories of putting black treacle on doorknobs in Leeds in the late ‘70s. I have never commented on the live blog before, but couldn’t let this pass.” Fair enough Rebecca. So Yorkshire is right and everywhere else is wrong or just importing American culture? Maitland-Niles has just zipped a cross into the near-post that cause mild panic in the Liverpool ranks but Van Den Berg cleared eventually. 13 min: Oxlade-Chamberlain pings a lovely cross-field pass to Origi, on the left. The forward takes a touch, and lofts a neat ball to the back post, that Arsenal defend well. 12 min: Bellerin has had a few decent bursts down the right hand-side for Arsenal, where Maitland-Niles also looks determined to make a point but Milner will be a tough opponent to get past on that side, assisted by Keita. It may be on the left, where Saka is up against Williams, where Arsenal might find some joy. 9 min: Liverpool are enjoying the better of the possession and continue to look the sharper side. Lallana scoops a lovely ball over the Arsenal defence that Oxlade-Chamberlain fails to control when he had only the keeper to beat. 7 min: If you’re looking for mitigating circumstances, I suppose you could say that Brewster was lurking behind Mustafi, but it was a clumsy attempt to clear with his right foot, a kick and a miss that meant the ball clattered his left knee and went in at Martinez’s near post. Oh Arsenal! Williams plays a simple ball down the line to Oxlade-Chamberlain, who plays a low cross to the near-post that Mustafi puts into his own net. He slid in and lost all control when he could have stayed on his feet. 4 min: Keita does a double-stepover and pops the ball off to Origi inside him. The striker finds Elliott outside him. Elliott cuts inside and spots the top corner, but his curled effort is well over. Youthful exuberance? Worth a pop though. 3min: Origi stretches his legs down the left but Maitland-Niles sticks gamely to his task and does well to nick the ball off the Liverpool forward and clear up field. Maitland-Niles had a nightmare in the Europa League recently and was hauled off at half-time against Vitoria. Howe he could do with a good game to get it out of his system. 1 min: We’re under way. Liverpool haven’t won a home League Cup tie since Ben Woodburn became Liverpool’s youngest ever scorer in the 2-0 win over Leeds in November 2016. Harvey Elliott will be hoping to break that record tonight. Is that You’ll Never Walk Alone I can hear? I think it is, which means that the teams are out on the Anfield turf on a chilly evening on Merseyside. Meanwhile, Ian Copestake isn’t at the match tonight – and he should be. Blame the trains! “There may be some gaps at Anfield (in the crowd, I mean) as most trains to Liverpool (including the one I was meant to be on) were cancelled. Like the two teams I should have taken a coach!” Ah well, stick with me Ian. I’ll do my best. or go the pub. Yeah, go the pub. And there’s more pre-match chat: “There are some really unsavory (or, if you insist, unsavoury) elements associated with big time professional football, from greed to racism to corruption, it’s enough to make me feel quite depressed on occasion,” writes JR in Illinois. “I can’t stop following football of course because if I did that I wouldn’t be able to get all the references in David Squires’ cartoons.” Spare a thought for me JR – I’m often the sorry fella who has to try to explain his references to the Guardian’s lawyer. “It’s Mizzy Night in Liverpool? Granit Xhaka must be kicking himself,” honks Peter Oh. Ian Copestake responds to Brand Dwonch: “Liverpool conquered England a long time ago. They got their very own perch out of it.” Unai Emery has just spoken on Sky. He didn’t say much of note because he never really does. He swerved a question about Granit Xhaka and just said his team is focused on this game because the League is a good competition. Jürgen Klopp also spoke and confirmed that he took the decision long ago that he would make wholesale changes for the League Cup to rest his regulars. “We have to show them our faith,” he said. He also said that 18-year-old Neco Williams has been handed his debut because in the past four weeks he has really impressed him. You may or may not know, but it’s “Mizzy Night” (Mischief Night) in Liverpool this evening, which is generally a big excuse for wild kids to cause chaos with eggs, flour, or whatever else they can get their hands on. There’ll be a few fans with stained coats in Anfield tonight. It’s like Halloween, without the innocent fun – all trick and no treat. I believe Mischief Night is also “celebrated” in other parts of the north of England under different names and in the United States. If you do get egged or have a close escape tonight, be sure to let me know. I won’t laugh. I promise. “Have to say, I think Liverpool would be wise to sack this cup off,” writes Andrew Tuohy. “Especially,with the pointless World Club Championship coming up to put further strain on their scheduling. Worked last season losing to Wolves. See no reason not to repeat the same tactic.” I think Wolves was the FA Cup Andrew, but I take your point. I do think that providing Klopp plays a load of youngsters, he’s not adversely affecting his first XI, though it might upset the rhythm in training a little. “Although the presence of the likes of Milner gives a seasoned touch to the Liverpool starting XI, thanks to the inclusion of Brewster and mates, it’s definitely a punky selection,” whoops Peter Oh. “Even with Liverpool’s other commitments this season, Klopp has to be focused on silverware,” reasons Brandon Dwonch. “Klopp and Liverpool are in a window to dominate Europe but they first have to conquer England. Klopp will start youngsters but if they go down he will bring in the big guns.” That bench isn’t exactly stacked with “big guns” Brandon, unless you have a very high opinion of Curtis Jones. Liverpool’s captain for the night, James Milner, was speaking to our very own Donald McRae this week. Turns out, like most football fans everywhere, he’s not a fan of VAR. So, Jürgen Klopp makes 11 changes from the win over Spurs on Sunday, including four teenagers with 18-year-old Neco Williams making his first-team debut. Among the other young whelps, Harvey Elliott, at 16 years and 209 days, will become the youngest player to appear for the club at Anfield, while Rhian Brewster and Sepp Van Den Berg make their Anfield debuts too. Joe Gomez, James Milner and midfielders Adam Lallana, Naby Keita and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain add a bit of experience. For Arsenal, Mesut Özil makes only his third appearance of the season - and his first since 24 September. He’s not been seen in a matchday squad since his outing in the last round against Nottingham Forest but is one of 11 changes. Unai Emery has selected six players – excluding Özil – who could be considered first-team regulars, including Lucas Torreira, Sead Kolasinac and Ainsley Maitland-Niles. And it’s Hector Bellerin, not Özil (as had been rumoured), who captains the side. Well, someone’s got to. Liverpool: Kelleher, Williams, Gomez. Van Den Berg, Milner, lallana, Keita, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Elliott, Origi, Brewster. Subs: Adrian, Jones, Kane, Larouci, Chirivella, Clarkson, Koumetio. Arsenal: Martínez, Bellerin, Holding, Mustafi, Kolasinac, Torreira, Willock, Maitland-Niles, Özil, Saka, Martinelli. Subs: Macey, Sokratis, Tierney, Guendouzi, Ceballos, Pepe, Lacazette. Referee: Andre Marriner. Evening. It’s cards-on-the-table time – it’s hard to predict what might happen at Anfield this evening. That’s not a bad thing, because so much of modern football is too easy to predict. We can expect two vastly changed teams, with Liverpool perhaps more likely to field the most inexperienced XI, given their commitments in the Premier League and Europe, not to mention the Club World Cup in December. As for Unai Emery, the pressure is on at Arsenal, and even though he will not want to field a full-strength team, he might be minded to name a reasonably strong side to get a win on the board and keep open the prospect of some silverware down the line. With the beef between Granit Xhaka and Arsenal fans dominating headlines in the buildup to this game, Emery is acutely aware that Arsenal’s season is already shaping up to be a turbulent one. Emery needs a response from his Arsenal team after the draw at home against Crystal Palace, even if the XI players who provide it are not regulars. As for Jürgen Klopp, as much as this competition is probably the lowest on his list of priorities this season, it still offers him the chance to give fringe Liverpool players a run out and give him an idea who might be first in line to come in when he has to rotate over the busy festive period. One person we should see this evening, is Mesut Özil, who is expected to captain Arsenal while Xhaka continues to let off steam. While we wait for team news, see if you can spot him in David Squires’s latest bit of brilliant doodling. For some reason, the match at Anfield kicks off at 7.30pm GMT. Well, it is a school night and I’m not complaining.
2||Chelsea 1-2 Manchester United: Carabao Cup fourth round – as it happenedJacob Steinberg has filed his match report from the Bridge, so I’ll leave you with that. The draw is tomorrow morning, since you asked. Goodnight! Aston Villa complete the quarter-final line up - they beat Wolves 2-1 at Villa Park. There were ten goals in the match between Liverpool and Arsenal, and nine more in the penalty shoot-out. Marcus Rashford scored both goals, the second a booming free-kick from 35 yards that might not be bettered all season. It was a pretty even game, but United picked more of their first-choice players and that was ultimately decisive. Peep peep! Manchester United win their third away game in a week, and move into the quarter-finals of the Carabao Cup. 90+4 min And they don’t take it. 90+4 min James wins a corner for Chelsea. This is their last chance... 90+3 min Jorginho waves a passing elbow into the face of Young. I don’t think the referee saw it and there’s no VAR. It was nothing really. 90+2 min Abraham fouls Rojo, who takes the opportunity to waste 30 seconds. 90 min An imaginative long-range curler from Martial goes just wide. Then Kovacic is booked for clattering Williams. There will be four minutes of added time. 89 min Chelsea were brilliant for the first 20 minutes of the second half before Ole Gunnar Solskjaer made an important change from 3-4-2-1 to 4-2-3-1. Since then, United have been relatively comfortable. 88 min Zouma charges forward with intent before shooting from 40 yards. He falls over and it goes about 40 yards wide. 86 min McTominay, who has made umpteen important tackles and interceptions tonight, makes another from Jorginho’s pass. 84 min Phil Fred is booked for timewasting. 83 min Harry Maguire is moving gingerly. United have used all their subs so they can’t replace him. 82 min Alonso’s shot from a tight angle is shovelled behind by Romero. The corner is headed across goal and wide by Zouma, who was under enough pressure from Maguire that he couldn’t make proper contact with the header. 81 min Ashley Young’s first contribution is to boot Reece James up in the air. We’ll miss him when he retires. 80 min Marcus Rashford limps off to be replaced by Ashley Young. It doesn’t look too serious, although I’m no Doogie Howser MD. 78 min Tammy Abraham replaces Michy Batshuayi, who scored an excellent equaliser for Chelsea. 77 min McTominay, who was booked in the first half, is penalised for pulling down Kovacic. Some referees would have shown him a second yellow card, but Paul Tierney settled for a final warning. 76 min Williams makes a terrific challenge in the area on Reece James. After a difficult start, he has been excellent at times in the second half. That is a stunning goal. Rashford hammered the free-kick over the wall, and the ball wobbled extravagantly before flying past Caballero. That must have been at least 35 yards out. He hit it with the old Juninho Pernambucano technique, striking through the valve, and it roared into the top corner. And by heck did he hit it! 73 min Fred is fouled 35 yards from goal by Pedro. Rashford is going to hit this... 72 min It’s worth repeating that this will go straight to penalties if it’s a draw. No extra-time. Nope. 71 min Batshuayi threatens to repeat his goal, surging at the last man Rojo only to slip over just outside the area. 71 min A double change: Pedro and Mason Mount replace Billy Gilbert and Christian Pulisic. Gilbert was tidy, Pulisic was thoroughly Wan-Bissakaed. 70 min Chelsea look the likelier winners, although there isn’t a huge amount in it. Fred leathers a cross shot that flashes past the far post. Caballero had it covered. 69 min Zouma shanks a clearance behind for a corner. That’s a safe option against Manchester United these days, and the corner is another poor one. 68 min “Back to the good old days before VAR,” says Harry Hutton, “when a goal was a goal.” 67 min Another change: Andreas Pereira replaces Jesse Lingard, who again did very little. He has gone to seed since the World Cup. 66 min A Manchester United change: Anthony Martial replaces Victor Lindelof, which suggests a switch from 3-4-2-1 to 4-2-3-1. 65 min Reece James wins a corner for Chelsea. He and Hudson-Odoi are giving Williams a pretty torrid evening, with two-on-one attacks all the time. What a brilliant goal. Batshuayi picked up a loose ball near the halfway line, after a mix-up between Maguire and Lindelof I think, and set off towards goal. There were five United defenders on his tail, with no team-mates within 40 yards. He kept running to the edge of the D, shifted the ball to the right and smacked a low curling shot that flashed past Romero. Michy Batshuayi hits a storming equaliser! 60 min United are struggling to get out. Hudson-Odoi tries to run Williams, who makes a fine tackle with his wrong right foot. 59 min “I’m not being hipsterish clever, honest, but this is a far more fascinating game than the other because of the place the two teams have in the Scheme of Things right now,” says Drew Goldie. “No-one doubts that Arsenal can do what they’re doing on occasions, but there’s a cluelessness about the club at the moment. Chelsea and the other mob are quite interesting in what the strategy is, because both need one. I’m speaking as someone who supports Hearts and Millwall, by the way, so I’m just diverting my sorrows by trying to sound informed about the Big Pots like a lot of people who stands in pubs do.” 57 min Another chance for Chelsea. Hudson-Odoi runs onto a long pass from the back, waits for it to drop and leathers a shot just over the bar from 20 yards. 56 min United’s back three, who were cruising in the first half, are now defending on the seat of their pants. It’s been a stirring response from Chelsea. 54 min A superb cross from Reece James flashes right across the six-yard box. If only England had some decent young right-backs, eh. 53 min Pulisic drags a speculative cross-shot wide from 15 yards, but this is so much better from Chelsea. It feels like a cup tie now. 52 min Chelsea appeal unsuccessfully for a penalty when Gilmour’s shot is blocked by Rojo. It may have hit Rojo’s hand as he fell onto the ball, though that isn’t a penalty under the new laws anyway. 52 min Chelsea have upped the tempo since half-time, with and without the ball. They were a little passive in the first half. 50 min Hudson-Odoi misses an excellent chance, screwing Alonso’s low cross wide of the far post after a fine passing move. He mistimed the shot completely, although he might have been unsighted. 49 min Hudson-Odoi is back on the field. 47 min Hudson-Odoi is receiving treatment off the field. He was thrown over the advertising boards by Williams, who might have been booked. 47 min There’s been a ninth goal at Anfield. Nine times! 46 min Peep peep! Chelsea begin the second half. No substitutions yet. Peep peep! Manchester United lead through Marcus Rashford’s penalty. It was an uneventful half, with just one shot on target apart from the goal, and you’re still reading the wrong live blog. 43 min Chelsea haven’t had a shot on target yet. They have plenty of attacking options on the bench though, including Mason Mount, Pedro, Tammy Abraham and Olivier Giroud. 41 min Nothing much happening at Stamford Bridge, so here’s some association football porn. 39 min I hope you realise you’re reading the wrong MBM. Mesut Ozil has just done something pretty special in that game. 38 min Hudson-Odoi waves a good pass down the line to James, whose dangerous low cross is cleared decisively by Wan-Bissaka. 37 min Lingard curls straight at Caballero from 20 yards. 35 min Chelsea have had better possession in the last few minutes, although it has mainly been in front of the United defence. Most of their good work has been done down the right. On the other side, Wan-Bissaka has given Pulisic nothing thus far. 32 min Phil Fred is penalised for manhandling Gilmour, who looks very comfortable receiving the ball in tight spaces. He hasn’t done anything spectacular, but you can see what the fuss is about. 30 min United have been dominant in the last 10 minutes, with their back three looking increasingly secure. 27 min It wasn’t a stonewall penalty, but I do think it was a foul. Alonso challenged James from the wrong side and made sufficient contact with his knee to knock him off balance. Alonso was trying to make up for his earlier mistake, when his poor pass allowed United to counter-attack. 26 min That’s Rashford’s third goal against Chelsea this season, two of them from the penalty spot. Marcus Rashford has missed two penalties this season - but he scores this time, crashing the ball low to the left. Caballero went the wrong way. PENALTY TO MANCHESTER UNITED! It was a brainless challenge by Alonso on James. 22 min Hudson-Odoi runs 40 yards down the right before being fouled by Phil Fred. He looks Chelsea’s biggest threat at the moment, especially as United’s left-back Brandon Williams has been a bit jittery in the first 20 minutes. 21 min I’ll be honest, it’s not a classic. 20 min There’s no extra-time tonight. If this match ends in a draw, it goes straight to penalties. 18 min Batshuayi is booked for a late tackle on McTominay. 16 min United are, in the parlanace of our time, growing into the game. They haven’t been as snappy in possession as Chelsea, but Rashford and James are an obvious threat on the break. 15 min A loose clearance from Zouma falls kindly for James, whose snapshot bobbles miles wide. 13 min McTominay almost gives United the lead. It was a good, training-round corner, with James cutting the ball back for McTominay to run into space and spank a first-time shot just wide of the near post. 13 min Wan-Bissaka finds Lingard in space down the right, and his cross deflects off Guehi for a corner. 11 min McTominay is booked for an inept lunge at Kovacic. 10 min The game is being played at good pace, with Chelsea looking very assured in possession. 7 min Lingard goes down just outside the area after a challenge from Kovacic. I’m not sure whether it was a slip or a foul. The referee Paul Tierney judged that it was the former, and replays show he was right. 5 min After a patient move of at least 20 passes, Pulisic’s snapshot is blocked by Lindelof. Chelsea have started very well. 4 min Chelsea have had most of the ball in the first few minutes. Pulisic looks very lively, as you’d expect of someone who had a day out at the weekend. 2 min Jonathan McKenzie points out that both XIs have the same average age, to be said in a Tony Soprano voice: 24. 1 min Peep peep! Manchester United, in red, kick off from left to right. Chelsea are in blue. “Cannot wait to see whether Billy Gilmour can cut it against an (albeit mid-table) Premier League team,” says Matt Baxter. “He was incredible vs Grimsby. The future’s bright, the future’s Blue!” And he’s Scottish. They are in serious danger of having a decent team in the next few years. This game kicks off at 8.05pm. The match between Liverpool and Arsenal started at 7.30pm; if you don’t want to know the score, don’t click this. “Evening Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “Gregg has the current Big Cup holders on his MBM, and Guest appearances from both Donald McRae and David Squires. I think you need to make your readers an offer they can’t refuse. Cute cat video, perhaps?” I’m offering Phil Fred, mate. I think I know who’s winning. The Sky Sports team graphics suggest an unexpected midfield battle tonight: Marcus Jorginho against Phil Fred. Seriously. Phil Fred! So much for giving old age a chance. Both have picked strong, young sides, with United close to full strength. Chelsea (4-3-3) Caballero; James, Guehi, Zouma, Alonso; Gilmour, Jorginho, Kovacic; Hudson-Odoi, Batshuayi, Pulisic. Substitutes: Cumming, Lamptey, Azpilicueta, Mount, Pedro, Giroud, Abraham. Manchester United (3-4-1-2) Romero; Lindelof, Maguire, Rojo; Wan-Bissaka, Fred, McTominay, Williams; Lingard; James, Rashford. Substitutes: Grant, Jones, Young, Pereira, Garner, Mata, Martial. Referee Paul Tierney. Ambassador... department We have two MBMs tonight, such is our commitment to the Carabao Cup. If you’d rather follow Liverpool v Arsenal, Gregg Bakowski is your man. Pre-match reading Evening. The Carabao Cup is seen as the competition in which Chelsea and Manchester United give young players a chance. In practice, that hasn’t always been the case. Jose Mourinho, in particular, won the competition with both clubs by picking experienced sides. And while we should see one or two newish faces tonight, it’s likely that the average age of both teams will increase. That’s because both teams have already picked their best young players in the Premier League. The average age of their starting XIs this season has generally been 24 or 25, among the lowest in the league, so tonight is a chance for older players like Pedro, Olivier Giroud, Willy Caballero, Juan Mata, Sergio Romero and Phil Jones to remind us of their existence. It’s what the Carabao Cup is all about! Kick off is at 8.05pm.
7||Was it wrong for baseball fans to chant 'lock him up' at Trump? A head-to-head debateArwa Mahdawi: ‘Let’s get a grip, shall we? This wasn’t a show trial’ When I saw the video of people chanting “lock him up” at the World Series I thought: ha. And then I moved on with my life. Sadly, others did not. Despite the fact America is supposed to be a democracy where free speech is sacrosanct, the incident sparked pearl-clutching among pundits and politicians who seem to think chanting represents a dire threat to the very soul of America. The Democratic senator Chris Coons, for example, said it reminded him “of things that happen in countries where rule of law is unknown or unestablished”. Let’s get a grip, shall we? This wasn’t a show trial. It wasn’t an AR-15-wielding mob. It wasn’t a threat to due process. It was a group of people spontaneously expressing frustration that the president of America hasn’t been held properly accountable for any of the many crimes he has been accused of – from sexual assault to election-meddling – and openly boasts about being above the law. Only a few days earlier one of Trump’s lawyers argued he could not be investigated by local authorities in office even if he murdered someone on Fifth Avenue. You know what reminds me of countries where the rule of law is unknown? A head of state who thinks he has carte blanche. Not a few chants. But what about all the “lock her up” chants? some people have argued. You hypocritical libs were outraged about that. On Monday, for example, NBC’s Joe Scarborough snarkily tweeted: “Let’s see if I’ve got this straight. When crowds chant ‘Lock her up’ toward Hillary, it is illiberal and anti-American. (I agree). But when crowds chant the same toward Trump, it is suddenly a fulsome exercise of sacred first amendment rights.” No, Joe, you haven’t got it straight. There is a big difference between people in a baseball stadium spontaneously chanting and politicians stirring crowds at rallies up into a frenzy of rage over unfounded accusations. Had Joe Biden or Hillary Clinton been encouraging the stadium to protest you might have a point. But unless there’s some secret Clinton plot I don’t know about that wasn’t the case. As for all the people complaining about how this is yet another example of the erosion of civility in America: please get your effing priorities right. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist Lloyd Green: ‘Lock him up’ is a demand for mob justice On Sunday night, Donald Trump received a dose of his own medicine. After being introduced at game three of baseball’s World Series, the crowd booed the president, and then launched into a chant of “lock him up”. With Melania by his side, Trump finally heard first-hand what much of blue America thought of the vulgarian-in-chief. Make no mistake, Trump had definitely earned the fans’ disgust and ire. Turnabout is fair play, to a point. During Barack Obama’s presidency, Trump had fanned the flames of birtherism. On the 2016 campaign trail, Trump had mocked a reporter for being disabled, trashed a federal judge for being Latino, and repeatedly delivered a verbal beatdown to the now late senator John McCain for having been a prisoner of war. Grace was never part of Trump’s vocabulary or mien. But most memorably, it was Trump who would lead his minions in the cry of “lock her up” – even after he was ensconced in the Oval Office. The past was never past. Due process was for his supporters, not his political opponents. Indeed, Trump saw them as his enemies. The bile that Trump vented on stage was no act but rather the core of his DNA. And yet that can only be part of the story. Although Trump has debased the presidency as he conflated the office with himself, his opponents – of which there are many and whose disdain in more than justified – need to think long and hard about echoing the very line that had rendered Trump unfit to hold and keep his current job. “Lock him up” is more than a sentiment. Rather, it is a demand for mob justice, one at odds with the rule of law, qualitatively different from simply voicing disapproval. To be sure, politicians get booed at ballgames. Presidents Herbert Hoover and Harry Truman were on the receiving end in their day. By contrast, a demand for instant imprisonment of our government officials is not what democracies are about. We remain defined by our processes despite their seeming inconvenience. This coming Thursday, the House of Representatives will take up a resolution to guide its impeachment investigation, a process a federal judge last Friday found to be constitutionally valid and legally compliant. “Lock him up” got Trump’s attention. But it’s no substitute for the work that remains to be done. An attorney in New York, Lloyd Green was opposition research counsel to George HW Bush’s 1988 campaign and served in the Department of Justice from 1990 to 1992
2||Rashford rocket sinks Chelsea to extend Manchester United’s resurgenceThere have been few moments to match this level of fantasy from Manchester United in recent times. This is a club whose identity is built around turning impossible dreams into unforgettable realities but too many players have looked uncomfortable wearing that famous red shirt of late. The modern United have been too safe, too bland, and they have put out too many sides without the courage to deliver under pressure. Not this time, though. This time there was magic. It materialised when Marcus Rashford, who turns 22 on Thursday, stood over a free-kick in the 73rd minute and decided to try his luck from 30 yards. Lesser players might not have had the confidence but Rashford trusted in his technique and produced something special, stunning Stamford Bridge with a rocket that wobbled through the air and flew into the top corner. “A bolt out of the blue,” Frank Lampard said. “No team can stop that.” Chelsea’s manager was right but Rashford’s individual brilliance was not the only reason United are through to the last eight of the Carabao Cup. This was also a strategic triumph for Ole Gunnar Solskjær, whose counterpunching tactics worked in the opening period, as did his decision to make two attacking substitutions when Chelsea were on top midway through the second half. United, who are unbeaten in four matches, were rewarded for responding positively when Michy Batshuayi cancelled out Rashford’s early penalty with an excellent strike in the 61st minute. Instead of falling back, they rediscovered their attacking zest. Solskjær turned to his bench, bringing on Anthony Martial and Andreas Pereira for Victor Lindelöf and Jesse Lingard, and switching to a back four allowed United to regain control of a game that seemed to be slipping from their grasp. “It shows the character of the team,” Solskjær said. “We were excellent, with fast football. That’s Manchester United. We’re trying to get back to that. Marcus has that strike in him. I’ve seen him in training so many times.” While United celebrated, Chelsea absorbed the disappointment of their seven-match winning run coming to an end. There was a callow feel to a side containing four teenagers, a lack of oomph waiting to be exploited, and United were quick to put themselves about. Fred had another good game in central midfield, Scott McTominay set the tone when he was booked for steaming into Mateo Kovacic early on and Lampard must have been alarmed when Harry Maguire won the ball off Marcos Alonso with a firm challenge before shrugging Christian Pulisic aside. United had disrupted Chelsea’s rhythm and were carrying the greater threat in attack. McTominay had gone close in the 13th minute, sweeping a shot just wide from Daniel James’s corner, and it summed up Chelsea’s unease when Alonso conceded the penalty that allowed the visitors to edge ahead midway through the first half. A fine run from James, who was always available to receive the ball on the right, created the danger. The winger’s pace carried him deep into Chelsea’s territory and he was entitled to go down after being bumped from behind by Alonso. Chelsea’s left-back could have no complaints when Paul Tierney penalised him, though at least United’s recent struggles from the spot gave the Spaniard hope of a reprieve. Yet Rashford, who had seen a penalty saved against Norwich on Sunday, kept his nerve. He had also missed one against Crystal Palace in August but there was no doubt in his mind here, only the composure to send Willy Caballero the wrong way and plant the ball into the opposite corner. Lampard was worried. He knew Chelsea’s passing had been slow. They did not manage a shot on target during the first half and Brandon Williams, United’s teenage wing-back, was coping well whenever Callum Hudson-Odoi ran at him on the right. Pulisic also found it hard to shake off Aaron Wan-Bissaka on the opposite flank. There were brighter signs from Chelsea at the start of the second half. Billy Gilmour, a slender 18-year-old, injected some urgency in midfield and Hudson-Odoi spurned two opportunities, scuffing wide after meeting Alonso’s low cross and firing over after latching on to a searching ball from Pulisic. An equaliser was on the way and it arrived when Caballero punted a clearance towards Batshuayi. The striker had spent most of the match being bullied by Maguire but this time he made the United centre-back look clumsy and slow, nodding the ball away from him, turning sharply and charging towards the area. Maguire’s lack of pace had been exposed and Batshuayi fired beyond Sergio Romero from 25 yards. Yet the last word went to United after Pedro, on as a late substitute, brought down Fred. Rashford stepped up and the best compliment that can be paid to him is that Cristiano Ronaldo would have been proud of what happened next.
2||Curtis Jones and Liverpool beat Arsenal on penalties after 5-5 thrillerThere were more goals scored in normal time than in the penalty shootout and Liverpool advanced to a quarter-final their manager suggested they might never play. Yes, it was another of those ridiculous Anfield nights. It started with an own goal and finished with an 18-year-old from Liverpool, Curtis Jones, converting the decisive spot-kick in front of the Kop. The fulfilment of his dream was a nightmare for Arsenal. Unai Emery could point to Caoimhin Kelleher’s penalty save from Dani Ceballos in an otherwise flawless shootout as the fine margin that often separates teams at this level. It would not be entirely true. His team traded 10 goals with Liverpool, ranging from ugly to stunning and including everything in between. They traded dreadful mistakes and blows from beginning to end of an enthralling cup tie too. But only one side possessed the belief that the game is never over and it was not the team that led from the 26th minute until the 94th, that led 3-1, 4-2 and 5-4 in stoppage time. The faces in the Liverpool starting lineup had changed – all 11 of them from the win against Tottenham on Sunday in fact – but the strength of character to go to the last had not. Liverpool have a winner’s mentality throughout their squad. Arsenal lost theirs a long time ago. Divock Origi pegged back Arsenal for a fifth and final time with a flying volley from Neco Williams’ fine cross. Jones swept home Liverpool’s fifth and final penalty to secure a place in the last eight after James Milner, Adam Lallana, Rhian Brewster and Origi had scored past Emiliano Martinez. Héctor Bellerín, Mattéo Guendouzi, Gabriel Martinelli and Ainsley Maitland-Niles were also on target in the shootout for the visitors. Only Ceballos failed to beat Kelleher, Liverpool’s third choice, 20-year-old goalkeeper, and Klopp was left to savour not only the result but an experience for a team featuring five home debutants he could never have dreamt up in coaching school. “I don’t know when I had so much fun at a football game,” said the Liverpool manager, who threatened not to play the quarter-final that clashes with the Club World Cup in Qatar if “a proper date” is not found. Liverpool’s starting lineup had an average age of 23 years and 122 days and, despite a hugely encouraging start, a more experienced Arsenal team ruthlessly exploited the errors that crept into the home side’s display. Teenage summer signings Harvey Elliott and Sepp van den Berg were among five Anfield debutants while the 18-year-old Williams impressed on his full Liverpool debut at right-back. Williams, a Wales under-19 international, played a fine pass behind Sead Kolasinac for Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain to cross towards Rhian Brewster at the near post. Shkodran Mustafi got there first yet conspired to miss the ball with his outstretched right leg and divert it past his own goalkeeper with his left knee. Arsenal, with Mesut Özil back in from the cold and floating to telling effect behind Martinelli, drew level from their first meaningful attack. Martinelli instigated the equaliser with a powerful surge down the left and low cross that eventually found its way to Bukayo Saka via Özil and Maitland‑Niles. Kelleher saved but Torreira snapped up the rebound from close range. VAR would have disallowed the goal for offside. Torreira revelled in its absence. The visitors overturned the deficit when Liverpool fell asleep at a free-kick. Torreira released Maitland-Niles down the right as home players stood watching and, from his second attempted cross, Van den Berg miscued towards his own goal. Kelleher saved but once again could only work the ball back into the danger zone and Martinelli converted into the roof of the net. Arsenal were clinical with their chances. Liverpool were supremely generous in offering them up and fell further behind when Elliott turned a Williams pass carelessly inside to Özil, who released Saka clear down the left with a fine first touch. The cross arrived low and perfectly for Martinelli to score his seventh goal in seven appearances with an emphatic shot over the exposed Kelleher. Emery’s team sensed daylight and welcome respite but the fun was only just beginning. Liverpool’s wayward passing and uncertain defending tested Anfield’s patience but they were offered a route back minutes before the interval when Elliott tumbled over Martinelli’s outstretched foot inside the Arsenal area. Andre Marriner had no hesitation in pointing to the spot, seconds after dismissing a penalty appeal for handball by Bellerín, and Milner sent Martínez the wrong way from 12 yards. Milner of all people was responsible for Arsenal regaining a two-goal advantage when his weak backpass was pounced upon by Maitland-Niles who, after an improvised flick from Özil, scored easily. Liverpool had it all to do once again. The comeback recommenced with a thumping 25-yard strike from Oxlade-Chamberlain, who found the top corner having beaten Maitland-Niles to a Lallana header. Parity was restored when Jones, a replacement for the injured Naby Keita, found Origi on the edge of the Arsenal area and the striker turned Rob Holding brilliantly before beating Martínez with a thunderous shot. And back came Arsenal. The tie was ridiculously open and so too was Liverpool’s midfield when Joe Willock breezed through and found the top corner from almost 30 yards. With seconds remaining the Arsenal defence switched off and Origi volleyed home Liverpool’s fifth. Klopp’s team, inevitably, held their nerve.
0||England and Jamie George inspired by cricketers’ example for World Cup finalEngland’s rugby players have called on their cricketing counterparts for inspiration as they set about following in their footsteps and clinching World Cup glory. Eddie Jones’s side lock horns with South Africa in Saturday’s final and the hooker Jamie George has been seeking advice from Eoin Morgan. George has spoken to the England one‑day captain on numerous occasions and believes England can learn from the cricketers’ dramatic super-over victory against New Zealand in July. George also sees similarities between the teams in that both endured calamitous World Cup campaigns in 2015. Much like the cricketers, George also revealed that England have been conducting clear‑the-air meetings, with the coaches banned from attending and the captain, Owen Farrell, delivering inspirational messages. “I’ve spoken to [Eoin] a few times, more around the culture rather than the World Cup final but I watched an interview with him that was pretty interesting, talking about the culture of the team but also the mindset of the team going into their final,” George said. “They had been through a bit more of a rollercoaster ride than we have in this tournament but there are certain similarities over the last two seasons or so.” George is also close to the England cricketer Sam Billings, who missed the World Cup through injury but is now on tour in New Zealand. The pair went to school together and George said: “The video came out of us watching their World Cup final and, chatting to him, they will probably be sat around watching ours as well. It’s quite a cool thought.” England go into the final in Yokohama as favourites having moved to No 1 in the world rankings for the first time since 2004 with their imperious win over the All Blacks. Morgan and co were also widely tipped to lift the World Cup trophy before their final against New Zealand but the nature of their dramatic victory has served as a warning to George. “A big thing that I have thought about is your ability to perform your skills under the highest pressure,” he said. “If you think back to that super over and the last run-out – Jason Roy’s throw – he had to pick the ball up first, the ball is coming to him at speed, he’s done it a thousand times before but doing it under that pressure knowing he needs to get it there in that moment. Things like that. Doing your job under pressure. I read that all Jason Roy could think about was getting the ball into his hands. He was thinking about the process rather than thinking about the big picture.” George said Farrell will host another of his captain’s meetings on Friday night and deliver one last call to arms. The togetherness of England’s squad was tested during their World Cup training camps when an altercation between Ben Te’o and Mike Brown led to both being jettisoned by Jones in August. George, however, has praised Farrell’s meetings as a way of uniting the squad. “Everyone is hanging on every word he says,” George said. “It is very inspirational without tearing the roof down because that is probably not what is needed. He has a very good feel of what the team needs and what messages he needs to deliver. There are no coaches in the room. He just asks us how we are feeling and if anyone has anything to say. Often people will get something off their chest if they are thinking about the game and then he says his bit and without fail you could hear a pin drop. “As a leader I can’t speak highly enough of him. He is the sort of person you want to follow. He leads from the front but at the same time you know for a fact the messages he is giving you he has been thinking over and over again. He is very good at delivering a theme and messages that build up nicely throughout the week. “Owen talks a lot about how the buildup starts through the week but it also starts from the minute you wake up on the Saturday – the image you give off to the people around you, even in the way you walk to breakfast. You are always constantly giving off a message to other people about your mindset and how you are feeling.”
0||England unable to use drone to film Rugby World Cup final training in TokyoEngland’s preparations for the Rugby World Cup final on Saturday hit a glitch with Eddie Jones’s backroom staff unable to use their drone to record training sessions because their Tokyo base is close to an airport. England had to seek permission to use their drone from tournament organisers but they cannot do so in the buildup to their first final for 12 years as their training facility, situated near to Tokyo Stadium, is next door to Chofu airport. The drone is primarily used by the coaches to review training sessions and is a key part of England’s preparations when they are based in Bagshot during the Six Nations or autumn internationals. Throughout England’s World Cup campaign Jones and his coaches have repeatedly talked of the importance of the players’ work off the ball and that aspect of the games was highlighted when the cutting-edge technology was introduced to their training sessions in November 2016. At the time, Jones said: “The drone is fantastic for us. It’s another piece of technology that helps us accelerate the programme, allows us to have another piece of vision that sees how well we work off the ball and in rugby, work off the ball is just so important.”
2||Elmohamady gives Aston Villa edge over Wolves in makeshift cup derbyAhmed Elmohamady, that trusty old right-back, scored his first club goal for over a year to send Aston Villa into the last eight of the Carabao Cup at the expense of youthful Wolves. Villa dominated and took the lead through Anwar El Ghazi but Patrick Cutrone equalised early in the second half, forcing Villa to find another goal, which Elmohamady delivered less than three minutes later. So Villa deservedly prevailed in what was a strange encounter: a derby in a soldout stadium with a place in a quarter-final up for grabs but with neither manager moved to field their strongest lineups. Both have more pressing engagements. Villa made nine alterations to the lineup that started Saturday’s Premier League defeat at Manchester City while Wolves, contesting their 21st match of what is becoming an epic season owing to their European commitments, were even more radical. Theirs was an unashamedly experimental selection, featuring three teenagers making full debuts: the 19-year-old wing-back Dion Sanderson, the 18-year-old midfielder Taylor Perry and the forward Chem Campbell who, at 16 years and 304 days, became the second youngest player to start a competitive match for the club (only the fondly remembered winger Jimmy Mullen was more precocious). Three more rookies made debuts off the bench. Nuno Espírito Santo was unapologetic after the defeat, insisting Wolves will reap the benefits of exposing youngsters to such experiences. “It’s a building process,” he said. “We have always tried to give real competition to the young boys. They are from Wolverhampton, they feel the club, they want to grow and perform. They are good lads and everybody should be proud of them.” It took a while for anyone to find fluency. Conor Hourihane, a relative stalwart, provided the first flash of quality, opening up the Wolves defence with a cute pass to Trezeguet. Max Kilman rushed across to block. Campbell gave a taste of his talent by releasing Sanderson with a wonderful flicked pass. Then the 16-year-old fired off Wolves’ first shot, a powerful drive wide from 20 yards. Villa were generally stronger and more wily. Henri Lansbury made exemplary use of possession when he slipped a canny pass between Ryan Bennett and Rúben Vinagre and into the path of El Ghazi, who unloaded a low shot from 15 yards. John Ruddy got a hand to the ball but could not stop it from crossing the line. There was no sign of a Wolves comeback but they did not stop seeking one. They drew level, practically out of the blue. Douglas Luiz had been quietly authoritative in the heart of midfield until Perry unceremoniously stripped him of the ball near halfway. The teenager fed Cutrone and then accepted a return pass before curling it back towards the Italian from the left-hand corner of the box. Kortney Hause appealed in vain for offside as Cutrone poked the ball past Jed Steer from close range. Wolves fans had barely finished celebrating when Villa regained the lead. Lansbury pinged a free-kick from the right towards the near post, where Elmohamady got the jump on Bruno Jordão to flick the ball into the net. Wolves nearly delivered an instant reply but this time Steer denied Cutrone. Smith, satisfied that his team deserved to progress, said Villa are serious about going far. “You enter three competitions at the start of the season and the title probably slipped away from us on Saturday,” he said, wryly. “So we’ve got the Carabao Cup and the FA Cup to fight for. We’ve won this competition five times and we want to try to win it again.”
6||Boeing employee raised concern over Max sensor three years before crashes, email showsIn a second day of congressional hearings into Boeing’s handling of its ill-fated 737 Max plane, lawmakers were shown internal records revealing that three years before two fatal crashes one employee had expressed concern that an anti-stall flight system at the center of crash investigations could be triggered by a single sensor. “Are we vulnerable to single [angle-of-attack] failures with [the system’s] implementation or is there some checking that occurs?” a Boeing employee asked in an email from December 2015, nearly three years before the first Max 737 crash in Indonesia almost exactly a year ago. The employee, who has not been identified, was referring to a sensor on the outside of the plane that measured its angle in flight and could trigger a system, known as MCAS, to push it down if it thought the aircraft was at risk of stalling. Relying on a single sensor, aviation experts say, is fundamentally dangerous. With no back-up any malfunction could trigger the plane into a dive – as investigators believe happened with both the Lion Air and Ethiopian Airline crashes, killing 346. The release of the document, in addition to warnings from Boeing’s chief test pilot that the MCAS system could engage without warning, adds to belief that Boeing overlooked safety in a rush to put the Max 737, its most profitable model, into production. The new email is among others unearthed during withering transportation committee hearings during which lawmakers have repeatedly assailed Boeing’s CEO, Dennis Muilenburg, over a failure to prioritize safety. “You have a systemic problem in your company. You’re driving profit. You’re not driving quality, and you’re sure as heck not driving safety,” the California Democrat John Garamendi told the chief executive. In another memo, a veteran Boeing production manager warned the company was placing the workforce under too much strain in its rush to speed up production of the jet. “Frankly right now, my internal warning bells are going off,” the manager wrote in the email, which was sent four months before the Indonesia crash. “And for the first time in my life, I’m sorry to say that I’m hesitant about putting my family on a Boeing airplane.” The email, which was sent to the general manager of the Max program, warned that workers on the Max assembly line were exhausted by the schedule and there should be a temporary halt. “I know this would take a lot of planning, but the alternative of rushing the build is far riskier,” the manager wrote. At the hearing, Muilenburg confirmed the note’s author had copied the warning to him, and he had answered them. However, Boeing did not slow its rate of production. Peter DeFazio, the Democratic chairman of the committee, told the hearing the manager had resigned his job at Boeing “because his concerns weren’t being addressed”. He accused Boeing of a “lack of candor” over the crashes, after John Hamilton, Boeing’s chief engineer, testified that the company had identified MCAS as the probable cause within days of the first crash and begun to work on a fix.
1||'Call it off, please': video shows how operation against El Chapo's son fell apartMexican soldiers who detained a son of the jailed drug lord Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán forced him to telephone his brothers in a desperate effort to call off a rescue attempt by cartel gunmen. Instead, the call triggered a fresh onslaught in the northern city of Culiacán as the Sinaloa cartel mounted a terrifying show of strength that eventually prompted the outnumbered soldiers to free the capo’s son in exchange for their lives. The video of Ovidio Guzmán López’s call was released on Wednesday as part of an extraordinary government report revealing just how badly things went wrong in the failed operation on 17 October. President Andrés Manuel López Obrador insisted the report would rebut the arguments of critics who say the disastrous operation has made his government appear weak and have called on him to reconsider his commitment to a non-confrontational “hugs not bullets” security strategy. “We want everything to be known. That’s how we demonstrate the responsibility of the actions taken in a complex, difficult and very serious situation,” the president said. “It’s how we demonstrate that the most important thing is to protect citizens, to protect life.” The defence secretary, Luis Cresencio Sandoval, described Ovidio, 29, as “one of the main traffickers” of methamphetamines and fentanyl into the United States, and said the aborted operation stemmed from an arrest warrant with a view to extradition issued on 13 September. The general said a special unit within the security forces was dispatched to Culiacán on 9 October with an arrest plan that involved the establishment of an inner and outer security cordon as soon as intelligence confirmed that Ovidio was at a house in the centre of the city. Things began to fall apart, however, when attacks by gunmen prevented soldiers and members of the national guard from reaching their positions on the outer cordon. Pressure increased, he said, when gunmen attacked blocks of flats occupied by the families of military personnel and took an officer and nine soldiers hostage. Critics have argued that the authorities should have sent a larger force for the operation. But Sandoval emphasized the gunmens’ military-grade arsenal, which included armoured vehicles, .50-calibre machine guns, and rocket launchers that hit a helicopter, and argued that to defeat the cartel force, the army would have had to use even superior firepower – which would have inevitably put civilians at risk. The government says eight people died during the operation, though local media has put the death toll at 13. As fighting raged across the city, it appears that the younger Guzmán never left the house were he was detained. Video shot at the property shows him passing a handgun to an associate before emerging into a garage, fiddling with a black baseball cap before soldiers back him against the wall. With intense gunfire in the background, a soldier shouts at him: “Tell your people to stop this!” after which he is seen holding a mobile phone. “Call it off, please, I’ve given myself up,” he is heard saying. “Now stop it, calm down, there’s nothing to be done … Tell them to pull back, I don’t want this,” he continues. But the attacks continued and four hours after the operation began, officials in Mexico City ordered security forces to withdraw. Initial reaction to the report included some shock, and even admiration, that the government had been so open about such a disastrous event. But many questions remain unanswered, including who gave the go-ahead for such a badly planned operation and how the cartel obtained the intelligence to mount an effective rescue operation so quickly. López Obrador has promised to answer outstanding doubts at a press conference on Thursday.
8||Weatherwatch: Lord Byron's reflection of the rain in GenoaLord Byron is in Italy near Genoa and sees a monumental deluge. “But being on a hill we were only nearly knocked down by the lightning and battered by columns of rain and our lower floor afloat with the comfortable view of the whole landscape under water, and people screaming from their garret windows; two bridges swept down, and our next door neighbours, a Cobbler, a Wigmaker, and a Ginger-bread baker, delivering up their whole stock to the elements, which marched away with a quantity of shoes, several Perukes, and Ginger-bread in all its branches,” he writes to his half-sister Augusta Leigh in November 1822 in Lord Byron: Selected Prose, edited by Peter Gunn for Penguin (1972). He continues: “The whole came on so suddenly there was no time to prepare. Think only, at the top of a hill of the road being an impassable cascade, and a child being drowned a few yards from its own door (as we heard say) in a place where Water is in general a rare commodity.” A preaching friar predicted the day of judgment “with all kinds of tempest and what not in consequence of which the whole City (except some impious Scoffers) sent him presents to avert the wrath of Heaven by his prayers.”
9||Tactical voting website criticised for 'bogus' adviceA new tactical voting website has been criticised for advising pro-remain voters to back the Liberal Democrats in some seats where the party is way behind Labour, including key knife-edge marginals against the Conservatives. The website, launched by the pro-remain Best for Britain organisation, suggested that voters should back the Lib Dems in Kensington, where the Labour MP Emma Dent Coad has a majority of just 20 against her Tory opponent. The Lib Dems received just 4,724 votes there in 2017 compared with 16,313 for the Tories and 16,333 for Labour. Likewise in Cities of London and Westminster, the website recommends voting Lib Dem, where the candidate got just 4,270 in 2017, compared with 18,005 for the successful Tory incumbent and 14,857 for Labour. Both seats have high-profile Lib Dem defectors standing, with former Tory Sam Gyimah in Kensington and former Labour MP Chuka Umunna in Cities of London and Westminster. Tests of the website suggested there were many examples of advice to vote Lib Dem in seats where there was little hope of victory and a vote for Jo Swinson’s party would be likely to lead to a win for the Tories. A senior Labour party source said: “The only person who benefits from this bogus advice is Boris Johnson and the vested interests he protects. This false information makes Johnson’s sell-out Brexit deal more likely and its peddlers should be ashamed of themselves. A vote for the Lib Dems in almost every seat in the country helps put Johnson in Downing Street.” Naomi Smith, chief executive of Best for Britain, defended the voting guide. “Our tool uses MRP analysis, which is the only model that correctly predicted the shock wins for Labour in 2017, like Canterbury and Kensington,” she said. “Based on a sample of 46,000 people, our data is very robust and our Peterborough byelection prediction got the Labour vote share correct within 0.6%. The tool will be updated with the data for each seat in the next day or so. We expect to back Labour in over 370 seats in England and 180 or so Lib Dems. The tool only covers England and Wales. “If 30% of anti-Brexit voters can hold their nose and back a party they wouldn’t normally, we can deny Boris Johnson a victory, and return a parliament that backs a final-say referendum on Brexit.” Earlier, Best for Britain launched new research suggesting that tactical voting could swing a victory for pro-remain parties in the December election. Its analysis found that Johnson would fail to get a majority if one in three pro-remain voters in England and Wales switched their vote. In this scenario, the Conservatives would win 309 seats, Labour 233, the Liberal Democrats 34, Plaid Cymru four and the Greens one. When the Scottish National party, Democratic Unionist party and the Commons Speaker are factored in, this would give pro-remain parties a slim majority. Smith said: “If we vote tactically we can stop a Boris Johnson majority and return a parliament that much more accurately reflects the state of the country’s views on the issue of Europe, which is now a majority pro-European country and we need a majority pro-European parliament. “We think that there are only 20% of people who are so committed to the way they are going to vote that they cannot be persuaded to vote tactically. If you can get 30% of pro-remain voters to hold their nose and vote for a party they don’t normally vote for in their seat to stop the Conservatives or Brexit party, you get over that golden 320 figure to form a government. At 40%, we are way over.” If 40% of pro-remain voters chose to vote tactically, it would put the Tories on 277 seats, Labour on 254 and the Lib Dems on 44, securing a large remain majority. In both scenarios the SNP would win 52 seats. Best for Britain’s assessment was done on a seat-by-seat analysis with a poll of 46,000 British people in September and October. Without any tactical voting, the Tories would win a majority of 44, taking 364 seats to Labour’s 189, it said. There are concerns that the remain vote is split across five political parties, including Labour, while the leave vote is split between the Tories and Brexit party. Lewis Baston, an election expert, said at a launch event for the study in Westminster that in the current climate casting an “effective vote” was “all the more important because the remain tribe is more divided than the leave tribe”. Votes are likely to be split so markedly between a range of parties that there will be a dramatic reduction in the number of MPs elected with more than 50% of the local vote. Baston predicted this would fall from 242 Conservative and 221 Labour MPs currently to just one Tory and 18 for Labour. Baston said: “We know from all the social research and academic research that has been done [that] leave and remain identities are very strong and often override their party loyalties.” Baston said the elections in 2015 and 2017 were hard to predict because of the number of people switching parties, and he expected the same to be true in 2019. He said: “Between successive elections, extraordinary numbers of people changed their minds in the 2015 and 2017 elections. Something like 35 to 45% of people were switching over from one to another. We’ve never seen levels of volatility at an individual level since the 1920s. We can’t just look back at 2017 or 2015 or 2010 to look at the geography of party support.”
2||Atlético Madrid’s Ángela Sosa ends Manchester City’s European hopesManchester City’s third consecutive defeat was the most damaging, a loss that cut deep. Beaten by Manchester United, beaten by Arsenal, they were beaten by Atlético Madrid, knocked out of Europe at the hands of the same team who eliminated them last year. A late goal from Pauline Bremer set up a frantic final few minutes but in the end a Steph Houghton own goal and a second from Angela Sosa was enough to take Atlético through, 2-1 on the night, 3-2 on aggregate, and end City’s European ambitions. For City, twice semi-finalists, this was hard to take and there were tears at the final whistle. “This will hurt,” the manager, Nick Cushing, said. “We’re in a difficult period but we were knocked out a round earlier last year and won two trophies. We haven’t lost three in a row since 2015 but we just need to make sure we keep believing and we will be fine.” For Atlético, it was historic. They have never been this far in the competition. Their manager, Pablo López, who injured himself jumping about in the tension of the final minutes, said: “It’s amazing, seeing them in the dressing room singing, jumping, dancing. All I can say is thanks for having taken this historic step. I am immensely happy. It’s wonderful to see how happy they are.” City had needed a goal from the start but did not get it until the 88th minute, their first goal in three matches. By then Atlético had two and City could not add to theirs – although for a few, heart-stopping moments it seemed they might. Ellen White was sent through on the left only for her shot to drift wide of the far post for the first chance early on and, soon after, Jill Scott’s effort was blocked. But if that appeared to be a warning, urgency only arrived when the situation became critical and by then it was too late. Cushing said he felt his side had dominated but admitted they could not create meaningful chances and lamented bad luck. “It happens in football,” he said. Atlético, by contrast, did threaten. A lovely touch from Ludmila da Silva, flicking inside for Sosa, saw her set Toni Duggan away. Shifting the ball on to her right foot, heading horizontally into the area, Duggan was preparing to shoot when the door was closed. From a Sosa corner Ludmila’s header was scrambled away for another one, from which Aïssatou Tounkara could not keep her attempt down. Then the goal came, five minutes before the break. Sosa found a way out of a crowd, clipping a diagonal ball to the right-hand side for Kenti Robles. She combined with Virginia Torrecilla before sending a long cross dropping behind Gemma Bonner. It seemed to be going out but Ludmila breathed life into the move, keeping the ball from crossing the byline and sending it rebounding off Houghton and into the goal. City had not scored in their previous two games and Atlético looked the more likely to find the net. City rarely convinced, although a run from deep by Lauren Hemp saw her deliver a superbly weighted pass to White only for Sari van Veenendaal to dive out and block. Corral and Ludmila – so direct, so fast, so hard to contain – set up Atlético’s second. Ellie Roebuck had to save at the near post after Charlyn Corral’s sprint up the left. Duggan and Sosa sent Ludmila away, only for her to be dragged down by Megan Campbell. Carmen Menayo hit wide. And then off went Corral again, streaking into the area. Roebuck saved, twice, at the near post but the ball deflected to Sosa, who scored from close range. A long looping header that could have been the first of the two goals City now needed thudded back off the bar. When they finally did score, it came from a long throw, turned in by Bremer. Atlético, so comfortable a few minutes before, appeared scared. Another long throw almost led to an equaliser and City’s passage to the quarter-finals but it was the Spanish side who progressed.
8||Corrections and clarifications• In early editions, an article said that in India the number of people at risk of annual flooding by 2050 had increased both sevenfold and twelvefold. Sevenfold was correct. As the accompanying graphic made clear, twelvefold referred to Thailand (Number in danger from rising sea levels trebles to 300 million, 30 October, page 18). • A picture captioned as showing the view “from Mount’s Bay, Cornwall” was actually taken from Mullion Cove harbour, looking towards Mount’s Bay and Mullion Island (23 October, page 13). • Other recently corrected articles include: Berlin Wall: GDR relics to see, 30 years on The 10 most misleading American historical sites Bitter melon: it looks like an alligator – but don’t let that faze you
10||Laborers and domestic workers stay behind as thousands flee California wildfiresThe rhythmic metallic clang of construction rang through what should have been a ghost town. Amid a heavy smell of smoke from the Kincade fire burning just miles away, work continued for many people in the mandatory evacuation zones of Santa Rosa on Tuesday. Contractors hammered. Landscapers dug holes. Crews removed port-a-loos. All amid an air quality index measured unhealthy, with officials warning locals to stay inside. “We still need to make money,” said landscaper Jordan Stokles, taking off his hat and wiping sweat from his brow. In disasters like the wildfires scorching northern and southern California, choking the air with smoke and ash, day laborers and domestic workers have always been disproportionately affected. In northern California, more than 185,000 people were ordered to evacuate their homes and work sites over the weekend as the Kincade fire raged across the wine country hills. While many in the region were able to heed the warnings, many workers stayed behind. “It’s an agricultural community and everything is very time-sensitive when it comes to harvesting the crops,” said Ariel Kelly, the chief executive of Corazón Healdsburg. “We have those visa workers on temporary agricultural visas and they’ll be concluding their stay because this is the end of the season. There’s this concern that ‘if I don’t finish the job, I won’t get paid’…I know that after the first wave of evacuations happened last Wednesday night and a number of them were at our shelter, they were still leaving to go back to work.” As the climate crisis intensifies the wildfire threat across the state, advocates warn these discrepancies will only get worse. “For a lot of day laborers and household workers, not having a day’s work often means the difference between houselessness or not,” said Maegan Ortiz, the executive director of el Instituto de Educación Popular del Sur de California. “Not having a day’s work is actually a big deal. Not working means not having money for medication for a chronic illness. Not working means not having money for food.” In the Coffey Park neighborhood of Santa Rosa, several construction crews were at work on Tuesday, many of them rebuilding homes that burned down during the 2017 Tubbs fire that leveled the neighborhood. Josh Strand was cruising the neighborhood, which he said had been “technically” evacuated in totality. He was emptying the portable toilets on construction sites along street. The air was thick with the smell of fire, but Strand said he wasn’t too worried. “Two years ago it was worse. I had to wear a mask. It’s not so bad this time.” Advocates in southern California have similarly warned that workers are left exposed as wildfires rage in and near Los Angeles. “I’m hearing stories from Los Angeles where the owner just forgot to tell the worker not to come into work that day,” said Lucas Zucker, the policy and communications director for the Central Coast Alliance United for a Sustainable Economy. “You have safety exposures for workers where they may have less access to information about what’s going on and the risk they’re under, or they may be compelled to stay, whether it be their own economic necessity or their employer asking them to stay.” Complicating many workers’ decision of whether to show up for work is their legal status in the country. They’re not eligible for federal aid if they are affected by the disaster, or unemployment. Nor do they necessarily trust they can bring any complaints to the correct authorities without putting their immigration status at risk. And for many, language barriers prevent them from getting accurate or trustworthy information. In the Sonoma county wine region, there are more than 38,000 undocumented people, said Christy Lubin of the Graton Day Labor Center. During the 2017 fires, undocumented residents, fearful of the authorities, fled toward the coast instead of to evacuation centers with services, forming an encampment of 1,200 at Bodega Bay, Lubin said. “You see the national guard, you see increased law enforcement presence, and it’s always scary,” she said. The UndocuFund, a fund that provides relief for undocumented residents affected by wildfires, has been reopened by immigrant service providers and advocates for the county. In Los Angeles, Ortiz’s organization is tracking instances of workers continuing to work in impacted areas and assessing how to aid those in need. She already knows of one instance of a house cleaner in respiratory distress. Last year during the Woolsey fire, which charred up nearly 97,000 acres and killed three, Ortiz’s organization collected stories from more than 500 workers about having to work through the wildfire. “The stories we heard last year were workers being given hoses and being asked, ‘Hey, keep the fire away’,” she said. “Families evacuating and saying, ‘Hey can you stay and watch my dogs?’” She says her organization is still struggling with the after-effects from the Woolsey fire. In the aftermath of the destruction, everyone looked at the decimated mansions without comprehending the loss of jobs that came with it. “The homeowners have insurance and are able to rebuild or move to a different place,” Zucker said. “The worker has essentially nothing. With domestic workers, we saw people in really desperate situations, just people completely unemployed in a moment’s notice, with no unemployment benefits and no access to any government aid.” While day laborers and domestic workers will always experience a disproportionate impact in a disaster, Ortiz pointed out that the reason for this is that they are disproportionately affected by circumstances every day. “The situation that day laborers and domestic workers find themselves in is a climate-accelerated disaster because there is already a crisis that is happening,” she said. “Even when there’s not a wildfire, it’s the same sad thing. It’s just exacerbated by these horrible climate situations.”
10||White House blocked effort to condemn Russia for seizing Ukraine ships, Congress toldThe White House blocked the US state department from issuing a statement condemning Russia for seizing Ukrainian military vessels, according to a state department official, in the latest example of the strain the Trump administration is under in pursuing conflicting policies towards the two countries. The revelation on Wednesday came from Christopher Anderson, who was a senior aide to the special envoy on Ukraine, Kurt Volker, in November 2018, when Russia fired on and captured three Ukrainian vessels in the Sea of Azov off the Crimean peninsula. “While my colleagues at the state department quickly prepared a statement condemning Russia for its escalation, senior officials in the White House blocked it from being issued,” Anderson said in his prepared remarks to congressional committees holding impeachment hearings. “Ambassador Volker drafted a tweet condemning Russia’s actions, which I posted to his account.” In the face of silence from the White House, the then US ambassador to the UN, Nikki Haley, condemned Russian behaviour, after which the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, followed suit. Trump voiced concern but did not blame Moscow. The 24 Ukrainian sailors detained in the operation were returned last month as part of a prisoner exchange. Anderson, and his successor in the Ukraine job, Catherine Croft, both testified to House committees on Wednesday about the role played by Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, in foiling state department efforts to bolster the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in the face of Russian military intervention in eastern Ukraine. In his testimony, Anderson quoted the former national security adviser, John Bolton, as saying: “Giuliani was a key voice with the president on Ukraine which could be an obstacle to increased White House engagement.” On Wednesday, the House committees asked Bolton to testify on 7 November, but it is unclear whether he will attend. Bolton’s former deputy, Charles Kupperman, is currently seeking a court ruling on whether to comply with his congressional subpoena in the face of a White House order not to testify. At the other side of Congress, the nominee to become ambassador to Russia, John Sullivan, faced pointed questions on Wednesday at confirmation hearings in the Senate about Giuliani and the split US policy towards Russia and Ukraine. Sullivan, currently the deputy secretary of state, said he was aware of Giuliani’s role in a campaign against the former US ambassador to Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch. Asked if he knew Trump’s lawyer was “seeking to smear” Yovanovitch, he replied: “I believe he was, yes.” Sullivan confirmed he had been shown a dossier of material attacking Yovanovitch, saying it had provided by the White House to the state department legal adviser, but he was not aware it had been put together by Giuliani. He said the dossier “didn’t provide to me a basis for taking action against our ambassador”. He said that Pompeo gave Sullivan no explanation for the decision to recall Yovanovitch before the end of her posting, other than she had “lost the confidence of the president”. “As I understand, [Trump] may decide that he doesn’t like my testimony today and he doesn’t want me to go to Russia. The president can decide when he loses confidence in his ambassador – then that person is not going to continue as ambassador,” Sullivan said. Sullivan sought to avoid taking a position on the testimony by several former and current state department officials that the president, through Giuliani, had made a White House meeting and US military aid dependent on the Ukrainian government investigating Trump’s political rivals. “Soliciting investigations into a domestic political opponent – I don’t think that would be in accord with our values,” Sullivan said. But he would not confirm that was what the president had done. Democratic senators signaled that they were prepared to support Sullivan’s nomination as an experienced and respected diplomat, acknowledging the difficult position he was in. But they expressed concern he had not done more to find out what Trump and Giuliani were trying to achieve in Ukraine. The ranking Democrat on the Senate foreign relations committee, Bob Menendez, told Sullivan he had been playing the role of “see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil.” “You’re going to go to Russia, and you’re going to be saying one set of things based upon your testimony here,” Menendez said. “And we have the president who, in his public statements, is totally aligned differently than what you’re going to be saying.” “Do you understand the incredibly difficult job that you’re going to have as a result of that?” Menendez asked Sullivan. “I would say, senator, you’ve cited the president’s statements. I’d cite the president’s actions,” the nominee replied, listing sanctions the administration had imposed on Russia.
9||Lynton Crosby protege positioned at heart of Tory election machineIsaac Levido, the former right-hand man of Lynton Crosby, has taken centre stage at Conservative headquarters (CCHQ) as head of the campaign, replacing his former boss in the election war-room as the party targets 50 key seats and defends another 50 marginals. Tory insiders said Levido – little known either inside or outside Westminster – has taken a desk in the middle of the office, known as the central “pod of power” occupied by Crosby in previous elections. Dominic Cummings, the prime minister’s de facto chief of staff, will not officially be running the campaign and is still based in Downing Street, according to several sources. He is due to have an operation in November, which was previously delayed, and it is understood that this may still go ahead during the campaign. Over at Matthew Parker Street, the Conservative party’s headquarters, Levido is sitting next to Michael Brooks, a pollster who worked with him on Scott Morrison’s unexpected victory for the Liberals in Australia earlier this year, and the two young New Zealanders, Sean Topham and Ben Guerin, who are running the campaign’s digital media strategy. The pair previously helped run a controversial Facebook propaganda network while working as contractors for Crosby’s CTF Partners. Alongside them sits Darren Mott, the director of campaigning and a veteran Tory with experience of battleground seats, who had to make room for Levido when the newcomer was appointed over the summer. Those who have worked with Levido say he is less of a big character than Crosby, but was his most trusted lieutenant. In 2015, there was a running joke in the office that Crosby was constant calling out “IS-AAC” across the room to summon his protege for advice. A former colleague of Levido said: “He was Lynton’s right-hand man in previous campaigns. He’s seen up close what it takes. He’s understated, quietly effective, very much out of the Lynton Crosby textbook. But he won’t be seeking the limelight and recognises that it’s a big task and is definitely not taking things for granted. “He just came back from doing the Australian election won against the odds and it was very reminiscent of here in 2015 when people said you can’t win and the polls were saying that, but the private polling was much more consistent with him winning. And there’s a recognition it will be a digitally focused campaign.” Crosby himself is not expected to be a presence in CCHQ like he was in 2017, when he clashed over strategy with Theresa May’s advisers, and 2015, when he ran the campaign that saw David Cameron get a surprise small majority. He is an old friend of Boris Johnson, having run his London mayoral campaigns, and the pair were in touch by phone for informal advice during his Conservative leadership campaign. Downing Street declined to reveal details of who would be involved in the campaign at this point. Tory insiders claim they are more advanced in their preparations than they were in 2017 but there is nervousness among many MPs about the strategy of targeting Labour leave-voting seats in the north, Wales and Midlands that May failed to take in 2017. There are also nerves about losing seats across Scotland to the Scottish National party and struggling against the Liberal Democrats in the south-west. The anxiety about holding on to current seats means the party’s resources will be split between an offensive and defensive strategy. Matt Hancock, the health secretary, appeared to reveal four key target constituencies for the party as he mentioned in a broadcast interview that new cancer treatments are being rolled out “from Barnsley to Bassetlaw; from Wigan to Warrington” – all of which are northern leave-voting Labour constituencies. A Guardian analysis of marginals where the Tories are likely to be targeting Labour show the party has selected candidates in almost all of them. The rows over candidate selection are centred on plum seats with big majorities where MPs are standing down. Charles Walker, a vice-chair of the 1922 committee, resigned from the party’s board earlier this week following a furore about attempted interference by Downing Street in the selection process. A Tory source said he had rowed with Dougie Smith, a CCHQ official, over attempts to centrally impose candidates and then walked out.
9||Keith Vaz faces six-month ban from parliamentKeith Vaz is expected to be banned from parliament following concerns he could stand again as an MP without an official punishment for offering to buy drugs for sex workers. The House of Commons will be asked to support recommendations that the MP for Leicester East should receive a six-month ban for bringing parliament in to disrepute and failing to cooperate with an official inquiry. In practice, parliament signs off recommendations from the standards committee which spent three years examining claims that Vaz offered to buy cocaine for male sex workers while posing as an industrial washing machine salesman. Vaz has received support on Twitter from his local constituency association in the event that he decides to stand again. However, Labour’s ruling body is due to discuss his case this week and could decide that he should not stand as a Labour candidate because of the committee’s findings. Kate Green, the chair of the standards committee, said she had asked the leader of the house, Jacob Rees-Mogg, that Vaz’s case should be heard swiftly so that any election should know the settled view of parliament. “Our thinking is that this is a serious case and we wanted the House to act swiftly. Should he contest the forthcoming election, it is right that the electors in Leicester East are aware of the view that the House, not just the committee, takes of his conduct,” she said. Sources close to the leader’s office said parliamentary time would be found to discuss the committee’s findings. The inquiry examined claims published in the Sunday Mirror in 2016 that he offered to buy cocaine for male sex workers while posing as an industrial washing machine salesman. At the time, Vaz was chair of the home affairs select committee which was examining the issues of drug use and prostitution. Vaz’s explanation, which included that he had amnesia and could not recall key events, was “not believable and, indeed, ludicrous”, the inquiry found. The inquiry examined claims that Vaz visited a flat he owned and met two men who recorded the events that followed. Vaz told the Romanian male escorts in recorded conversations that his name was Jim and he was a washing machine salesman. He was quoted discussing the possibility of obtaining cocaine for them next time they met, although he reportedly said he would not want to take the drug himself. After claims by Vaz’s friends that the MP may have been drugged during the newspaper sting, the Mirror released details of what it claimed was a second meeting between Vaz and the two men. It included a transcript of him allegedly ordering them to take up sexual positions. Vaz denied that the purpose of his encounter with the two men was to engage in paid-for sex, the inquiry report said. “He asserts that the purpose was to discuss the redecoration of the flat in which the meeting took place,” it said. The committee, which made its recommendations on Monday, also asked that he should not be given access to a former member’s pass once he has stepped down as an MP. Any ban recommended by this parliament would have to be rubber-stamped again by the next parliament after the election. This, however, is usually a formality, an informed source said. Labour’s national executive committee, on which Vaz continues to hold a seat, will also decide whether to restore the party whip to Stephen Hepburn and Kelvin Hopkins, who have denied allegations of sexual harassment, and Chris Williamson. Williamson was suspended over comments he made about the party’s handling of antisemitism. He has said he regrets the remarks but that he is determined to clear his name. A statement on Vaz’s website said he had been receiving treatment for a “serious mental health condition” for the past three years as a result of the events of August 2016. It said: “He has shared all the medical reports in confidence with the committee. He has nothing further to say on this matter other than what was said in his oral and written statements to the committee and to the commissioner.”
10||More than 1,000 homeless people died in Los Angeles county last yearMore than 1,000 homeless people died in Los Angeles county in 2018, double the number of deaths from six years ago. The increase is a stark illustration of the region’s severe housing crisis, advocates said. The LA county public health department reported this week that 1,047 homeless people died last year, a number that has steadily increased every year since 2013, when 536 people died. The leading causes of death were coronary heart disease, which accounted for 22% of deaths, followed by alcohol and drug overdose at 21%, transportation-related injuries at 9%, homicides at 6% and suicides at 5%. The data sheds light on a worsening public health emergency in the county, where officials estimate there are now 59,000 people homeless, including more than 44,000 people who are living unsheltered – in cars, tents, or makeshift quarters. The report also follows a string of high-profile attacks against homeless people in the area, including the killing of Darrell Fields, a beloved musician who was burned to death in his tent on Skid Row. “We’ve got three people a day dying on the streets,” said Adam Rice, an organizer with Los Angeles Community Action Network (LA Can), a group that had worked closely with Fields. “It is a complete failure of leadership. Darrell didn’t need to die. None of these people needed to die. The reason this is happening is because there’s not proper housing.” Soaring rents and a major shortage of affordable housing have pushed people out of their homes in the area, with more than half of unsheltered adults in a recent count saying they were experiencing homelessness for the first time. The county estimated that there are now 8,800 homeless families. “It brings an overwhelming sadness when you think about precious human beings dying in our streets when it can be avoided,” said the Rev Andy Bales, CEO of Union Rescue Mission (URM), which runs a shelter at Skid Row, at the epicenter of the crisis in downtown LA. The county’s analysis also found that the mortality rate among homeless people has also jumped: “Put simply, being homeless in LA county is becoming increasingly deadly,” the agency wrote. The increase in overdoses represented the largest jump in terms of causes of death, the report found. In addition, the mortality rate among white homeless people has decreased while the rate of deaths for black and Latino residents has increased, the county said. Overall, African Americans are four times more likely to experience homelessness in LA county than other groups. Of the transportation-related deaths, which include vehicle and train collisions, 82% of victims were pedestrians and cyclists. The county and local clinics have increasingly sent healthcare workers to encampments to try to serve people on the streets. More than 21,000 homeless people were also placed in housing last year, an increase from 2017, officials reported early this year. The health department report this week recommended more direct outreach to homeless people, the creation of a “death review team” to study the subject and more traffic safety measures near encampments. Bales predicted that medical visits were not enough to reverse the deadly trends: “What we need most is for everyone to be immediately under a roof and protected from the elements. Until that happens, the death rates will continue to grow … and more and more people will be devastated by homelessness.” The crisis demanded a more urgent response, he added: “How much evidence do we need to gather before we decide not to let another human being die on the street?” LA’s homeless crisis has recently received national attention, with the Trump administration suggesting it could pursue some kind of law enforcement crackdown, drawing skepticism from some local organizations. Advocates have criticized efforts to further criminalize people living on the streets and have argued that the government needs to put more funding to housing and shelter. “It’s really a travesty when you think about it. How many deaths could’ve been prevented?” said Kourtney Milligan, a 29-year-old homeless woman, who has lived on Skid Row. “The resources that they say are out there are so hard to find.”
9||Brexit party divided over election tacticsSenior figures in the Brexit party are divided over whether they should contest every seat in the general election – or give committed Tory Brexit supporters a clear run. The party, led by the former Ukip leader Nigel Farage, is hoping to secure its first MPs this December when it stands in a general election for the first time. But splits are emerging between those who want to run in all 650 seats and others who would prefer to focus on a smaller, targeted list. The Brexit party chair, Richard Tice, has said the party has vetted 600 candidates so far and hopes to run in up to 650 seats. Farage is said to be in the middle on the strategy in terms of numbers. Others are urging for caution and suggest working on a much-reduced list of target seats in case they split the Brexit vote and threaten the chance of Britain leaving the EU. Arron Banks, who co-founded the Leave.EU campaign group with Tice, said that there is a “split view on what to do” within the party, which will go to the electorate with a promise to deliver a “clean Brexit” – a form of no deal. He said: “What I was saying was, be strategic. Where it makes sense to stand, stand. Where it doesn’t, don’t.” Farage is currently away in Washington but decisions on where the party is going to stand will take place over the weekend, it is understood, after their election launch due to take place later this week. Banks added: “He’s got a big decision to take, whether to be strategic about it.” In dozens of marginals it could be possible that the Brexit party hands victory to pro-remain candidates from Labour or the Liberal Democrats by splitting the vote withthe Tory party candidate who may be an enthusiastic advocate of Boris Johnson’s deal. He said that some candidates might decide it is not worth running against committed Brexiters and “take matters into their own hands” by standing down. Among the candidates apparently already withdrawing from the race, according to Banks, is their representative in Stone, the seat of the long-standing Eurosceptic Bill Cash. A spokesperson for the Brexit party said the idea that they were due to pull out of hundreds of seats so as not to risk scuppering Brexit was “rubbish” and “speculation”, but acknowledged that the party wants to focus on Labour heartlands with a significant leave vote. He said: “It is complete speculation. We are talking about things but we have got candidates and we are just working out where to place people.” John Longworth, the Brexit party MEP for Yorkshire and the Humber, has suggested the party be “sensible” for its first Westminster election and focus on parts of the country where they have a genuine chance. “I think we ought to be targeted in terms of the number of seats that we decide to address,” he told the Times. “I can imagine that might be 20 or 30. They would be entirely winnable then if you poured all your resources into them. You probably would not get any more if you concentrated on the 600. But you would also get a better result for Brexit too.”
11||Morning mail: Water buybacks, call for Labor reckoning, Alexis Wright's rebellious cockatooGood morning, this is Richard Parkin bringing you the main stories and must-reads on Thursday 31 October. Top stories How much water does $80m worth of water entitlements get you? Not a drop, the commonwealth environment water holder has confirmed during Senate estimates. A lack of significant rainfall in south-west Queensland has seen no overflow into the river system in question that held an entitlement value of 71,456 megalitres. The government purchased the water without a tender through direct negotiations with the company, Eastern Australia Agriculture, but the commonwealth environmental water holder confirmed it was “very supportive” of the purchase which still stood to benefit threatened wetlands, the Narran Lakes. Labor frontbencher Clare O’Neil has urged the party not to shift either left or right, calling for election postmortems to lead to an examination of new faultlines such as economic winners and losers from the digital economy, intergenerational equity and an urban-rural divide. O’Neil has also called for a rejection of populist or strongman models of leadership, and has slammed Labor’s economic policy since the 1980s as being based on a model that’s broken. Chile’s embattled president Sebastián Piñera has been forced to cancel two major international summits after weeks of violent protests that have left at least 20 people dead continue to grip the South American nation. Xi Jinping and Donald Trump were expected to attend November’s Apec summit, with the COP25 UN climate conference also scheduled to take place, but “difficult circumstances” have prompted Piñera to abandon hosting the meets. 3,535 people have been arrested since 17 October following ongoing street protests, while 1,132 people have been taken to hospital – 38 of them with gunshot injuries. Australia An overhaul of the childcare systems has seen a dramatic drop in the number of grandparents claiming childcare benefits, raising concerns over the available options for thousands of vulnerable children. A 37% decline in the number of children claimed for is believed to have been prompted by a tightening of eligibility requirements. The number of women on the boards of Australia’s top companies are tumbling, with just 32% of available seats going to female candidates since December last year. Seven top 200 companies still have no women at all on the board. The Liberal senator James McGrath and the former Liberal candidate Jacinta Price have fronted an Institute of Public Affairs advertisement attacking any proposal for an Indigenous voice to parliament, claiming it will divide Australians by race. A Melbourne newspaper ordered to compensate a traumatised journalist more than $180,000 has appealed the payout. The former reporter at the Age was awarded damages for post-traumatic stress, anxiety and depression. The Australian Signals Directorate has disclosed legal breaches including cases of failing to get ministerial authorisation before producing intelligence on Australians and intercepting communications without a warrant. The world China has closed 32 futuristic glass bridges in the scenic Hebei province – including the 488m Hongyagu bridge – after at least two deaths and a series of accidents involving glass slides and flying debris. More than a million people remain without power in California as wildfires fuelled by winds of up to 120km/h continue to buffer the US state, with 130,000 people remaining under evacuation orders. A 310-year-old violin left behind on a London train has been stolen, police report, with the owner of the £250,000 masterpiece understandably distraught. Electric cars could travel 320km off as little as 10 minutes charge, thanks to new battery technology, according to new research out of the US from Nobel-prize winning scientists. Recommended reads Basically wild, seemingly untameable – a rebellious adolescent. So great was Miles Franklin-winning author Alexis Wright’s admiration and affection for the sulphur-crested cockatoo, Pirate, rescued through a Tullamarine airport relocation program, that he came to feature in her award-winning novel, Carpentaria. “The little king spent his days watching me with his beady black eyes while listening to either classical or country and western music,” writes Wright. “When we parted I felt as though I had lost my right arm. He still flies free, and loves a girl who cares for him. This is the way I always remember the boss in my heart.” “Life is not just about what you do – it’s more about how you do it.” That’s the cherished advice grandmother Nai Nai gives her granddaughter Billi, in Lulu Wang’s recent autobiographic film, The Farewell. It’s a film about immigration and identity, and as Jo Tovey writes, it’s also a love story – about one of the most meaningful relationships some are lucky to experience: the bond between an adult child and a loving grandparent. “If you’re lucky, these relationships are rooted in unconditional love, acceptance and family ritual. With grandparents, there aren’t the complex intricacies of the relationship between a parent and ‘adult child’ … For some, grandparents might be bridges back to old countries, languages and cultures. For others, they can be a connection to a different time and way of life.” There is still no inflation to speak of in a stagnant Australian economy, writes Greg Jericho. “That, even with the massive rises in tobacco prices, we still are seeing inflation below the 2% floor of the Reserve Bank’s target is a good pointer of just how much the economy is lacking any growth in demand. While the consumer price index rose 1.7%, up from 1.6% in the June quarter, the average of the Reserve Bank’s two core inflation measures was a record low 1.4%. People are not spending.” Look Now a world-renowned coral ecosystem, Ningaloo is famous for tourists flocking to swim with whale shark or humpbacks. But the once obscure community has had to band together to fight overdevelopment. As campaigner and author Tim Winton documents in this series of photos, it’s more than just a location – it’s a lifestyle: home to eccentrics, alternatives and entrepreneurs. Sport Australia has retained the Ashes, boasts five ODI World Cups and appears to have waded through the scandal of recent years – is it time now to conquer the Twenty20 format? Well, it’s something firmly on Justin Langer’s to-do list, writes Sam Perry. From Tommy Bishop to Ellery Hanley, NRL fans have always loved a world-class Englishman, and with the news breaking of his sudden retirement the affection for Sam Burgess is apparent, writes Nick Tedeschi, despite his run-ins with the judiciary. Media roundup Mental illness is costing the economy $180bn, with one million Australians allowing health conditions from anxiety or depression to psychosis to go untreated, reports the Australian, with nearly three million more receiving help. More than $17m worth of property owned by Chinese nationals who police allege were laundering money through Australia has been seized by police, writes the Herald Sun, bringing the total to around $50m since Australian and Chinese police started collaborating on the issue. And since taking office five months ago, prime minister Scott Morrison has failed to visit the Northern Territory, rails the NT News, which led with a full page headline “not one second”. Coming up NSW’s environment department has forecast air quality in parts of Sydney today will be “poor” due to particles drifting from fires burning near Port Macquarie. Protests are expected to continue at the Imarc mining conference in Melbourne. And if you’ve read this far … The latest international campaign from Tourism Australia has landed, with an awkward, crow-barred pun (‘philausophy’) already dividing audiences in the same way that it inelegantly divides the word “philosophy” itself. Tell us what you think are the best and worst tourism campaigns of recent years. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.
9||Nicky Morgan and Amber Rudd among MPs stepping downThe culture secretary, Nicky Morgan, and the former home secretary Amber Rudd are among the Conservative moderates who have announced they will not stand in the upcoming election. Morgan announced the news on Twitter, accompanied by a letter in which she cited “the clear impact on my family and the other sacrifices involved in, and the abuse for, doing the job of a modern MP” as part of the reason for her decision. Rudd has been embroiled in a highly public spat with Downing Street over her departure, with the party banning her from standing again for the Conservatives and Rudd then responding that Boris Johnson had offered her a safe seat only last week. She and Morgan are two of a number of senior Tory moderates who are not standing again at the election on 12 December, including Ken Clarke, Alistair Burt, Claire Perry and the prime minister’s brother, Jo Johnson. They were joined on Wednesday by David Lidington, Theresa May’s former de facto deputy. In a letter to his local newspaper, the Bucks Herald, the Aylesbury MP wrote: “I have come to the conclusion that now is the right time for me to give a higher priority in terms of my time and energy, to … my family.” Many of the MPs leaving the Conservatives are female. One in six of the women who were elected for the party in 2017 have either quit or stood down. The row between Rudd and No 10 broke out after the former home secretary said she would be stepping down as an MP at the election and not standing again in her marginal seat of Hastings and Rye, where she has a majority of 346. Rudd, once tipped as a future Conservative leader, told the Evening Standard: “I’m not finished with politics, I’m just not standing at this election.” She later tweeted: “Moving on. Good luck to colleagues in forthcoming GE.” Announcing her departure, Rudd said she had hoped to rejoin the party ranks but was rebuffed by Mark Spencer, the chief whip, whose cutting letter to her was made public. In surrendering the whip, Spencer wrote, Rudd had made it clear she “did not support the approach of the prime minister and did not have confidence in him”. He added: “You have failed to provide me with assurances that you will not change your mind once more.” Having the party whip was “an honour, not a right, and as such it cannot be discarded or returned at will if it is to have any meaning”, Spencer said in the letter. Rudd tweeted in response that Johnson had asked her to stand in the election as a Conservative only last week, potentially in the safe seat of Mid Sussex being vacated by Sir Nicholas Soames. When she left the cabinet earlier this autumn in solidarity with Tory MPs who had had the whip removed for opposing a hard Brexit, Rudd condemned Johnson’s use of words such as “surrender” and “betrayal” over Brexit, warning it could incite violence against opponents. Rudd became an MP in 2010 and climbed the junior ministerial ranks before replacing Theresa May as home secretary in 2016, when May entered Downing Street. However, she was forced to resign two years later after failing to properly account for her role in the Windrush scandal about the treatment of Caribbean Britons. She returned to the cabinet as work and pensions secretary later the same year, but after Johnson replaced May, Rudd appeared increasingly uncomfortable with what she said was his pursuit of a no-deal Brexit. On Tuesday, 10 of the 21 Conservative MPs who had the whip removed for supporting a backbench-instigated bill seeking to block a no-deal Brexit were readmitted to the party. But the others remained out in the cold, indicating they would not be able to stand for the party, including the former chancellor Philip Hammond, the former justice secretary David Gauke, Oliver Letwin and the former attorney general Dominic Grieve. More than 50 MPs have so far announced they will stand down at the election, already well above the 31 who did not stand again in 2017. Those were both two-year parliaments. They include the Stockport MP, Ann Coffey, who resigned from Labour earlier this year and went on to help form Change UK. She announced her decision in a video to constituents on Twitter. More MPs have stood down before other elections, with 90 not standing again in 2015 and 149 in 2010.
6||Federal Reserve cuts US interest rates for third time this yearThe US central bank has cut interest rates for the third time this year in an attempt to keep the longest running period of growth in the country’s history continuing into the crucial election year of 2020. But the Federal Reserve put itself on a potential collision course with Donald Trump when it signalled to the financial markets that it had no immediate intention of cutting the cost of borrowing further. The president has put intense pressure on the Fed to boost the world’s biggest economy and his own re-election prospects by making aggressive cuts in the cost of borrowing. But the central bank’s chair, Jerome Powell, said there was a limit to what the Fed could do and that a more effective way to stimulate activity would be for Congress to loosen fiscal policy through spending increases or tax cuts. Two members of the Fed’s policy-making committee voted against the quarter-point cut in rates to between 1.5% and 1.75%. The move followed news that the world’s biggest economy grew at an annual rate of just under 2% in the third quarter of 2019. In a statement explaining the decision, the Fed said unemployment had remained low and household spending had been growing strongly, but business investment and exports had remained weak. Inflation was below its 2% target. Although Trump has boasted about the strength of the economy, growth has slowed this year as the impact of tax cuts has faded and manufacturing has been hit by the trade war with China. Paul Ashworth, the chief US economist at Capital Economics, said the Fed was still likely to cut at its next meeting despite signalling it was adopting a wait-and-see approach. “On balance, we still anticipate that a further deterioration in the incoming activity data will persuade the Fed to change tack and cut interest rates one final time in December,” he said. Rajan Naik, the director of Financial Markets Online, said: “Another Fed rate cut, another masterclass in the long game from Jerome Powell. Despite the surprisingly strong GDP data, the Fed chairman remains unwavering in his desire to keep ahead of the economic curve. “Even though he began his press conference with a list of the things that are going right – American consumer spending is in rude health, GDP is holding up well and US workers are basking in the lowest jobless rate for five decades – Mr Powell is keen to see off any economic clouds before they darken the horizon.”
7||The last PMQs gives MPs time to feel their unimportanceMorning after the night before. On Tuesday evening, MPs had been out on the lash, got a bit lairy and voted overwhelmingly for a general election. Now many had returned to the Commons with a bad hangover and gripped by remorse. The sense of an ending weighed heavy in the late autumnal air. Political careers both distinguished and entirely unremarkable faced extinction. Most by accident. Only a few by design. That which had been done could not now be undone. Even those who would return to Westminster would be changed by the experience of the next six weeks. Not necessarily for the better. The obnoxious would only become more so. The insecure likewise. This was a time for introspection. When MPs avoided one another’s gaze to briefly dwell on something they seldom allowed themselves time to feel: their unimportance. Sic transit gloria mundi. So there were almost no roars of welcome from both benches to greet the arrival of Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn for the final prime minister’s questions of the parliamentary session. Johnson began with one of his off-the-shelf, passive-aggressive best man speeches. A tribute to the outgoing Speaker that was laced with barbs. It generated a few laughs, though at times like this you might expect something rather more generous from a prime minister. Normally Boris has no trouble with insincerity. Maybe he too was distracted. Then it all rather unravelled for Johnson as he found himself unable to answer even basic questions on his government’s handling of the NHS. He couldn’t keep track of just how many hospitals he had promised to build – was it 40, 20, six or 0? – or where he had promised not to build them. Nor could he explain why the Department of Health had held five secret meetings with US companies – Matt “Man Boy” Hancock looked as if he was about to leak at both ends by wetting himself and bursting into tears as Daddy Bozza tugged his hair in confusion – if there were no plans to sell off part of the NHS. All fairly basic stuff. But well beyond him. Sensing he was losing what was left of his audience, Johnson panicked and went into free association. Longer waiting times were a sign of just how popular the NHS was. Everyone wanted a piece of it. What the country needed was leadership. But in the absence of that, it would have have to make do with him. Parliament had blocked Brexit by voting for it. There was a clear choice between economic disaster under Labour or economic catastrophe under the Tories. Pifflepafflewifflewaffle. God knows what a psychotherapist would have made of it. Tory backbenchers looked on in horror. They had always known that Johnson was a dud. He’d been a hopeless foreign secretary and nothing he had done since becoming prime minister – especially negotiating a worse Brexit deal than Theresa May – had given them cause to change their minds. But they had imagined that this was their private, guilty secret. That the voters would be still sucked in to the false narrative of Boris the Great Communicator. The politician with animal charm. Now they began to realise just how damaging six weeks of overexposure might be. Seeing just how shit Johnson actually was on a nightly basis might cause the veil to slip. Just as it had with May in 2017. Though at least with her, people had started off with fairly low expectations in the first place. Boris could just turn out to be an electoral liability. There was a similar process of revelation taking place among Labour MPs. They had started the day with a feeling of resignation. That with a more charismatic, more coherent leader they might have been in with a better shout of winning the election. But watching Johnson struggle, they began to think that Corbyn might do OK after all. Things weren’t so bad as they thought. The Labour leader was a far better campaigner than dispatch box performer, and if he didn’t try to overcomplicate things then the Tories could be in trouble. The final coup de grace was delivered by Jess Phillips, who contrasted the responsibility John Bercow felt towards his family to that shown by Johnson towards his. You could sense Boris physically recoil at that. Winning the trust of female voters won’t be easy. Not least because he couldn’t even promise to take care of the country’s children by guaranteeing them five full days a week in school. Some might give him a free pass for his infidelities. They wouldn’t for fucking the country. With that, Johnson totally lost it. Ad lib descended into an incoherent series of random words. He even failed to acknowledge the contribution Ken Clarke had made to the Tory party during 49 years as an MP. Boris is not one to let graciousness interfere with an ongoing feud. In Boris-world you’re either a fawning acolyte or dead to him. It was left to Bercow to make the tributes to Clarke the prime minister should have made. The Speaker checked his watch. PMQs had already run for more than an hour, but he was enjoying himself far too much to bring the session to a close. One of his last gifts to the nation would be to give voters all the time they needed to realise just how mediocre Johnson was. • John Crace’s new book, Decline and Fail: Read in Case of Political Apocalypse, is published by Guardian Faber. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&amp;p of £1.99.
1||Colombia launches military offensive after killing of five indigenous leadersColombia’s government has launched a military offensive to hunt down the gunmen responsible for the massacre of five indigenous leaders in the south-western province of Cauca. The president, Iván Duque, travelled to the region on Wednesday along with his defence and interior ministers to condemn the massacre and oversee operations to root out armed groups that plague the conflict-ridden Cauca province. The government blamed dissident factions of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (or Farc), a now-demobilised leftist rebel group, for the attack on Tuesday, in which assailants threw grenades and opened fire on a convoy of armoured SUVs carrying the indigenous leaders. Among the victims was Cristina Bautista, the leader of the semi-autonomous Tacueyó reservation and her unarmed indigenous guardsmen. Six other people were wounded in the aftermath, as the attackers fired on an ambulance that arrived at the scene. An initial investigation suggested that the massacre came in response to the capture of three Farc dissidents by local indigenous guardsmen. “Clearly, here we have a longstanding threat of drug trafficking groups, and of dissidents, who want to intimidate the population,” Duque told reporters from the nearby town Santander de Quilichao. “I hope to make some important announcements about operational capacity in the region and the capacity we will have to face these threats.” But his words rang hollow with indigenous leaders across the country who say he has done little to combat threats and attacks that have persisted since the Farc demobilised following a peace accord signed in 2016. “The government says the right things, but doesn’t do anything,” said Eduin Marcelo Capaz, the human rights coordinator of a local indigenous council. “Duque will say whatever he has to to cover up his government’s ineffectiveness and disinterest in protecting us.” “When will the massacre end?” tweeted the National Indigenous Organization of Colombia (or Onic), going on to report that 121 indigenous people have been murdered since Duque took office in August last year. Opposition politicians also lambasted the government’s inaction. “What is under way in Colombia is an indigenous genocide, and it will not stop if international justice does not appear,” Senator Gustavo Petro tweeted on Tuesday night, as news of the massacre began to spread. Violence is a daily reality in the Cauca province, where last month mayoral candidate Karina García was murdered with three others on the campaign trail ahead of elections that took place last Sunday. The violence that marred the election campaign – six other candidates were murdered nationwide – reminded Colombians of the political violence of the 1990s and 2000s, when the Farc were at their most powerful. The 2016 peace deal was supposed to usher in a new chapter of tranquility, formally ending half a century of civil war that killed 260,000 and forced over 7 million from their homes. But while the Farc demobilization removed one faction from Colombia’s war, peace never truly arrived: local conflicts over the drug trade, land rights and mineral resources continue to fuel violence, and social and indigenous leaders are often targets. According to Colombia’s human rights ombudsman, 486 activists and human rights defenders have been murdered since January 2016, alarming watchdogs. “The region where this massacre took place is a first-tier zone for violence, and the defence sector surely knows this but the response to repeated calls for help from indigenous communities has been far from adequate,” said Adam Isacson, a security analyst at the Washington Office on Latin America, a thinktank. “People are being left unprotected by their government in an area that is being disputed among several armed and criminal groups,” Isacson added. “Colombia must prioritise protecting these communities, working with their leaderships, to prevent another horrible tragedy.”
9||Five factors that could decide the general electionWith Brexit still unresolved, and smaller parties hoping to break through, pollsters and pundits have warned that this general election is the most unpredictable in decades. Here are five factors that could make the difference: 1) Is it all about Brexit? Labour has settled its Brexit policy, and will hope to stand out as the one party offering to “let the people decide” by offering a referendum within six months of taking office. But Jeremy Corbyn knows that will not be enough for many ardent remainers in his own party, and among its voters, who believe, as his deputy Tom Watson put it in a speech earlier this year, “our members are remain, our values are remain, our hearts are remain”. If remain voters feel more motivated by stopping Brexit than any other issue, they may feel tempted to opt for Jo Swinson’s “bollocks to Brexit” Liberal Democrats. Corbyn will therefore hope to recast the campaign away from Brexit, towards Labour’s “transformative” domestic agenda, including wholesale renationalisation, radical labour market reforms and a dramatic increase in public investment. 2) Is the big squeeze on, or can smaller parties flourish? In 2017, the Lib Dems had hoped to rally disgruntled remainers to their cause – and the party’s then leader Tim Farron even suggested they could “do a Trudeau”, and overhaul the official opposition. But as the gruelling seven-week campaign went on, Farron got tangled up in questions of sin and sexuality; while voters appeared to have decided their choice was about which party would be in government – and that meant Labour or the Tories. In the event, despite portentous predictions about the end of two-party politics, Labour and the Conservatives scooped up 82.4% of the vote between them – the highest score for the two main parties since 1970. Swinson is already pressing to be included in TV debates as she attempts to break in on that duopoly, and her supporters hope the electorate will warm to her. And Boris Johnson’s fate will also depend on how successful the Brexit party can be in scooping up disgruntled leavers – and how aggressive its leader, Nigel Farage, will be in pursuing the PM for failing to meet his “do or die” pledge of leaving on 31 October. 3) How will the leaders perform on the campaign trail? Corbyn’s uplifting rallies and Theresa May’s stilted stump speeches helped turn around voters’ perceptions of the two leaders in 2017. Johnson’s team, many of whom are Vote Leave veterans, are convinced he can recapture the rough-and-tumble of the 2016 referendum campaign, which saw him outshine David Cameron. But he has sometimes appeared chaotic or undisciplined during public appearances since becoming PM – and campaigns can be unpredictable. For Labour, meanwhile, it may be hard for Corbyn to recapture the freshness of 2017, when he was barely known to many voters, and before he became sucked into the mire of Brexit in parliament. And while his poll ratings as a leader were poor back then – and improved during the campaign – they are now even worse. Ipsos Mori says he has the lowest leadership satisfaction rating for any opposition leader since 1977. 4) Can Johnson do better than May at winning over Labour voters? May’s ill-fated manifesto launch in 2017 was held in Halifax – one of a swath of Labour seats across the Midlands and Northern England they hoped to take. In the event, May’s “strong and stable” slogan was much less successful than her boosters hoped at winning over former Labour voters: aside from a handful of seats, including Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland, and Mansfield. However, Labour majorities were squeezed in many Brexit-voting former industrial areas, such as Gloria De Piero’s Ashfield seat, and Paul Farrelly’s in Newcastle-under-Lyme. (Both are standing down). This time around, the Conservatives have discarded the austerity policies that have characterised their last nine years in power – and will have a manifesto aimed squarely at working-class, former Labour voters. Johnson has been visiting a hospital or a school almost every day in recent weeks; and Tory strategists hope Priti Patel’s tough stance on law and order will help them to exploit what they regard as a weak spot for Labour, and for Corbyn in particular. Patel, the home secretary, said at last month’s Tory conference that her party’s message to criminals was “we are coming after you” – and senior party figures were keen to tell stories of the warm welcome they were receiving on the doorsteps in Tory heartlands. Corbyn’s fancy footwork on Brexit is partly about allowing Labour to have an offer to make to voters in seats like these – and the party also has a list of snappy retail policies, including free prescriptions and funded social care. But Johnson’s allies believe he can cut a swath through the Midlands and the North of England. 5) Where do Tory remainers go? The departure of a string of high-profile moderates from the parliamentary Conservative party has underlined its rapid transformation in just months, during Johnson’s premiership. Some, including Amber Rudd and Oliver Letwin, have had the whip removed, while others, including David Lidington, have announced in recent days that they are quitting parliament. Several have voiced fears that traditional Tory voters in constituencies like theirs will have nowhere to go. Former justice secretary David Gauke, who represents South West Hertfordshire, suggested what he called Johnson’s “Farage-lite” strategy could cost his party millions of votes. Will the fear of a leftwing Corbyn government sting longtime Conservative voters into returning to the fold? Or will they be disillusioned enough to find a home elsewhere – perhaps most likely with the Lib Dems. Swinson told St Albans MP Anne Main – a leaver representing a remain seat – that she had already visited her constituency, and hoped to do so many more times in the weeks ahead. Many of these commuter-belt seats will be high on the Lib Dems’ target list – and the more of them Johnson loses, the more ground he needs to make up elsewhere. • This story was amended on 31 October. An earlier version mistakenly said that Halifax is in the north-east.
9||Lib Dems could win hundreds of seats in election, says SwinsonThe Liberal Democrats are “within a small swing of winning hundreds of seats”, the party’s leader, Jo Swinson, has claimed, as the main parties begin pushing out key messages before what is billed as the most volatile general election in living memory. Although the official campaign does not begin until parliament is dissolved next week, the near-certain passage through parliament of a bill calling a 12 December poll has prompted party election machines to swing immediately into action. MPs voted on Tuesday night to pass the bill, unblocking a long deadlock. It will now be sent to the Lords and is set to become law within days. While Swinson took to the airwaves to talk up her party’s chances of making a significant breakthrough, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, insisted the Conservatives were the only party that could push through Brexit. John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, told broadcasters that Labour expected to confound the polls as it did in the 2017 election, and warned that Swinson’s Lib Dems could go into coalition with the Conservatives. Meanwhile, it has emerged that Brexit rebel Dominic Grieve considered joining the Lib Dems to run as one of their candidates. It is understood the former attorney general and remain campaigner had talks with Lib Dem party officials where it was decided it would be better to run as an independent Conservative instead. A Lib Dem party source said they would have been happy to have him on board but he did not ultimately make the leap. They also believe he will follow a “soft whip” from the Lib Dems if he is re-elected, which means he might choose to vote with the group on Brexit and a number of other policies. The Lib Dems are not fielding a candidate in Grieve’s Beaconsfield seat to give him a clear run at capturing remain voters in this ultra safe Tory stronghold, where he currently has a 24,000 majority. Grieve has blocked a no-deal Brexit in parliament through a range of legislative procedures and also backs a second referendum. He denies he approached the Lib Dems to discuss joining their ranks. Swinson rejected the idea of supporting either Boris Johnson or Jeremy Corbyn in government and told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that her party’s “stop Brexit” message was resonating in “seats with all sorts of permutations”. She said the local elections in May showed that the party could win in areas beyond its current scope of 19 MPs, a total boosted by defections and a byelection win after the Lib Dems won 12 seats in the 2017 election. Challenged on whether she could really move the party into government from such a low base, Swinson said: “This is a volatile time in politics. Nobody needs to look at received wisdom or what’s happened in the past. “Our polling show that we are within a small swing of winning hundreds of seats, because the political landscape is so totally changed by what has happened in our country post-Brexit.” Speaking on Sky News, Hancock said a vote for the Lib Dems or another party was “a vote to put Corbyn in Downing Street and have more referenda and more blockage and delay”. Speaking later to the BBC, Hancock dismissed the idea of a notable Lib Dem surge. He said: “There’s no chance of them getting a majority. Instead, if you want to move this country forward, get things moving, there’s only way to do it, and that’s by voting Conservative.” McDonnell said that while Labour had initially been resistant to an election, the party was ready. “We wanted to give the government a chance to bring forward its bill. But they curtailed the time, and so all we could say was at least let’s get no deal off the agenda, and that’s what happened. So, let’s bring it on,” he told BBC One’s Breakfast. He said voters should be wary of Swinson’s aims, saying: “If the Lib Dems have said they no longer support a people’s vote and they want to side with the Tories – it looks as though they’re going into coalition again, like they did in 2010.”
12||Grenfell Tower survivors 'vindicated' by inquiry reportSurvivors and relatives of victims from Grenfell Tower have said they feel “vindicated” by the inquiry’s initial report into the fire that killed 72 people nearly two-and-a-half years ago. At an emotional press conference following publication of Sir Martin Moore-Bick’s interim report, bereaved family members stood in silence for 72 seconds – one for each of those killed by the 14 June 2017 blaze. A group of eight relatives and survivors from the upper floors welcomed official criticism of the failure of the London fire brigade (LFB) to carry out more effective rescues and reluctance to evacuate the burning building. The relatives also questioned the testimony of firefighters and asked why their loved ones had been told to stay put while others were helped down the stairs. The decision of some firefighters not to give statements to the inquiry was deplored. Shah Aghlani – whose mother, Sakina Afrasehabi, and aunt, Fatima Afrasehabi – died on the 18th floor of the tower, said the inquiry had found the LFB was “unprofessional and inadequately trained”. The service needed a “total overhaul”, he added, and Dany Cotton, the London fire commissioner, should consider her position. Nazanin Aghlani, the daughter of Sakina Afrasehabi, agreed: “However brave the firefighters were, there was a serious lack of common sense. They didn’t see, especially at senior levels, what was so vivid in front of them. “We look at firefighters as heroes ... but they are not heroes, they are professionals. It’s quite evident that the whole LFB ... is in the hands of people that are incapable of their jobs. They should be prosecuted [for corporate manslaughter]. I’m not saying individual firemen, they do a hard job ... but the seniors at the top get good money to do a very serious job.” Paulos Tekle, whose five-year-old son Isaac perished in a smoke-logged stairwell, wanted to know why “we were told to stay [in their 13th floor flat] while other families were told to leave”. Tekle said: “My friend advised us to go but we trusted the authorities. We believed the firefighters who told us to stay.” When they were eventually brought down, his son was being held by the hand but his grip slipped and he disappeared in the smoke. “How come they did not see the little boy? We were hoping to be rescued.” Flora Neda had lived on the 23rd floor of Grenfell with her son, Farhad, and husband, Saber, for 20 years. When other families, fleeing the flames climbed up to their floor she believed they had been misled by firefighters suggesting they could be rescued by helicopter. “I knew there was no way you could get out on to the roof,” she said. After about 45 minutes, when thicker smoke began to appear, her son carried her down the stairs. “We used the staircase from the top down to the ground floor.” She had thought she would see firefighters earlier but did not meet them until the 4th floor. Her husband, a former Afghan army officer, stayed behind to help two neighbours who were too scared to leave. He left it too late to escape and, as the flames closed in, jumped from the 23rd floor to his death. Neda and her son were the only two survivors from Grenfell’s highest floor. “I believe [my husband] would be alive, along with the other 21 people up there, if they had not listened to firefighters telling them to stay put.” Nabil Choucair, who lost six members of his family on the top floors of Grenfell, criticised the LFB for passing on blame to the cladding on the building. “They should have implemented a rescue mission much earlier. Has Dany Cotton not learnt anything from what happened that night?” Hamdan El-Alami sobbed uncontrollably as he told the press conference how he had lost his daughter, son-in-law and two grandchildren in the fire. Elsewhere in west London, Zoë Dainton, 32, who lived in Grenfell Tower for 25 years, said the report exceeded her expectations. “The inquiry has listened to us. Everything I said in my statement to the first phase, he has listened to. Now they need to keep on listening.” Tiago Alves, 22, was among the survivors pleased by the judgment that the cladding broke building regulations, partly because it means the issue will not have to be debated in the second phase of the inquiry examining the role of the council, builders, architects and cladding and insulation manufacturers. “Because this is illegal, the rest of the country shouldn’t have this on their buildings,” he said. “We are going to get to a point where life will get safer for people living in other buildings.”
9||Lib Dems face being frozen out of any live TV debatesThe Liberal Democrat leader, Jo Swinson, faces being cut out of televised leadership debates during the general election campaign, as broadcasters begin torturous negotiations over who gets to show the nation’s political leaders arguing with each other on stage. While the BBC, ITV, Channel 4, and Sky News are all vying for the position, Swinson’s place in any forthcoming debate is less than assured. The Tories are thought to prefer simple one-on-one debates between Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn in a bid to reduce the election to a simple choice between the two. Labour have adopted a similar stance amid fears they could lose pro-remain votes to the Lib Dems due to the party’s pledge to revoke Brexit. Corbyn’s spokesman said the Labour leader was committed to holding head to head debates with Johnson, with no mention of the Lib Dems. “There are only two possible people who can be prime minister at the end of this election campaign, and those two people should have a head-to-head debate,” he said. Earlier in the Commons, Johnson dodged a question from Swinson when she challenged him to a three-way-debate. “What the people of this country want is their promises kept,” he said in response. Channel 4 has already proposed a simple head-to-head leadership format involving only Johnson and Corbyn, according to a source at the broadcaster, while other channels are currently refining their plans. Smaller parties, including the Scottish National party, the Greens, and the Brexit party are also likely to demand the right to take part – especially in any programme on the publicly funded BBC. While US presidential elections have an independent organisation to agree on debate format, in the UK it comes down to bargaining with political parties by television executives. According to individuals involved in previous negotiations, the incumbent prime minister has the most power over the format of the debate, in part because channel bosses want to ensure they have the “main attraction” before ripping up the schedule and cancelling peak-time programmes that could attract higher audiences. One major concern for political campaigns is that televised debates are seen as increasingly risky, since short video clips from a debate go viral and reach a far larger audience on social media. The broadcasters could also struggle given the relatively short election campaign of just six weeks until 12 December, which gives political parties the ability to say they only have time for a handful of head-to-head televised events. Leadership debates have a reputation for sucking up days of campaign time as candidates have to be prepared and tested. Parties are also likely to emphasise the declining audiences for television – 3.5m viewers tuned in for the 2017 BBC leadership debate - and suggest they would prefer to put their efforts into digital campaigning. There is also the precedent set by Johnson’s team during his party leadership campaign. They ignored Channel 4’s leadership debate completely and let their candidate be represented by an empty chair. Instead, Johnson took part in a chaotic BBC debate involving five rivals and a single head-to-head on ITV with Jeremy Hunt, shrugging off claims he was avoiding scrutiny. Ever since British broadcasters convinced the UK’s major political parties to take part in live televised leadership debates for the first time in 2010, political parties have been trying to avoid them or shape the format to their advantage. Former Conservative strategist Sir Lynton Crosby blamed David Cameron’s decision to take part in the debates for costing him a majority, after the then Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg was briefly elevated to the top of the polls. In 2015 the Conservatives spent months wrangling with broadcasters over whether minor parties such as the Greens and Plaid Cymru should be included on stage, while in the 2017 general election the Tories decided to keep Theresa May out of the televised debates altogether – only for her to be widely mocked for her absence, in a symbolic representation of her collapsing campaign. The often farcical debates reached a new high at the end of last year, during a lengthy back-and-forth involving May and Corbyn and an attempt to hold a public debate over Brexit. This saw both BBC and ITV pledge to hold their own head-to-head programme featuring the two leaders in the same Sunday evening time slot, despite the physical impossibility of both politicians being in two television studios at the same time. In the end neither event went ahead.
11||Liberals front Institute of Public Affairs ad attacking Indigenous voice to parliamentThe Liberal senator James McGrath and the former Liberal candidate Jacinta Price have fronted an Institute of Public Affairs advertisement attacking any proposal for an Indigenous voice to parliament, claiming it will divide Australians by race. The inflammatory intervention comes just a day after the minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, launched a co-design process with Indigenous people on the voice to parliament. The negative advertising suggests the rightwing thinktank and aligned Coalition conservatives will continue to campaign against a voice despite the government’s repeated efforts to signal that the First Nations representative body will be legislated rather than enshrined in the constitution. In the ad, seen by Guardian Australia ahead of its release on Thursday, McGrath claims that the voice to parliament will “damage equality” and “divide Australia … on the basis of race”. “I don’t want Indigenous Queenslanders being separated from non-Indigenous Queenslanders on the basis of their race and who they can vote for and where they can vote on the basis of a special chamber or a special voice,” the Queensland senator said. “We’re all equal, we’re all the same. This is just nuts.” The incorrect claim that a voice to parliament would amount to – or be seen as – a third chamber has been advanced by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, his predecessor, Malcolm Turnbull, and the home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, although the former deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has apologised unreservedly for using the term to campaign against a voice. The original proposal by Indigenous Australians in the Uluru statement from the heart was for a constitutionally enshrined body to provide feedback from Indigenous Australians to parliament and would not constitute a third chamber. Price, an Indigenous Australian who ran for the Liberals in the Northern Territory seat of Lingiari, nevertheless said in the IPA ad that a voice would be “creating a separate entity”. “We are not a separate entity,” she said. “We should be considered Australian citizens and part of the fabric of this nation.” Price argued the voice amounted to “telling us that there are those that believe that we are forever going to be disadvantaged”. Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Lorraine Finlay, a non-Indigenous legal academic at Murdoch University, suggested in the ad that a voice to parliament is “patronising” and “a form of political segregation” because it implied that Indigenous Australians are “only allowed to play a certain prescribed role in the Australian democracy”. Despite the claims in the ads, there is no suggestion that any model of an Indigenous voice to parliament would reduce other democratic rights and full participation in Australian democracy. McGrath argued that the voice will not “fix” issues including suicide, infant mortality and unemployment. Anthony Dillon, an Indigenous mental health academic, said the “tough issues” including education, health and employment are “sidelined or hijacked by the virtue signallers, the ‘blacktivists’, the culture vultures”. Price suggested the “fad” of constitutional recognition could actually reduce focus on those issues, despite the purpose of the voice as an additional mechanism to improve policies affecting Indigenous communities. The Morrison government has ruled out enshrining the voice in the constitution but has asked the Indigenous leaders Marcia Langton and Tom Calma to conduct consultations with Indigenous Australians to co-design a legislated body. Calma on Wednesday urged Indigenous people to get behind the process of co-designing a voice to parliament, and told Guardian Australia it was possible the Morrison government could countenance constitutional recognition after a model is resolved. Langton told the ABC she remained a supporter of enshrining the voice in the constitution despite Wyatt and Morrison ruling that out, but she also urged Indigenous people to engage with the process in order to settle the model. “A constitutional entrenchment is the only way to guarantee that an Aboriginal voice will be heard by the parliament of Australia,” Langton said. She categorised the Uluru statement from the heart as “a highly metaphorical statement that required very large amounts of design work to turn it into a reality that governments can understand and can deal with” and she said the co-design process needed to settle on more precise words to explain the representative body. Like Calma, Langton said it was possible the government could allow a two-step process, first legislation and then enshrinement. “I agree with Tom on that,” she told the ABC. But the IPA advertisement underscores the difficulty Morrison and Wyatt would face convincing government MPs to sign up to a two-stage process. Groups such as the Central Land Council have also flatly rejected the government’s proposal to legislate the voice rather than enshrine it in the constitution. CLC delegates met near Uluru on Tuesday and passed a resolution opposing symbolic recognition. “We want to be part of designing the voice to parliament,” the resolution said. “We demand that it be protected in the constitution.”
7||The Guardian view on the Grenfell Tower report: bringing justice closerThe families and friends who mourn the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire have waited two years and four months for the first findings of the public inquiry into the 2017 disaster. One conclusion stands out. Though the report published on Wednesday focuses on the night of the fire – with the next phase of the inquiry due to investigate the controversial overhaul of the building which added cladding that fuelled the blaze – chairman Sir Martin Moore-Bick states clearly that the refurbishment of the building breached regulations. Others had already reached that conclusion. But now a judge-led public inquiry has done so. The significance of the finding is huge. Deregulation in the building and fire safety industries was the backdrop to the disaster – notably the rejection by Conservative ministers Eric Pickles, Gavin Barwell and Brandon Lewis of calls for new rules following previous fatal cladding fires. But Sir Martin has made it clear that his inquiry will not pin the disaster on lax laws, but on what was done in the existing legal framework. Not only did the panels on Grenfell Tower fail to resist the fire, the report finds, but they “actively promoted it”. The architectural feature that topped the building, known as a crown, aided the flames’ horizontal spread while serving no practical purpose. The failure of fire doors, for which Kensington and Chelsea council and its tenant management organisation (TMO) were responsible, is also identified as a cause of the rapid spread of the fire and smoke inside the building. Local or national politicians may, in due course, be blamed by the inquiry for political choices including cuts to public services, as well as repeated attacks on “red tape”. But one reason that Grenfell’s survivors and bereaved have broadly welcomed this week’s report is that the finding of non-compliance with building regulations would appear to make the prospect of criminal prosecutions of the contractors involved in the refurbishment, and the public authorities that employed them, more likely. Most of the document, however, focuses on the events of 14 June, and contains strong criticisms of the London fire brigade (LFB), which it finds to have been at fault before, during and after the disaster. If the report has won praise from victims, the reaction from the LFB and supporters including the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has provoked fury. LFB commissioner Dany Cotton is singled out for the “remarkable insensitivity” of her statement, in her evidence to the inquiry, that she would do nothing differently if Grenfell were to happen again, and that planning for such a fire would have been like planning for a spacecraft landing on London’s tallest building. This claim, as the report sets out, was nonsense. While the scale of the Grenfell tragedy was unprecedented, cladding fires have happened before, including at Lakanal House in south London, where six people died in 2009. It may be uncomfortable and disappointing both to firefighters, and to the public and politicians who hold them in high regard. It may be that budget cuts, and their impact on training and morale, provide a partial explanation. But the fact is that the fire service should have been better prepared. At the inquest following Lakanal, the coroner made no recommendations to the LFB after being told that “extensive work” to learn from that fire had already been undertaken. In this context, the Grenfell inquiry’s finding that nothing appeared to have changed in the eight years between the two fires is damning. National guidance suggesting that call handlers review the advice they give (such as that to “stay put”) was not included in LFB training materials. Institutional failure does not cancel out or even detract from individual and collective acts of enormous bravery by firefighters. But the findings of fault by the inquiry, as well as its recommendations to government, must be treated seriously. To dismiss or discount these would be an insult to the 72 people killed on that terrifying night, as well as their neighbours and relatives. It would also increase the danger of what should be unthinkable – another such disaster.
7||The Guardian view on a volatile electorate: disunited and unpredictableThe fanfare at the launch of a general election tends to obscure the reality that Britain’s voting system involves hundreds of very particular local elections. That constituency variation, combined with unusual volatility in party identification, makes the poll due on 12 December highly unpredictable. Brexit has shuffled conventional loyalties, forcing the Conservatives in particular to seek support on unfamiliar terms. A recent report by the Conservative thinktank Onward identifies “rugby league towns” – places such as Workington, Warrington and Wakefield – as the arena for a new type of political contest. These are places weighed down by economic and social insecurity. They voted leave in 2016 and Labour a year later. Conventional Thatcherite Toryism, preaching liberation through individual enterprise, has little purchase there. But Boris Johnson needs to advance on that front to compensate for a pro-EU migration to the Liberal Democrats in seats that used to be comfortably Tory. Meanwhile, Labour hope to woo remainers in cities and university towns without alienating pro-Brexit voters in their heartland seats who might defect to the Tories, or Nigel Farage’s Brexit party. Jeremy Corbyn’s method is to campaign on non-European issues: economic fairness; funding for public services. That might be a viable strategy given voter fatigue with all things Brexit and the salience of more local concerns. But Labour must also overcome Mr Corbyn’s dismal personal ratings. Doubt about the leader’s fitness for office haunts some of the party’s MPs. No party can take anyone’s vote for granted. It is almost certain that conventional wisdom in some area or other will be upended in December. What is often described as national volatility expresses the inadequacy of national narratives in describing Britain. This is not a new phenomenon, but political fragmentation seems to be accelerating. It is matched by economic divergence. While the UK economy as a whole has grown consistently over the past decade, data from the Office for National Statistics show that the north-east and south-west of England, for example, have experienced three recessions during that period. It is hardly surprising that politics as broadcast from Westminster sounds in some parts of the country like a signal from an alien planet. Campaign strategists try to compensate by using data analysis to customise messages, which can then be fed to the target’s computer screen. That can be an effective mobilising technique, but it is no substitute for cultivating support by delivering real benefits for people and their communities. Those allegiances have frayed in many places over many years. The coming election will reveal quite how drastically the electoral geography of the country needs to be redrawn. Whatever the outcome, it will require humility from all parties in recognising that none of them alone can plausibly claim to speak for the nation.
9||Tory party suspends candidate accused of sabotaging rape trialA Conservative candidate for the Welsh assembly who was accused by a judge of deliberately sabotaging a rape trial has been suspended by his party after Boris Johnson was pressed in the House of Commons to take action. Ross England was giving evidence in the trial last year when he made claims about the victim’s sexual history. The trial judge, Stephen Hopkins, told him: “You have managed, singlehandedly, and I have no doubt it was deliberate on your part, to sabotage this trial. “Mr England, as far as I am concerned, this matter so far as you are concerned isn’t ended. I shall be writing personal letters to people who are politically close to you and I hope they take appropriate action. Get out of my court.” The issue was raised during prime minister’s questions in the Commons on Wednesday where the Labour MP Jo Stevens asked if the prime minister was going to sack England. Johnson replied: “It would be inappropriate for me to comment on ongoing legal proceedings.” However, legal proceedings have concluded in the case. A statement was issued on Wednesday evening in the name of the chairman of the Welsh Conservatives, Lord Davies of Gower, who said: “Ross England has been suspended pending this matter being presented to the candidates committee.” England had been endorsed for his candidature by his former employer, Alun Cairns, the secretary of state for Wales. Stevens, who is the MP for Cardiff Central, said it was disgraceful that Johnson had refused to answer her question about England. She said: “I made clear the case had finished. The PM could and should have answered me. Both he, and the secretary of state who endorsed this individual as a candidate, have serious questions to answer about why this man is a Tory candidate.” The defendant in the rape trial, James Hackett, who is reportedly a friend of England, was subsequently convicted of rape in a fresh trial. The victim denied the claims made by Ross during the trial in 2018 and has told the BBC that England’s selection by the Welsh Conservatives “shows how little respect they have for me”. Gwendolyn Sterk, a spokesperson for Welsh Women’s Aid, said: “We find it significantly worrying that any party should select a candidate that has been deemed by a judge to have deliberately undermined a rape trial and caused further trauma to a survivor.” Cairns was asked by the Guardian if he was aware of the comments made by the judge when he endorsed England. A spokesperson for Cairns said: “Mr Cairns received no communication at any point from the court regarding this case. This is a matter for the individual as he was not employed by Mr Cairns at the point of case collapse or at his subsequent selection.” Eljai Morais, the Women’s Equality party’s general election candidate in Dover, said: “Disdain for women is fast becoming the criteria for being a Conservative party candidate. “Boris Johnson’s lack of concern over fielding a candidate who deliberately sabotaged a rape trial is shocking but hardly surprising.”
0||Bianca Andreescu’s twisted knee adds to concerns for teenager’s careerBianca Andreescu was forced to retire with a left knee injury while losing 6-3 to Karolina Pliskova at the WTA Finals in Shenzhen as injuries continue to define the young Canadian’s career. Andreescu had arrived for her second match of the tournament with all eyes on her back after she struggled towards the end of her three-set defeat by Simona Halep on Monday. Instead, she was covering the court fluidly until she twisted her knee while lunging for a wide forehand at 2-1 in the first set. “My knee twisted, I heard a crack, [the physio] validated me that it’s my meniscus. I can’t bend my knee at all. It’s cracking every time I walk and it hurts,” Andreescu said to her coach, Sylvain Bruneau. As he implored her not to push her injury too far, she cried: “I don’t want to stop.” She spent the following half-hour teeing off on her groundstrokes while desperately trying to move her immobile leg. At one point, she saved three break points to hold for 3-3 and then celebrated by barking loudly down the court towards a bemused Pliskova. She fought hard, but Pliskova eventually stepped inside the court and used her experience to put away her ailing opponent in the first set. Naomi Osaka withdrew from the tournament with a right shoulder injury on Tuesday but the circumstances are more worrying for Andreescu. There are few doubts about the potency of her forehand, the fluidity of her movement and her tendency to enrage opponents with her variety but the 19-year-old’s injury list is growing. This year, Andreescu contested only one match between March and August owing to a torn rotator cuff injury and many of her 48 victories in 2019 have included numerous physio visits and extended periods of physical ailments. After losing to Andreescu at the Miami Open in March, the former world No 1 Angelique Kerber was incensed by her opponent’s numerous injury claims and infamously branded the youngster “the biggest drama queen ever”. The unfortunate irony is that Andreescu continues to prove Kerber wrong. While Andreescu’s body crumbled again, Wednesday’s opening match was defined by Elina Svitolina’s physical prowess as she overcame Halep 7-5, 6-3 to move into the semi-final. Indoor tennis is historically fast and favours the big hitters but the conditions in China are extremely slow. Svitolina has been happy to hit consistently deep groundstrokes, forcing opponents to hit through both the court and her supreme defence in order to win. After Pliskova failed to put Svitolina away in their opening match, Halep spent this one frantically cycling through every last stroke in her arsenal, but she finished with 38 unforced errors and was unable to consistently dent the Ukrainian’s armour. Svitolina has now qualified for the semi-finals, while the second spot in the Purple Group will be decided by the winner of Halep’s contest with Pliskova on Friday. Andreescu will decide whether to play again after an MRI scan.
2||Derby sack Richard Keogh a month after being injured in car crashRichard Keogh has been left distraught after Derby sacked him on Wednesday. The club captain sustained serious knee ligament injuries when he was in the car that his teammate Tom Lawrence crashed into a lamppost after a boozy night out on 24 September. Keogh, 33, has had surgery and is expected to be out for 12-14 months, giving him a return date of the end of next year. His contract, under which he was paid £24,000 a week, was set to expire in June 2020. Derby had told Keogh he could stay and see out his deal. Yet they stunned the central defender by saying he had to accept a massive pay cut in order to do so. It is understood Derby offered him only a fraction of the money he would otherwise have collected over the remainder of his contract. The club’s hardline stance was unacceptable to Keogh and now they have told him he is no longer in their employ. Keogh has instructed his lawyers in the matter and the Professional Footballers’ Association has also become involved. Keogh had been out with Lawrence and other Derby players, including Mason Bennett, after a team bonding day. Lawrence’s car went into the back of Bennett’s, before going across a roundabout and hitting a lamppost. Keogh was left unconscious at the scene and Lawrence and Bennett fled. They returned 45 minutes later, when they were arrested. The men admitted drink-driving and failing to stop at the scene of an accident when they appeared at Derby magistrates court on 15 October. They avoided jail sentences but each was ordered to carry out 180 hours of unpaid community service and banned from driving for two years. Lawrence and Bennett were not in the Derby squad for the home win against Birmingham on 28 September but Lawrence has played 90 minutes in all five of the club’s subsequent matches. Bennett has been used twice as a substitute. Derby also fined both of them six weeks’ wages. Keogh is understood to feel badly let down by Derby, for whom he signed in the summer of 2012 from Coventry. He started in 316 of the club’s 330 Championship matches before the crash, plus all 10 of their play-offs games. Keogh, who was pictured on crutches at Pride Park last Wednesday when Derby beat Wigan, has been left to begin what is set to be an arduous rehabilitation on his own. Derby said they had terminated Keogh’s contract with immediate effect for “gross misconduct” and that he had the right of appeal within 14 days. They added: “The club will not tolerate any of its players or staff behaving in a manner which puts themselves, their colleagues, and members of the general public at risk of injury or worse, or which brings the club into disrepute. The club will be making no further comment at this time regards this matter until the conclusion of any potential appeal.”
13||Jeremy Vine was 'gifted' his show, says Samira AhmedJeremy Vine was “gifted” his primetime Radio 2 show by BBC management and handed opportunities that were not available to ambitious female presenters, according to the broadcaster Samira Ahmed, who is suing the BBC for £693,245 in lost earnings over claims of unequal pay. Ahmed told an employment tribunal in central London that she had been consistently underpaid over six years for her work on BBC’s Newswatch programme compared with Vine, despite at one point the pair having similar public profiles. She also claims that when she raised salary concerns with management she was told by a senior BBC executive that “the BBC doesn’t do equal pay”. Ahmed said she had more input into writing her programme’s scripts than Vine and also highlighted the extra demands placed on female presenters: “It is likely that Jeremy Vine spends less time in make-up than I do. Women are more likely to be criticised for their appearance on air.” The broadcaster arrived at the central London tribunal to give evidence on Wednesday accompanied by supporters including fellow BBC presenters Jane Garvey, Richard Coles and Aasmah Mir, in the first major employment tribunal case since the corporation become embroiled in the gender pay row. Ahmed is bringing the case against the BBC on the basis that she was paid £440 an episode for presenting Newswatch since 2012, at a time when her male equivalent at the broadcaster, Vine, was paid £3,000 an episode for presenting Points of View. Both are short television programmes of similar length that deal with viewer feedback about BBC output, with Ahmed claiming the pay difference is an example of gender discrimination. She said there was little logic to how the BBC paid its top talent: “It seems to me that men are more likely to be seen as stars, or at least stars that should be paid very highly. I don’t think it is clear what criteria the BBC use to decide whether someone is a star.” In supporting documents, she said she had been brought in to “transform the look and ambition” of Newswatch following the departure of its previous host Raymond Snoddy, but was kept on a similar salary. As part of her case, Ahmed’s team have said Newswatch attracts about 1.6 million combined viewers across the BBC News channel and BBC One – more than double that of Points of View. In response, the BBC has taken the unusual decision to play down the reach of its own output, saying its rolling news channel is a “relatively niche” service that airs little-watched programmes. It also said the only reason the corporation repeated the Newswatch programme on BBC One on a Saturday morning was to “fill out the programme at the weekend”, suggesting it was only watched because viewers had already turned on their TV in the hope of seeing BBC Breakfast. The BBC’s initial evidence at the tribunal claimed the two viewer feedback programmes were different shows for different audiences, which justified the different salaries paid to their presenters. The corporation claims Points of View is an entertainment show which has always attracted high-paid, high-profile presenters who have the skills to deal with a topic in a “light-hearted way”. By contrast, Newswatch is a “serious programme, which deals with matters seriously”, presented by a news journalist, which means it has always commanded a much lower salary. The broadcaster said Vine earned substantially more because of his star status across the broadcaster’s output, having negotiated a bumper pay contract in early 2008 when an unnamed commercial broadcaster was offering the Eggheads host a salary of about £1m to leave the BBC. Vine stopped presenting Points of View last year and was replaced by Tina Daheley, who receives £400 an episode for providing a voiceover. Ahmed will claim that the decision to cut the presenting fee for Points of View is related to her employment tribunal claim. Ahmed, who is being supported by the National Union of Journalists, has already settled equal pay claims with the BBC for her work on Radio 3 and Radio 4, where she was paid up to 50% less than her male colleagues over several years. However, the broadcaster has chosen to contest her claims over Newswatch, which could result in her winning more than half a million pounds in back pay. Equal pay is different to the wider issue of the gender pay gap. It covers specific cases where individuals doing the same, or equivalent, work are paid less than their colleagues.
9||Johnson knew of potential conflict of interest, says ArcuriBoris Johnson was aware there was a potential conflict of interest in his relationship with Jennifer Arcuri, the US businesswoman has claimed, on the eve of the publication of an inquiry into how she secured a £100,000 government grant. In an interview for Bloomberg Businessweek, Arcuri also said that a senior official at the then London mayor’s promotional agency London &amp; Partners (L&amp;P) was renting a room in her Shoreditch live/work space in 2013. Around that time Johnson visited Arcuri in the property and the agency was sponsoring her events. In a further embarrassment to the prime minister, Arcuri said Johnson was aware of her business links to the former city trader and Libor-rigger Tom Hayes. But Arcuri again denied she was given any favouritism by Johnson or his agency and even claimed that at times she felt shut out because of her friendship with the mayor. She said: “He knew there was a potential for conflict, and this is why he never did anything.” Her comments come as the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) is due to publish a review of how it awarded Arcuri’s company, Hacker House, a £100,000 grant earlier this year under a scheme aimed at fostering UK cyberskills, amid questions over the company’s tenuous links to the UK. Arcuri told Bloomberg that DCMS officials knew she was living abroad when she applied for the grant. She also revealed she was planning to apply for another £100,000 before her friendship with Johnson was revealed. The culture secretary, Nicky Morgan, who promised to published a review of the grant by Thursday, has already denied that Johnson had any role in awarding the grant. Earlier this month MPs on the DCMS select committee called for a police investigation into Hacker House if the review finds that deception was involved in obtaining the grant. Arcuri also told Bloomberg that Johnson was aware of her links with Hayes before he was convicted of rigging the Libor interest rate. Arcuri, who went to business school with Hayes, was the co-director of his startup company Title X Technology. Arcuri told Bloomberg that she had told Johnson how upset she was at Hayes being prosecuted after his arrest in 2012. She recalls the then mayor saying: “Look Jennifer, the world is full of bad men, be careful.” Despite those apparent words of disapproval, a presentation by Title X in May 2013 included an image of Johnson speaking at one of Arcuri’s events, the Guardian can reveal. Johnson and Arcuri continued to meet each other until 2016. She listed Johnson on her phone as Alex the Great in reference to his real first name, Alexander. In December 2012 she boasted to a friend that she was seeing “AtheGreat” for lunch. It is one of at least 20 encounters between the pair that the Guardian has evidence for, including the three trade missions and four occasions Johnson spoke at her events. Johnson’s register of interests as mayor makes no mention of Arcuri or her companies and he insists he had no interest to declare and that everything was done with “full propriety”. Despite failing to meet the criteria for inclusion, L&amp;P gave Arcuri permission to go on two trade trips to Tel Aviv and New York with Johnson in 2015 after intervention from the mayor’s office. The agency also bent its own rules to allow her to attend a trade trip with Johnson to Singapore in 2014. Arcuri admitted she was “very pushy” with L&amp;P about requesting a place. But she expressed frustration that Johnson would not help her. “I was going insane with Boris. I was like, ‘Dude, what is your deal?’ … The mayor’s team made things very difficult. But I was just not going to take no for an answer. Why should I not get to go to Singapore because I was friends with Boris?” L&amp;P confirmed that one of its officials, Pru Ashby, rented a room in Arcuri’s flat for two months in 2013. But Allen Simpson, L&amp;P’s strategy and corporate affairs director, said Ashby declared the interest and played no part in the agency’s decision to give Arcuri a place on trade missions or its awarding of £11,500 in sponsorship for two of her company’s events. He said: “Pru Ashby knew Jennifer Arcuri socially. She made her managers aware of that fact and was not responsible for decisions to support Ms Arcuri’s businesses, which were taken by more senior leaders.” The interview, part of a 4,650-word article on Arcuri, also revealed that she blagged her way into an expensive British Venture Capital Association summit when she first met Johnson as a business student in 2011. The encounter, which she has previously described as “electrifying” and which was caught on camera, only occurred after she made up a story about being the president of a venture capital club to avoid paying the entrance fee, Arcuri told Bloomberg.
14||US effort to remove ‘sexual health’ from UN agreement may violate law, say senatorsThe Trump administration may have violated federal law by lobbying more than 70 countries to remove protections for “sexual and reproductive health” from a UN agreement, according to a letter from four US senators seen by the Guardian. The letter from the senators, all high-ranking Democrats, focuses on an effort from the Trump administration to remove “sexual and reproductive health” from a high-level UN agreement on universal health coverage. The group of four senators wrote they were “alarmed that your opposition to abortion care – as stated in the letter – harms women and families, as well as endangers millions of women and girls”. The letter was signed by the US senators Dianne Feinstein of California, Patty Murray of Washington, Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire and Robert Menendez of New Jersey. “We are also concerned the letter may violate the Siljander Amendment, which prohibits use of foreign assistance in lobbying ‘for or against abortion’,” the senators wrote. Efforts to remove “sexual and reproductive health” from international agreements have continued amid the lawmakers’ criticism. This week, Kelly Craft, US ambassador to the UN, said the US “could not accept” a resolution on women, peace and security because it included references to previous resolutions that included this phrase. Removing language about sexual and reproductive health from international agreements has been a longtime goal of ultra-conservative religious organisations. The Trump administration, which relies on a base of conservative evangelical and Catholic voters, has proved a staunch ally to the groups. Administration officials have argued the phrase “sexual and reproductive health” amounts to a dramatic new interpretation of international human rights, and an effort to establish an international “right to abortion”. In fact, language on sexual and reproductive health has been an established part of international law since the 1990s. In July, the US circulated a letter to 70 countries arguing the phrase should be removed. Its efforts were unsuccessful. The phrase “sexual and reproductive health” stayed in the UN’s high-level agreement in September, and the US was only able to enlist 18 other countries to its cause, including many with poor human rights records, such as Saudi Arabia, Russia and Sudan. In September, the Trump administration made a last-ditch effort to have the phrase excluded, sending two cabinet officials to the UN to argue against its inclusion. The US health secretary, Alex Azar, criticised “language that has been used to promote abortion as healthcare”. The senators said the speech amounted to “advocating to deny resources and education that could help millions of women and girls around the world”. The effort so alarmed the international community that the Dutch minister Sigrid Kaag delivered a special statement on the phrase’s importance before the general assembly. The joint statement was signed by 58 countries, including western democracies and longtime US allies such as the UK and France. “[W]e strongly believe that sexual reproductive health and rights is an integral part of universal health coverage and that sustainable development goals,” said Kaag. The programs, she said, were “ultimately saving lives”. While the US failed to have the language excluded from the consensus agreements, it has succeeded in watering down commitments in the UN security council, where the US has a veto vote. In spring 2019, the US threatened to veto a resolution on rape as a weapon of war. To avoid a veto, diplomats pulled the phrase “sexual and reproductive health” from the agreement, watering down protections for women in armed conflict zones.
1||Belgian police find 12 people 'safe and well' in refrigerated lorryBelgian police say they have found 12 people “safe and well” in a refrigerated lorry, one week after 39 people lost their lives in a similar vehicle that had travelled to Essex via continental Europe. The migrants were discovered in the back of a fruit and vegetable lorry on the motorway, near the Flemish town of Oud-Turnhout, in the early hours of Wednesday. Police said they found 12 adult men: 11 Syrians and one Sudanese citizen. “Yesterday evening we received a call from a lorry driver near Oud-Turnhout who suspected that there were people in his refrigerated lorry,” Sarah Frederickx, a federal police spokeswoman, told the Flemish national broadcaster VRT. “The 12 men were found safe and sound.” The discovery comes one week after British police launched a murder investigation when 39 people were found dead in the back of a refrigerated lorry in Essex. The lorry had travelled to the UK via the Belgian port of Zeebrugge. Lorry drivers are increasingly reluctant to drive to the UK, because they risk £2,000 fines per every person illicitly found onboard, one industry group said. The head of the Belgian road freight association Febetra, Isabelle De Maegt, told the Francophone national broadcaster RTBF: “Drivers going to England are increasingly confronted with the dangers of having migrants on board the vehicle.” She said people were choosing to travel in refrigerated vehicles because they thought it less likely they would be detected. Lorries needed “closed and sealed” parking areas with cameras and entry points along the route to the UK, she said. Separately, Belgian police detained 28 people at Antwerp station on Monday night as part of an operation said to be targeting people smugglers and tracking migrant routes. Police detained 27 men and a woman from Eritrea, Sudan and Ethiopia, although 11 said they were under-18. The people had travelled from Brussels and were believed to be trying to reach the UK.
9||Election panics, polls and propheciesThe Lib Dems have embarked on a high-risk strategy, in provoking an early general election with the Tories ahead in the polls, ostensibly on the grounds that it is “our best chance to elect a government to stop Brexit” (Parliament breaks deadlock with December 12 election, 30 October). They must know that the only way to do so is to work with Labour to ensure that the public can have a final say on any Brexit deal. This means dropping their insistence that Jeremy Corbyn is “unfit to lead”. After all, we have not done particularly well with recent leaders, who brought us death and destruction in Iraq and Libya, austerity, inequality and collapsed public services at home, a referendum on major constitutional change without appropriate safeguards, and obstinacy, lies and chicanery to subvert democratic oversight of their procedures. It means concentrating their electoral resources on seats where they can defeat the Tories. If by splitting the anti-Tory vote in constituencies winnable by Labour they facilitate another Tory government, they will bear a heavy responsibility for the fate of the country, as well as successfully torpedoing both their own flagship policy and their future electoral prospects. Dr Anthony Isaacs London • Boris Johnson claims that Labour would have “sliced and diced” his Brexit legislation beyond recognition. The Liberal Democrats claim that because 19 Labour MPs voted for the government’s withdrawal agreement bill, it was no longer possible to amend it so as to secure a either a confirmatory referendum on Johnson’s deal with Brussels or a future UK-wide customs union with the EU. They can’t both be right, though between them they have bounced Labour’s shadow cabinet into triggering what promises to be the most fraudulent general election of modern times. David Purdy Stirling • Back in April 2017 the Guardian kindly published a letter from me stating how alarmed I was as a Conservative party member that Theresa May had recklessly called an early election. My prediction that illusory poll leads came from bad modelling and would soon vanish turned out to be true (although I took no pleasure in becoming an oracle): and over two years later nothing has changed. Conservatives are still succumbing to the same fatally complacent hubris. There is a minor consolation that the Tories are in something of a stronger position than before: Boris Johnson will probably not be so stilted, wooden and tin-eared a campaigner as Theresa May, and the polling models which underestimated Labour’s vote in 2017 will have since been corrected, so the Tories’ current poll lead is probably more genuine. However, vote-splitting from the Brexit party is a much more significant threat now than Ukip was then: it has already caused Conservative defeats in the 2019 byelections and could yet spoil a general election. There are huge hurdles in communication: I have seen many poorly informed Conservative voters – who don’t understand the full context that Boris Johnson was forced by law to make a Brexit extension – now accuse the Tories of wilful betrayal. And Corbyn’s simple seductive populist messages are as powerful as ever. I think that I am looking at the final destruction of the Conservatives, if there’s nothing behind Boris but Brexit bluster. Robert Frazer Stockport, Cheshire • It is just over a century since a general election was held so close to Christmas, on 14 December 1918. Despite the extension of voting to all women over 30 and men over 21, the electoral turnout of 57.2% was one of the lowest ever recorded, no doubt influenced by the Spanish flu epidemic and soldiers still abroad following the recent end of the war. It was also the last time the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland voted as one. Within four years most of Ireland had left the union, while the other great governing party, the Liberals would virtually disappear, to be replaced by a new party, Labour. Will history repeat itself? If so, December 2019 may well be remembered as the last UK general election that involved Scotland, and the one that eclipsed the other major governing party of the union, the Tories. Paul Dolan Northwich, Cheshire • Among the commentators and chroniclers of mayhem, there has been some side muttering about the absence of Nigel Farage in the current bloody political orgy. It is to be hoped that many media outlets are cured of the habit of providing him with a permanent platform whether it’s appropriate or not. It could also be that with a hard-right administration having wheedled their way into power he is obsolete. My own guess is that a hyena doesn’t join in the scrap, it moves in after the kill has been made and enjoys the easy meal of a carcass. Amanda Baker Edinburgh • I was heartily sickened watching, live in the Commons on Tuesday night, Nigel Evans (Conservative MP, Ribble Valley) wittering on about his concern that his constituents register for a postal vote because lots of them in the forthcoming general election will be away trekking in the Himalayas or cruising. I am sure that Gerald Jones (Labour MP, Merthyr Tydfil and Rhymney) will also have concerns about his constituents, some of whom are so badly affected by Iain Duncan Smith’s universal credit system that has forced so many to seek help from food banks. And we, the working class, elect these people! Himalayas, my arse. Unfriggingbelievable. Steve Evans Ystrad Mynach, Gwent • I’m not going to campaign for, or even vote for, Jeremy Corbyn. I’m going to campaign and vote for a Labour party that combines its 2017 manifesto (no more neoliberalism, an end to austerity, investment in people) with the Green commitments it has been developing over the last year: a green industrial revolution, with a detailed plan supported by the Sustainability Research Institute (Labour spells out new 30-point plan in green pledge, 24 October). Bollocks to Brexit, I’m going green via Labour. Alison Leonard Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire • Funny how the media falls for the old cliche that refers to an election campaign happening “on the doorstep”. Do people not see the blocks of apartments that dominate the skyline? Catch up! The campaign moved to the screen some time ago. Judith Clark Southampton • Nigel Dickinson says Labour faithfully reflects its public manifesto (Letters, 28 October). Page 24 of the manifesto began with the words “Labour accepts the referendum result”: Labour now backs a second referendum, with remain on the ballot paper again. As the Lib Dems know to their cost, going back on manifesto promises – whatever they may be – is not the best look. Peter McKenna Liverpool • Does the Fixed-term Parliaments Act mean that we are now condemned to having general elections in mid-December for the foreseeable future? Helen MacNab Tunbridge Wells, Kent • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
12||Grenfell firefighters who deserve our respect and understandingI hope the press and the public will show more sympathy and understanding for Michael Dowden, the watch manager in charge at the beginning of the Grenfell fire, than is shown in the Grenfell inquiry report (Fire brigade ‘was gravely unprepared for Grenfell’, 29 October). Firefighters work in dangerous and unstable conditions and are highly trained to deal with a wide range of incidents from dustbin fires to car crashes and chemical spills as well as fires in buildings, but that training is based on existing knowledge and experience. No one on the ground that night had any experience of a fire like Grenfell. What else was a relatively junior officer to do other than follow the previously reliable “stay put” policy? Has the chair of the inquiry fully considered the possible consequences if children and the elderly had been told to find their own way down 24 floors in a toxic, smoke-filled single stairway? The London fire brigade is a highly regulated organisation, and you could argue that, given the dangerous situations in which firefighters work, it needs to be. It should be recognised how difficult it would have been under the stress and pressure of a fire running out of control to change the “stay put” policy, and it happened when there was a senior officer on site with the authority to take the decision. There is much the London fire brigade will learn from Grenfell, but to lay so much responsibility at the door of an individual lacks empathy and imagination, and is profoundly unfair. Name and address supplied • The London fire brigade is being scapegoated. The advice to stay put has always been the best advice in buildings built with four-hour fire resistance. As my husband, a retired fire officer, stared, stunned, at the television pictures of Grenfell, he kept saying “That can’t happen! That can’t happen! There are laws to stop that happening!” Unfortunately, since he retired, the laws have been loosened and are no longer as strict. The guilty are those who chose to use flammable materials, especially in properties that have a single means of escape, without being pressurised or having air locks. I am shocked that people who spend their lives helping society are scapegoated in this way. Sheila Myron St Helens, Merseyside • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
3||Lessons amid the loneliness of griefI was saddened to read Devika Bhat’s article (Grieving for a baby who did not live, G2, 28 October), which happened to be published the 32nd anniversary of our own stillborn daughter’s birth. I was saddened also that Bhat feels the subject of pregnancy loss is something that is swept under the carpet. I found that when I talked about my experience, many women and men told me that this had happened to them also. I did draw comfort from feeling I was not alone. I also joined Sands, a fantastic organisation that offers advice and support to families who have lost babies. When stillbirth or any pregnancy loss happens to you it is a tremendous and terrible shock. Grief is very hard and lonely. And when people are pregnant it is not the right time to talk about all the ways a baby can be lost. So many of us when we are expecting a baby or when a woman is pregnant shut our minds to the fact that a baby can be stillborn or die. It is only when this terrible thing has happened that we can talk about this experience. You are not alone. Contact Sands at sands.org.uk or via the helpline on 0808 164 3332. Helen Jenkins London • John Crace hits the proverbial nail on its usual head (Digested week, 26 October). We cannot accept the end of life, other than through an intellectual process, and live “each day as if we and those we love are immortal”. I have just lost my life partner and, even though I knew she could not survive for long, her death has left me devastated. I should have known, and did know, but that is not an emotion. I refused to feel it and to process the information displayed before me. The great tragedy is that, through that denial, I could have invested even more love, as John Crace suggests, but did not do so. Michael Chapman Maynards Green, East Sussex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
9||Baked beans and damp squibs for BrexitWhat an enthralling collection of Other Lives (Obituaries, 28 October). We mere mortals standing on the sidelines can only be grateful to these champions of British agriculture, academia, publishing, education, social policy, design and nursing. And not a little concerned that valuing such achievements seems sadly out of step with the current lie of the land. Richard Lee Leigh-on-Sea, Essex • I have rarely read such a moving, insightful and accurate account of grief in such a succinct piece of writing (In grief, I have found unexpected comforts, G2, 29 October). Suzanne Moore recognises and acknowledges the human response to intense grief, and takes a simple, down-to-earth approach that provided comfort to me and I am sure to many others reading it. Thank you. Jan Smith Brighton • In the 1960s, we were told that a notice in the local Catholic church read “Any woman wishing to join the Union of Catholic Mothers, please see the priest after mass” (Letters, 26 October). James Herring Dunbar, East Lothian • Posters in the window of our local hardware shop had been advertising fireworks for sale to “celebrate Brexit on 31 October”. Yesterday morning, they were gone. Bit of a damp squib? Lots of ditch-digging equipment still available, however. Christopher Graham Hale, Greater Manchester • Is it safe to eat my Brexit hoard yet? (Four tins of baked beans… not all at once, obviously.) Margaret Squires St Andrews, Fife • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
1||Separatism and the rule of law in SpainI am extremely concerned by your publication of an article by Arnaldo Otegi (Spanish state repression in Catalonia may be shocking – but it’s nothing new, 23 October), which builds upon previous opinion pieces published by the Guardian – in particular those by Carles Puigdemont – portraying Spain’s state repression as a reality. Puigdemont may represent a genuine fight, the cause of independence for Catalonia, and I am pleased that the Guardian is giving him a voice. However, I believe that you should make an effort to represent opposing views as well. The majority of Spaniards holding a different view are voiceless in the English-speaking media, and the government in Spain is well known for its lack of international statements. As a consequence, the conversation in English is dominated by those with funds to pay for a PR campaign. The Catalonian cause is paid for by an affluent class educated in English. Meanwhile the constitutional system in Spain is misrepresented in English. The kingdom of Spain operates according to the rule of law. Millions of its citizens, including those of us advocating for a federal republic, believe that wrongdoing by the government, police or judiciary must be judged, and they are indeed corrected. We are critical of our government and point out its mistakes, but we can see too how citizens’ rights are upheld in courts and are proud of our democracy. Therefore, having been concerned with Puigdemont’s views being presented one-sidedly, I am now deeply worried by the position the Guardian is taking on the Spanish rule of law by adding Otegi’s opinion. I kindly ask you to uphold independent journalism and publish the opinion of the large majority of people who think differently – an opinion absent from the English-speaking progressive media that the Guardian represents. León Fernando Del Canto London • Arnaldo Otegi claims that Spain is repressive and undemocratic. Yet, after a career as a terrorist, he is now a free man and the leader of a Basque separatist party in the Spanish parliament, both of which suggest the opposite. His “political prisoners” are former members of Eta, the Basque terrorist organisation responsible for murdering more than 800 people in the course of their struggle for independence. They assassinated policemen and military personnel, judges and prosecutors, politicians, journalists, intellectuals and university professors, as well as 340 civilians. The most recent attacks, including the killing of a French policeman, were in 2010-11. Otegi himself was convicted and imprisoned for the 1979 kidnapping of a prominent Basque businessman, part of Eta’s campaign of extortion and blackmail. If Otegi has reinvented himself as a democrat, it is in large part due to the success of the Spanish government’s anti-terrorism efforts and the increasingly outraged public reaction against Eta’s savage, ethnically driven violence. The real victims in Spain are not Otegi and his Eta collaborators, but the thousands of people who are still living with the scars, psychic and physical, of separatist violence. Ben Casement-Stoll Cambridge • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
4||Facebook removes Africa accounts linked to Russian troll factoryFacebook has taken down accounts linked to Yevgeny Prigozhin – the businessman allegedly behind Russia’s notorious troll factory – which were actively seeking to influence the domestic politics of a range of African countries. The company said on Wednesday it had suspended three networks of “inauthentic” Russian accounts. The Facebook pages targeted eight countries across the continent: Madagascar, the Central African Republic (CAR), Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ivory Coast, Cameroon, Sudan and Libya. All were linked to Prigozhin, a Russian tycoon close to Vladimir Putin. The US has previously indicted Prigozhin for interfering in the 2016 presidential election. It accuses him of running a global disinformation media empire and of funding the Internet Research Agency, the St Petersburg troll factory that boosted Donald Trump. Facebook’s head of cybersecurity policy, Nathaniel Gleicher, said Russia used almost 200 fake and compromised accounts to reach more than 1 million followers in Africa. Russian-run networks worked closely with locals in order to disguise the sites’ true origins, he said. “There’s sort of a joining of forces, if you will, between local actors and actors from Russia,” he told Reuters. “It appears that the local actors who are involved know who is behind the operation.” In recent years the Kremlin has made considerable efforts to cultivate support from African rulers. Last week Putin held the first-ever Russia-Africa forum in the Black Sea resort of Sochi, attended by more than 40 African heads of state. Prigozhin has led Russia’s push in Africa. Mercenaries from Wagner – a shadowy private military contractor linked to Prigozhin – have been sent to the Central African Republic. Prigozhin entities have also established media outlets in several African countries and have sent Russian “advisers” to help with elections. Moscow’s aim appears to be to bolster existing governments and smear pro-western opposition parties. Documents seen by the Guardian earlier this year envisage grooming a new generation of African “leaders” and undercover “agents”, and pushing out former colonial powers such as France or the UK. Facebook said one fake network was centred on Sudan, where in late 2018 Russia tried unsuccessfully to prop up President Omar al-Bashir, who was deposed in April. Another – featuring 35 accounts and 53 pages – was run out of Madagascar and Mozambique. A third was focused on Libya. The campaigns shut down for meddling in Africa had posted about local news and geopolitical issues, as well as sharing content from local and Russian state media including Sputnik and RT. Some of the accounts were active as far back as 2014, Facebook said. The company did not identify which accounts had been suspended. The Guardian found that the Facebook page of a French-language news service, Afrique Panorama, based in Madagascar’s capital, Antananarivo, was no longer working. Also not working was the account for Afric, a South Africa-based website previously linked with a Russian attempt to meddle in the country’s recent election by backing the ruling African National Congress. The campaign appears to have had little impact. Researchers at the Stanford Internet Observatory, the research lab at Stanford University, said the networks used a variety of techniques across the African countries. Some accounts supported a specific party or candidate, they said, while others backed multiple figures. In other cases, the pages appeared geared towards building support for Wagner activities or Russian deals for gold, diamonds and other natural resources. The takedown on Wednesday was Facebook’s second move against groups it linked to Prigozhin in a week. Last week the company said it had suspended a network of 50 Instagram accounts connected with the Internet Research Agency Prigozhin has denied US claims he finances the troll factory and says Wagner does not exist.
9||General election: Corbyn challenges Johnson to TV debates - as it happenedBoris Johnson has said the government will fully accept the findings of a report on failings in the Grenfell Tower disaster, promising survivors and relatives that “the truth will out and justice will be done”. Jeremy Corbyn has challenged Johnson to TV debates on what has effectively been the first full day of campaigning since MPs agreed that there should be an election on Thursday 12 December. (See 4.06pm.) The bill approving the election is still being debated by peers, but it is expected to clear the House of Lords without a hitch by the end of today. Amber Rudd and David Lidington, respectively the ex-home secretary and Theresa May’s former de facto deputy, have both announced they are among an increasing number of sitting MPs who will quit at the coming election. The Liberal Democrats are “within a small swing of winning hundreds of seats”, Jo Swinson has claimed, as the main parties began pushing out key messages before what is billed as the most volatile general election in living memory. That is all from me for today. A colleague will be picking up the blog later for any breaking news. The disclosure from Adam Price, the Plaid Cymru leader, that his party may agree to form pro-remain pacts with other anti-Brexit parties such as the Lib Dems in certain seats (see 4.52pm) raises the question about the role in Scotland of Westminster’s largest anti-Brexit force: the Scottish National party. The Lib Dems are explicitly ruling out any deals with the SNP, even though Nicola Sturgeon’s party has 35 MPs now and could well have nearer 50 after election day. It is, on the face of it, a curious decision. After all, Plaid has, like the SNP, an explicit pro-independence policy for Wales and Scotland, and the Greens also support national autonomy for both countries. (Their sister party, the Scottish Greens, are often more gung-ho for a referendum than Sturgeon.) Lib Dem officials at the Scottish parliament say the SNP is excluded from the party’s thinking about possible pacts for one simple reason: the SNP are closer to getting Scottish independence than Plaid is for independence in Wales. Sturgeon made clear as she launched the SNP election campaign in Stirling on Wednesday morning that a second independence referendum will be central to her party’s manifesto. Under Price’s leadership, Plaid is much more explicit about its independence ambitions. The difference, say Lib Dem officials, is that Plaid’s support has fallen by several points to 12% in the few opinion polls carried out in Wales, and so poses no threat, while the SNP dominates the polls in Scotland, and very much does. There is another reason. Top of the Lib Dem target list is the most marginal Westminster seat in the UK, that of North East Fife which was won by the SNP’s Stephen Gethins with an extraordinarily slender two vote margin. North East Fife was held by former Lib Dem leader Menzies Campbell for nearly 30 years and they’d very much like it back. One of Boris Johnson’s main lines of attack against Labour at the moment is the claim that Jeremy Corbyn would submit the country to two referendums after the general election. This is how he put it at PMQs. Johnson said: [Corbyn] also offers a political disaster, consigning next year, which should be a wonderful year for our country, to two more referendums: another referendum on the EU because he cannot make up his mind what he thinks, flip-flopping this way and that; and another referendum on Scottish independence. Why on earth should the people of this country spend the next year, which should be a glorious year, going through the toxic, tedious torpor of two more referendums thanks to the Labour party? Labour is committed to renegotiating Brexit and holding another referendum. As Jeremy Corbyn’s spokesman said in a briefing for journalists after PMQs, Labour would not agree to a Scottish independence election in 2020. But Corbyn has confirmed that he would be willing to agree to a Scottish independence referendum at some stage later. (For a Scottish independence referendum, Westminster has to allow it.) The Scottish Labour party used to be flatly opposed to a second independence referendum, but Corbyn changed party policy on this during the summer. Speaking during a visit to Crawley Hospital in West Sussex this afternoon, Corbyn said he was “not in favour” of another referendum on Scottish independence “any time soon”. But he went on: At a later stage, obviously under the terms of devolution, if the Scottish parliament demands it, then there could be, at a much later stage, a referendum. I make it very clear, we are against Scottish independence and we are certainly not in favour of any referendum in Scotland any time soon. From the BBC’s Mark D’Arcy According to BuzzFeed’s Alex Wickham, who has written a good insider account of the Conservative election campaign, some senior Tories put their chances of winning at between 50/50 and two thirds. He says: Senior Conservatives put their chances of forming a government on Dec. 13 at between fifty-fifty and two-thirds in favour. The path to a Johnson majority has been made slightly easier after he restored the whip to 10 of the 21 Tory rebels who opposed his Brexit plans last month. But the Tories still go into the election well short of a majority and likely to lose their foothold in Scotland as well as further seats to the Liberal Democrats in areas of England where support for EU membership remains strong. To win a majority healthy enough to comfortably pass his Brexit deal, Johnson would have to gain Labour seats far away from their usual target list — and with the added unknown factor of Nigel Farage’s Brexit party eating away at their vote in leave areas. The fear among Conservatives throughout the party is that they fall short and that parliament remains hung and deadlocked. The potential of Corbyn in Downing Street in coalition with the Scottish Nationalist party is a risk some Tories did not want to take. But there is a growing worry that, even if Johnson has the numbers to stay in Downing Street but the Commons remains at an impasse, the conversation will turn to another long Brexit extension and a second referendum as the only way to find a definitive answer. Wickham says some Tories are summing up their mood as one of “positive fatalism”. Overall, while its various factions disagreed over when to go for an election, No 10 is united in the belief that it ultimately has the team and message to win. One Tory who spoke to BuzzFeed News talked about “positive fatalism” — the idea that the choice facing the country was clear, an election to break the deadlock in Parliament was inevitable at some point, and that if voters genuinely preferred Corbyn, then so be it. According to CNN’s Luke McGee, Brexit party activists have been told not to say on social media where the party will be standing at the election, amidst rumours it may decide to not most seats, as originally planned, but just a handful. McGee writes: Rumours are now circulating that the Brexit party will switch its focus from standing in every seat to concentrating on a handful of seats that they have a decent chance on winning. On Wednesday morning, party campaigners were sent the following message, which has been seen by CNN. “Message from HQ ... IMPORTANT. Please go DARK on social media. DO NOT respond to any questions about where we are standing, what the strategy or plan is from now. Things will be made clear to all PPCs very soon. #changepoliticsforgood.” Adam Price, Plaid Cymru’s leader, has confirmed that his party may form a pact with other pro-remain parties to maximise their chances. In August Plaid Cymru and the Greens stood aside in the Brecon and Radnorshire by-election, which helped the Lib Dems win the seat from the Tories. Price said: The Brexit crisis has shown up Westminster to be totally unfit for purpose. The Conservatives and Labour are divided and are simply not offering the solutions we need. Plaid Cymru is a party of principle and we have consistently said that Wales is best served within the European Union. That is why, as Wales’s leading remain party, we are open to working with others to secure our European future. Tory MPs have been criticised for jeering Jeremy Corbyn over his green tie, which he wore as a sign of respect to those who died in the Grenfell Tower fire, the Press Association reports. The Labour leader wore the garment for a House of Commons debate on Wednesday after the report into the disaster that killed 72 people was published. As relatives of those killed looked on from the public gallery, members from the Conservative benches mocked him for the bright tie. Theresa May, who was prime minister when the blaze took hold of the west London building in June 2017, could be seen admonishing them by stressing the tie was to mark the tragedy, PA reports. Asked to comment on the MPs’ behaviour, Corbyn’s spokesman said: I think that’s fairly contemptible. He was wearing a green tie as a mark of respect for the victims of the Grenfell disaster. I think those Tory MPs mocking his tie would be better supporting justice for the families and the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire and those who died in similar conflagrations and to deliver safety and protection for people living in tower blocks all over the country. As my colleague Rajeev Syal reports, the Commons standards committee has asked Jacob Rees-Mogg, leader of the Commons, to schedule a debate tomorrow to allow MPs to pass a motion approving the committee’s recommendation for Labour MP Keith Vaz to be suspended for six months. The full text of Green’s letter to Rees-Mogg is here (pdf). Michelle O’Neill has said Sinn Fein is hoping to unseat “an architect of Brexit” - DUP deputy leader Nigel Dodds - as it aims to increase its number of MPs from seven to eight. As the Press Association reports, the Sinn Fein vice president said the December 12 general election will be about maximising the return of pro-Remain candidates. Standing alongside the party’s North Belfast candidate John Finucane, O’Neill said: We will stand in our seven constituencies in which we currently hold seats and we will stand in North Belfast to win that seat. We believe there is a real opportunity in North Belfast to oust someone who has been architect of Brexit, someone who has actively worked against the interests of people who live here on this island, and John Finucane can provide local representation but also will reflect Ireland’s interests in all of this mess. Dodds had a majority of 2,081 over Sinn Fein in 2017. But at that election Dodds did not face a challenge from the Ulster Unionist party, which agreed to give the DUP a clear run to maximise the unionist vote. But this time the UUP intends to put up candidates in all 18 of Northern Ireland’s constituency because it does not want to be seen to endorse the DUP’s Brexit stance. Jeremy Corbyn is challenging Boris Johnson to face him in head-to-head televised debates during the election campaign, the Press Association reports. But it was unclear whether the Labour leader was willing to accept a challenge for a three-way discussion from Liberal Democrat leader Jo Swinson. After PMQs, Corbyn’s spokesman told journalists: As we demanded of Theresa May and she refused to agree, we would challenge Boris Johnson to agree today to head-to-head TV debates in this campaign. But when asked about a three-way discussion with Swinson, the spokesman replied: We are in discussion with the broadcasters. But there are only two people who can be prime minister at the end of this campaign and I think the British public have a clear right to see them debate head-to-head on TV and hear their cases. The number of MPs who have said they are standing down has now reached 57. Sir Alan Duncan, the former Foreign Office minister, is the latest to announce his departure. Here is my colleague Peter Walker’s story about two of the most prominent departures, the former Tory work and pensions secretary Amber Rudd and the former “de facto deputy prime minister” David Lidington. As the Mail’s Jack Doyle revealed, Mark Spencer, the Tory chief whip, sent a letter to Rudd today saying he was not willing to restore the whip to her because he did not trust her not to criticise the prime minister again. He told her: I appreciate that you surrendered the whip in an act of solidarity [with the 21 fellow Tories who had had the whip withdrawn] but I am of the view that the receipt of the whip is an honour, not a right, and as such it cannot be discarded or returned at will if it is to have any meaning. The Scottish Tories will run a “decisive and determined” election campaign promising voters there will be a “referendum free period ahead”, the party’s interim leader Jackson Carlaw said. Speaking as the Scottish Tories launched its campaign in Perth, Carlaw said his was the only party pledging no more referendums, in contrast to Nicola Sturgeon’s support for a fresh EU poll and a second Scottish independence vote next year. He told reporters: We’ve now fought several referendums. I have respected the result of them all, win or lose; Nicola Sturgeon has never respected the result of any referendum, other than the illegal one in Catalonia. [As] we go forward from here Scottish Conservatives are promising a referendum free period ahead. Nicola Sturgeon is promising another two referendums. If we want to end that division, if we want to move on, we have to keep Scotland in the UK, and no more referendums. Sturgeon, who kicked off the Scottish National party’s campaign on Wednesday at an event in Stirling at which newspaper reporters were not invited, would dispute Carlaw’s claims she respected the result of the unofficial Catalan referendum in 2017. She backed the case for staging one in principle, but did not endorse the event itself. Previously deputy Scottish leader, Carlaw replaced Ruth Davidson after she resigned unexpected in August, partly in protest at Boris Johnson’s premiership, pending a leadership contest next year, but the party’s campaign literature still promotes Davidson prominently. It sent out election letters to Tory voters signed by Davidson, a keen remain campaigner during the referendum, saying the threat of a second independence vote was a very real one. The A3 election leaflets Tory activists handed out in Perth on Wednesday did not name Carlaw once. Perth and North Perthshire is a key Tory target seat: the SNP’s Pete Wishart retained it with a wafer-thin majority of 21 votes, or 0.04%, over the Tories. Carlaw insisted that promoting Davidson prove the Tories had a strong team, which included both his predecessors – Davidson and Annabel Goldie, while sidestepping questions on whether he personally trusted Boris Johnson. He said: We’re absolutely delighted we have got former leaders that we’re able to use in this campaign. I doubt the SNP will be using Alex Salmond. I doubt the Labour party will be using Kezia Dugdale. Brexit day has now officially been changed, in UK law, from 31 October 2019 to 31 January 2020. Although the Brexit extension was agreed with the EU earlier this week, the government still had to change the date of “exit day” set out in the EU (Withdrawal) Act for EU law to continue to apply until the new exit date. Ministers have now just done this, by approving the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 (Exit Day) (Amendment) (No. 3) Regulations 2019. James Duddridge, the Brexit minister, was the person who signed it. Under the Act, ministers can change the exit date in the legislation without the need for a vote in parliament. There was a vote the last time it got changed, but that was because Theresa May agreed to hold one in response to a request from Tory Brexiters. Overseas voters have been advised to consider finding a proxy voter for December’s snap general election because of the risks their postal votes may not arrive in time. The Association of Electoral Administrators, the body which represents the UK’s returning officers and other election staff, said there were logistical challenges in getting postal ballots printed and sent out in time. After MPs voted last night to stage the election on 12 December, it has now officially recommended that option. The Cabinet Office has advice on how to apply on its website, and says an overseas voter can ask anyone to be their proxy, as long as they’re able to vote. A number of councils began floating this option some weeks ago after the threat of a snap election gained traction: Tower Hamlets and Islington councils in London were amongst a number who began contacting overseas voters by email in September raising this option. Postal ballot packs cannot be sent out until all the candidates have been confirmed. The registration deadline is 14 November while the deadline to register for a vote is 25 November. Only a few printers around the UK are contracted to produce ballot papers and postal ballot forms, adding to the pressure. The Royal Mail will also be over-stretched by Christmas post, without factoring in any bad winter weather. The AEA said: Our members have been actively working on provisional polling station bookings, alerting temporary staff and working with printers to agree orders for poll cards and postal vote packs. Election teams will now be working extended hours across seven-day weeks to make sure that the polls on 12 December and subsequent counts go smoothly. As always, we will be working with our partners at the Cabinet Office, Electoral Commission, Royal Mail and more widely to ensure that our members are kept fully supported and up to date. As postal vote packs cannot be printed until candidate nominations close in the middle of November, it may be prudent for UK voters living overseas to consider setting up a proxy vote to have someone they trust vote on their behalf on 12 December. Here is my colleague Peter Walker’s story about the opening of the Grenfell Tower debate. I won’t be covering the rest of the debate, and I will be turning back now to general election developments. Turning to the “stay put” doctrine, May says this doctrine had been developed for good reasons. The problem was, there was no flexibility in implementing this, she says. She says firefighters should get training to ensure that they know when and when not to enforce “stay put”. She says one father survived the fire because he ignored advice to stay put. Labour’s Andrew Slaughter asks May if she accepts that Grenfell Tower would have benefitted from sprinklers. Should they be fitted in all new tower blocks, and retrofitted in old ones? May says the Lakanal House report did not say sprinklers should be obligatory. May praises the bravery of the firefighters who attended the fire. But she says it is clear from the report that there are problems with the way the fire service worked that need to addressed. The emergency services must be able to work together, she says. She says, as home secretary, she oversaw the JESIP project that was intended to address this. But the report shows that there were still problems. May says she has been struck by the care that the Grenfell Tower community have shown for each other. She says others have a lot to learn from this. She says people living in the tower were raising concerns about its safety well before the fire. But those concerns were ignored, she says. She says this was one of the most shocking aspects of what happened. She says housing ministers, including Alok Sharma, now international development secretary, worked on a plan to ensure people in social housing have their concerns heard. She was the government has been working on a green paper on this. She urges the government to publish this as soon as possible. Labour’s Karen Lee asks May if it is acceptable that the survivors of the Grenfell Tower fire have not been properly rehoused. May says, in the early stages, the work to find permanent homes for survivors did not go fast enough. She says she accepts that the survivors think the government has not done enough. But every effort will be made to support these families, she says. She says it is not just housing; mental health support is important too, she says. Theresa May, the former prime minister who set up the Grenfell Tower inquiry, is speaking now. She thanks Boris Johnson for the serious tone of his speech, and pays tribute to the dignity and fortitude shown by the survivors in their fight for justice. He says it cannot have been easy for the survivors to give evidence to the inquiry. And he thanks Sir Martin Moore-Bick for his report. It is detailed, and shocking, she says. Corbyn says, although Boris Johnson spoke about building a beautiful memorial to the victims of the fire, the real memorial will be a properly funded fire service and having people living in safe buildings. Corbyn says the night of 14 June 2017 will never be forgotten. And he pays tribute to the Kensington MP, Labour’s Emma Dent Coad, who had to respond to the fire only days after being elected to parliament. Corbyn says government cuts have degraded the fire service. And Boris Johnson was involved when he was mayor of London. As mayor of London, the now prime minister was at the forefront of the cuts to our fire service. In the eight years that he was mayor, the London fire brigade was required to make gross savings of over £100m, cutting of 27 fire appliances, 552 firefighters, 324 support staff, two fire rescue units, three training appliances and closing ten London fire stations. Corbyn says it is “disgraceful” that the “stay put” policy has not been reviewed. He says concerns have been raised about this for years, including by the Fire Brigades Union, but the government has dragged its feet. Corbyn says firefighters were not to blame for the fire. While this phase of the report makes criticism of the London fire brigade we should remember; it was not firefighters that deregulated building safety standards. It wasn’t firefighters who ignored the concerns of tenants. It wasn’t firefighters who ignored a coroner’s report and failed to put sprinklers in high rise blocks and it wasn’t firefighters who put flammable cladding on Grenfell Tower. Corbyn says we are not seeing urgent action from government. Councils know that if they spend money removing cladding they may not get compensation from government, and other services may suffer. Grenfell Tower would not have happened to wealthy Londoners, he says. Corbyn criticises the government for failing to learn the lessons from previous high-rise fires, particularly the Lakanal House fire and the Shirley Towers fire. He criticises the fact that some Grenfell Tower survivors are still living in temporary accommodation. Labour’s David Lammy says many people believe what happened at Grenfell Tower amounted to corporate manslaughter. Corbyn says he hopes ministers will have heard the point Lammy made. There has be be justice, he says. He says it may be for the courts to find out if people installed cladding that they knew to be dangerous. He says the government should not stand in the way of that. Labour’s Jim Fitzpatrick says many in the media have been targeting the fire brigade. They should be waiting for the big picture to emerge, he says. Corbyn thanks Fitzpatrick for what he said. He says Fitzpatrick is a former fireman. He says the media should be “cautious” about throwing blame around, because there is another report to come. Corbyn says he has been on a number of the walks for Grenfell. He has been on many marches on his life, he says. But he has never been on anything as poignant as this – people walking silently past what is left of the Grenfell Tower. He says, as the march went passed the fire station, it was clear how much respect people have for the firefighters. Jeremy Corbyn is speaking now. He starts by thanking Johnson for the serious tone of his speech. He says many of the survivors are in the gallery watching. For them, this is another day for horrid memories, he says. He says he remembers visiting the tower himself afterwards. This was a tragedy, he says. But it was an avoidable tragedy, he says. All the survivors deserve a new home in the UK, he says. Johnson says the government will continue to support the affected families “long after the television cameras are gone”. He says it will ensure a beautiful and appropriate memorial is built to the families. The government will also ensure that regulations are tightened up in line with the recommendations. He says he is personally committed to ensuring that the lessons do not get forgotten. The survivors had every reason to hide away. But instead they have fought for the truth, and dedicated their lives to ensuring that those who died will always be remembered. He says the truth will out, justice will be done, and Grenfell Tower, and the people who called it home, will never be forgotten. Johnson says the report will be “harrowing” for survivors. But he says he hopes it will show them that Sir Martin Moore-Bick is determined to get at the truth. Johnson says he has never met any firefighter anything less than totally committed to public safety. He says he will ensure the lessons of Grenfell Tower are accepted. Where Moore-Bick says the government should take responsibility for fire safety, the government will legislate. And he says the government will accept all the report’s recommendations for central government. Johnson says it is easy for MPs to have 20/20 hindsight. But they do not have to run into fires like firefighters, he says. Labour’s Rushanara Ali asks if Johnson regrets the cuts the fire services he implemented as London mayor. And does he accept that the regulators have had their powers reduced by the government. Johnson says the fire service arrived on the scene within minutes. He says today’s report does not make any criticism about resources. Johnson says the fire presented an unprecedented challenge for the fire service. He says Moore-Bick does not question the actions of any of the rank and file firefighters at Grenfell Tower. Moore-Bick said they showed courage and “selfless devotion to duty” as they faced choking smoke and temperature up to 1,000 degrees, he says. But the report says the firefighters were faced with a situation for which they had not been properly prepared, he says. He says the report says there was a serious failure of stated policies. The failure to order an evacuation of the fire after it was clear the fire was out of control probably led to the deaths of people who could have been saved, the report says. Johnson says fire procedure in blocks of flats is based on the “stay put” policy. In most circumstances this is the best policy. But at Grenfell Tower that was not the case. By 1.30am it was clear compartmentalisation (the theory that a fire will be contained) had failed. By 1.50am it was not too late to evacuate. But senior officers could not conceive of a situation in which compartmentalisation might not work. By the time an evacuation was ordered, the tower’s single staircase was filled with impenetrable smoke. Johnson says the report is clear that the cladding was responsible for the fire escalating in the way that it did. It was because of the cladding that a routine fire ended up killing so many people. He says Moore-Bick is clear that the cladding that was installed contravened building regulations. Labour’s David Lammy asks what the government is being done to help people who are still living in flats with this cladding. Johnson says the government has allocated money to remove this cladding. He accepts that progress on getting rid of it has not been as fast as he would like. All buildings owned by central or local government have had this removed, or at least have had the removal work scheduled. But in the private sector progress is slower, he says. Matthew Offord, a Conservative, asks what will happen to owners who do not remove the cladding by the June 2020 deadline. Johnson says the government is planning to name them. The people in those blocks are safe, because of 24 hour patrols. But the government needs to go further, he says. He says the government will take action to force owners to remove this cladding. Johnson says this stage of the inquiry looked at what happened. The next stage will look at why it happened. That will consider, among other things, why concerns raised by residents were ignored. Johnson says the government will allow time for MPs to debate the report at a later point, when they have had time to read it. Johnson says for too long those living in Grenfell Tower had their voices ignored – before the fire, and after. He says when firefighters were first called to Grenfell Tower, after a fire started by a faulty fridge, they thought it was a routine call. But the fire expanded rapidly. Within 45 minutes it was clear that the inferno was out of control. He says there were almost 300 people in the tower, 72 of whom died. Many people who lived together died together, he says. And those who survived saw everything they owned reduced to dust and ash, he says. Johnson says Theresa May ordered an inquiry soon afterwards. She was determined that the survivors would not have to wait years for justice. Today Sir Martin Moore-Bick has published the first report from his inquiry, Johnson says. He says it is almost 1,000 pages long. The full report is available here. And an executive summary is here (pdf). Boris Johnson is now opening a three-hour debate on the first report from the Grenfell Tower. Our main story about the report is here. John Bercow is now thanking his staff, and his wife and children for their support. His voice briefly cracks with emotion, and afterwards there is a brief round of applause. He announces that Tricia Hillas, the canon pastor at St Paul’s Cathedral, has been appointed as the next Speaker’s chaplain. He says he is delighted that she will be the second BAME person to take up that role. She will succeed Rose Hudson-Wilkin, who has been appointed bishop of Dover. UPDATE: This is from St Paul’s Cathedral. Richard Benyon, a Conservative, says Boris Johnson once said there was more chance of his being decapitated by a frisbee than becoming PM. He urges Johnson to continue the UK’s strong record on ocean conservation. Johnson praises Benyon’s own record on this topic. John Bercow admits he is “stretching time” but he is going to take two more MPs. He calls Labour’s Ronnie Campbell, who starts by saying Bercow is the best Speaker he has seen in his time in parliament. Campbell asks about the Waspi women (women who have lost out by increases in the state pension age for women, which were not well advertised in advance). Johnson says he is looking at what more can be done. But it is a very difficult issue, he says. From the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg We’ve got six more weeks of this. Sometimes PMQs is used as an opportunity for a forensic analysis of a particular issue, but today, more than ever, it was dominated by Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn rehearsing their election sloganising. And neither leader seems to have an overwhelming advantage. Corbyn focused on the NHS in all his questions. Traditionally this has been Labour’s strongest electoral territory and Corbyn had Johnson on the defensive throughout. His arguments about NHS underfunding and increasing waiting lists were more persuasive than Johnson’s “all is fine” bravado, and Johnson was confounded when Corbyn started talking about an individual case, because Corbyn sounded more emphatic than the PM. Corbyn also made it clear that he is going to spend much of the time claiming that a Johnson Brexit would open the door to the further marketisation and privatisation of the NHS. Whether this is wholly true is contestable, but it is a fear that registers with people, and may work well on the doorstep. Johnson was weak on the actual details of how the NHS works. But his attack lines against Corbyn – accusing him of sweeping anti-Americanism, and wholesale hostility to the involvement of private firms in the NHS (even though many NHS services are privately provided anyway – were much more powerful than anything Theresa May threw at Corbyn, and delivered with relish. At the end of the exchanges Corbyn and Johnson both segued into wider themes. Corbyn’s line about the election providing a once in a lifetime opportunity for change resonated. But it wasn’t as catchy as Johnson’s argument about Labour offering two referendums, which was just about true enough to register and stick as a key election message. (Labour are certainly promising a second Brexit referendum, which would fill some of the electorate with dread. Corbyn does not favour a second Scottish independence referendum, but he has not 100% ruled one out, and a minority Labour government dependent on SNP support would probably end up agreeing to one.) Johnson’s most lively attack lines were probably those he delivered against the SNP. It is widely assumed that the Tories will lose most of their seats in Scotland, and Ian Blackford had a good line when he said Johnson would be welcome in the country because he boosted SNP support. But, even if this is true, Johnson seemed to enjoy the chance to bang on about “borders at Berwick”. (See 12.35pm.) Labour’s Karen Buck asks how Johnson can justify spending £2bn on no-deal Brexit planning. Johnson claims that under Labour’s Brexit plan the UK would have to spend an extra £1bn a month to stay in the EU. (This is misleading. Because of the transition, even if the UK were leaving the EU at the end of the month, it would still be contributing to the EU as it is now.) UPDATE: Rather than “misleading”, it would be better to say this was just untrue. The Full Fact factchecking website explains why here. Steve Baker, a Conservative, says thousands of his constituents in Wycombe have relatives living near the line of control in Kashmir. Johnson says this is a serious issue. But it is a matter for India and Pakistan, he says. He says it is not for the UK to decide what the solution must be. The SNP’s Ronnie Cowan says fireworks can cause great disturbance to people and livestock. The Scottish government carried out a consultation that showed people favour greater controls. Does Johnson agree? Johnson says the law should strike a balance. He says animal welfare is important. And Brexit will allow the government to introduce more animal welfare measures. Labour’s Jess Phillips says it is a delight to see Bercow’s children in the gallery. She knows Bercow takes his responsibilities as a parent seriously. “And now to the prime minister,” she goes on, in a clear jibe at Johnson’s own record as a parent. She asks for an assurance that schools will be properly funded, so that they do not have to close early (a problem in Phillips’ constituency). Johnson says his government will fund schools properly. Phillips’ son will have a great future under them, he says. Nigel Evans, the Tory MP, says that as a former deputy Speaker he wants to pay tribute to what John Bercow did for LGBT rights. He says a survey last week showed that the Ribble Valley (Evans’ constituency) is the happiest place in Britain. A Tory election victory will make them happier. And will Johnson deliver the Brexit people want. Johnson says he will, and he promises more police officers too. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, also offers his best wishes to John Bercow. He says he hopes Bercow enjoys his retirement. Bercow will always be welcome in Scotland, he says. And Blackford wishes England all the best for the rugby on Saturday. He says the PM’s Brexit will take a wrecking ball to the economy and cost it up to £70bn. The PM is willing to throw Scotland under his big red bus to deliver Brexit, he says. Johnson says the greatest damage that can be done to the Scottish economy would come from the SNP’s plan for independence. That would break up the most successful political partnership in history. The SNP have a crackpot plan for borders at Berwick, he says. And the SNP would hand back control of Scottish fisheries to Brussels, just at the point where control is coming back to the UK. Blackford says it is PMQs, not the time for a “rant” from the PM. He says Johnson will be welcome in Scotland; every time he comes up, he drives up support for the SNP. The SNP is the only party standing up for Scotland’s interests. Only a vote for the SNP will secure an escape route from Brexit, he says. And it will secure Scotland’s right to protect its future. Johnson says Blackford rants himself. And he says the SNP wants to conceal its record. It is not running health or education well. And if good things are happening in Scotland, it is thanks to Scottish Conservatives. He says they can be relied upon to keep the union together. Corbyn says he is surprised Johnson can keep a straight face when his government has cut so much from the Welsh budget. He says anyone who has tried to get a GP appointment will know the problems. He quotes from a letter from Gillian, who says her mother died as a direct result of the GP shortage. The care her mother got always came after long delays. He says people who have to wait should be sympathised with and supported. Johnson says there are 17,300 more doctors and 17,000 more nurses since 2010. It is time to differentiate between the politics of protest and the politics of leadership. It is all very well to side with Russia and make huge promises and flip-flop on the referendum. Leadership means standing up for the police, for the economy, for wealth creators. And above all, it means getting Brexit done. Corbyn says, coming from a PM who withdrew his own bill, that sounds a bit odd. He says Johnson should have tried to show some empathy. GPs are in short supply. The NHS has suffered its longest spending squeeze ever. He says this election is a once-in-a-generation chance to end underfunding in the NHS. The NHS is up for grabs in a Trump-style trade deal, he says. It is up for grab by US corporations. Isn’t the truth that his government is planning to sell out the NHS? Johnson says he agrees there is a stark choice. It is between economic catastrophe under Labour, which would spend £196bn on nationalisations. And there would be a political catastrophe under Labour too. There would be two referendums, on Brexit and on Scotland. The UK would suffer “toxic torpor”. He says his government will invest in schools and education and infrastructure. That is what he is going to deliver. And he will deliver a fantastic future. That is the choice: “drift and dither” under Labour, or a brighter future under the Tories. Corbyn says of course the NHS needs to import medicines. He just wants it to be done openly. He does not approve of secret talks. Patients are waiting longer for cancer treatment, he says. Why can’t Johnson put the necessary resources into the NHS. Corbyn asks why NHS privatisation has doubled under this government. Nearly £10bn is spent on the NHS under this government. Johnson says, if Corbyn is saying that he does not want dentists and Macmillan nurses to work with the NHS, he is “out of his mind”. Corbyn should pay tribute to the hard work of NHS staff. He should not talk down their achievements. He says a strong economy supports the NHS. Corbyn would wreck that. Corbyn says we should not have private companies like Virgin Health suing the NHS. NHS money should not go into making people richer. Why has the number of people waiting for an operation reached a record high? Johnson says the NHS is working harder and achieving more. He says the SNP government negotiated a much higher price for the cystic fibrosis drug than did NHS England. If people want to know what a Labour NHS would look like, look at Wales. Targets there are routinely missed, he says. Corbyn says he welcomes the cystic fibrosis drug decision. But we have not been told what the deal actually was. He says, although Johnson talks of 40 new hospitals, the real figure is just six. He says the US wants full market access to the NHS. While the government is having secret meeting with US corporations, patients here are suffering. Why has the number of patients waiting longer for urgent NHS treatment tripled over the last nine years? Johnson says waiting lists are improving. He says Corbyn should not be claiming credit for the cystic fibrosis drug decision. The drug company involved is American. Is Corbyn really saying the NHS should not be talking to companies like that? Jeremy Corbyn pays his own tribute to John Bercow. He says Bercow has stood up for parliament. He says Labour hopes to form a government and expects to be held to account. Bercow has also done his bit to open up parliament, Corbyn says. He has changed some of the strange customs, and has promoted diversity. And he has tried to change the Commons from being a gentlemen’s club and turn it into a democratic institution. Corbyn says the PM’s sellout deal with Donald Trump will mean more NHS money going into private profit. He says the Channel 4 Dispatches investigation showed the health service has been repeatedly discussed with US officials. Why does Johnson say the NHS is not on the table? Because it is not on the table, says Johnson. He pays tribute to the way the NHS has recently made a cystic fibrosis drug available. The NHS is getting more money because the economy has been growing under the Tories, he says. Johnson confirms that the scheme for giving grants to thalidomide victims, which is due to end soon, will be reviewed with a view to it continuing. Labour’s Alan Whitehead asks about the news that the Tory manifesto will be written by a lobbyist for the fracking industry. Johnson says the government will soon make an announcement about fracking. But this government yields to no one in its enthusiasm to cut carbon emissions, he says. Boris Johnson starts by saying that after PMQs he will open the debate on the Grenfell Tower fire report. He goes on to pay tribute to John Bercow, the Speaker, saying this is his last PMQs. He says Bercow has peppered the chamber with comments like some tennis player machine. (Bercow is a huge tennis fan, and an accomplished player himself.) He says he disagrees with some of Bercow’s innovations as Speaker. But Bercow has done more than anyone since Stephen Hawking to “stretch time” in the chamber. (See 12.03pm.) From Sky’s Lewis Goodall From ITV’s Joe Pike PMQs is about to start. It is only Boris Johnson’s third PMQs since he became prime minister in July. Here is an interesting question from below the line. Psephologists will tell you that there is a minor incumbency advantage in election; ie, sitting candidates do better all other factors considered than new candidates, because voters know who they are. However, the impact is marginal. And since both the Conservatives and Labour have broadly similar numbers of MPs standing down, it is hard to see this factor making a difference. Some of the MPs standing down represent very safe seats. But in places like Putney, which is 35th on a list of Labour target seats and where Justine Greening is standing down, and Ashfield, 10th on a list of Tory target seats and where Gloria De Piero is standing down, the departure of an incumbent might arguably make a bit of a difference. Here is an up-to-date list of MPs standing down from the Institute for Government’s Gavin Freeguard. What is probably more significant is how these departures will affect the composition of the parliamentary Conservative party and the parliamentary Labour party after the election. There are clearly some people around Boris Johnson who want to purge his party of remainers like Philip Hammond. And, in Labour, replacing centrists with leftwingers who back the Corbyn project has long been an ambition of those in the leader’s circle. It is too early to be know quite to what extent both these parties will be transformed after the election, but in both parties the post-election centre of gravity will probably be in a slightly different place. You can read all of the Guardian’s election 2019 coverage here, including my colleague Dan Sabbagh’s analysis of the latest polling. And here are three other articles from today’s papers about the polling situation. Prof Sir John Curtice, the BBC’s lead polling expert, says in an article in the Times (paywall) Boris Johnson cannot afford not to achieve a majority. If the substantial net swing from Labour to Conservative in the present polls were to be realised at the ballot box, there are nearly 50 Labour seats that would fall into the Tory column. Winning those would more than compensate for losses elsewhere. Moreover, they are disproportionately located in the north of England and the Midlands, where many a voter backed leave, though, at 55%, the average support for leave in these seats was only somewhat above the 52% vote across the country as a whole. But while Mr Johnson’s hopes rest on taking Labour seats, the principal foundation underpinning his lead over Mr Corbyn’s party is not any marked success in winning over Labour votes. Rather it rests on his success in squeezing support for the Brexit party ... Above all, this is a contest that Mr Johnson cannot afford to emerge from without an overall majority. Biggest party in a hung parliament will not do. In that event, Labour will potentially be able to look to the Liberal Democrats and the SNP for support – for they all want to stop Mr Johnson’s Brexit deal in its tracks. The academic Matthew Goodwin says in the Daily Telegraph (paywall) that it is possible for Johnson to win a majority. One crucial piece of the puzzle is in Labour leave seats. Two years ago, Theresa May won only six of these seats and so found herself unable to compensate for losses elsewhere. This time around, Johnson will have to do much better. If his invasion of Labour Brexit territory can go as far as Wolverhampton North East, which was last Tory in 1987, or Stoke-on-Trent North, which has never been held by the Conservatives in the postwar era, a wave of other pro-Brexit Labour seats will likely turn blue, from Dudley North to Barrow and Furness, from Ashfield to Bishop Auckland. A strong majority would surely follow. Consolidating the leave vote would be made infinitely easier were the Brexit party to stand down, or the two parties to form some kind of pact. May did manage to squeeze the Ukip vote down to less than 2%. Farage is polling at about 10%. Sebastian Payne and John Burns-Murdoch in the Financial Times (paywall) say Boris Johnson is in much the same position as Theresa May was at the start of the 2017 campaign. An analysis by the Financial Times of the opinion polls suggests Mr Johnson’s party is facing an electoral landscape hardly changed since the 2017 election was called. Labour was polling on 25% on Tuesday, exactly the same level as when Mrs May called her snap vote. Worryingly for Mr Johnson, however, the Conservatives are significantly further behind than at the start of the last campaign. Whereas the Tories were polling 44% on the day the previous election was called, they are currently projected to garner 36% share of the vote. The political circumstances mirror those of Mrs May who was seeking to win a majority to secure a Brexit deal; Mr Johnson is doing so to achieve the same goal. From the Times’ Steven Swinford Here is Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, on tactical voting. (See 10.32am.) Boris Johnson is on course to win a Commons majority unless remain voters work tactically to block a Tory victory and ensure an EU-backing leadership, according to research. As PA Media reports, the Conservatives would achieve a majority of 44 if no tactical voting took place but anti-Brexit voters could scupper this, according to a study by the Best for Britain campaign. If fewer than a third of remain voters (30%) used their vote tactically they could swing the election to deny the prime minister and to secure a remain majority of four. The research by the anti-Brexit campaign was based on seat-by-seat analysis of 46,000 people over September and October and was released this morning, PA reports. The study does not seem to be online yet, but when it goes up, I will post a link. Now we’re up to 51 MPs standing down. (See 10.04am.) Amber Rudd, the former Conservative work and pensions secretary, who sits as an independent, has announced that she won’t stand as a candidate at the election. Rudd had been talking about possibly standing as an independent (see 9.43am.) But, in an interview with the Evening Standard (edited by her Tory ally, the former chancellor George Osborne), she hinted that she might try to return in the future. She said: I’m not finished with politics, I’m just not standing at this election. Rudd also insisted that her relations with Boris Johnson were good. She told the paper: I spoke to the prime minister and had a good meeting with him a few days ago. I’m really confident of my position. I will be leaving the House of Commons on perfectly good terms with the prime minister and I want him to succeed. That is not how it was a few weeks ago. When she resigned from cabinet in early September, Rudd accused Johnson of “an assault on decency and democracy” because he had removed the whip from the 21 Tories who rebelled over Brexit. She also said she did not think Johnson was seriously committed to getting a Brexit deal. That judgment is now looking rash, in the light of the fact that Johnson did manage to negotiate a Brexit deal with the EU that passed its second reading in the Commons, although it is arguable that Johnson committed properly to a deal only when rebels like Rudd made it clear to him that a no-deal Brexit would be unacceptable to parliament. The Labour MP Adrian Bailey, 73, who represents West Bromwich West, has also announced he is standing down, the Express and Star reports. Gavin Freeguard from the Institute for Government, who is keeping a tally, says Bailey’s decision takes the number of MPs leaving parliament to 49 – although his table does not include Patrick McLoughlin (see 9.59am), and so there are now at least 50 MPs leaving. The Tory MP Sir Patrick McLoughlin, a former chief whip and former transport secretary, has announced that he is standing down. He is the only former miner in the Conservative parliamentary party and got involved in Tory politics after he was one of the miners who carried on working during the 1984-85 strike. Aged 62, the MP for the Derbyshire Dales has been in parliament since 1986. From Sky’s Sam Coates Last night, as my colleague Peter Walker reports, the Tories announced that 10 of the MPs who had the whip withdrawn after rebelling on Brexit were being readmitted to the parliamentary party. But the list did not include Amber Rudd, who voluntarily resigned the whip when she resigned as work and pensions secretary, also in protest over Boris Johnson’s Brexit policy. This morning on the Today programme, Nick Robinson said he had heard Rudd was coming back to the party. But it seems the situation is not straightforward. These are from the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg and the Spectator’s James Forsyth. One problem might be that Rudd has already told her constituents that she does not want to stand again in Hastings and Rye, where she had a majority of only 346 at the last election. In recent interviews, she said she might stand as an independent somewhere else, but she has not committed herself to a particular constituency. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, will ask the UK government for a section 30 order to proceed with planning a second independence referendum before the end of this year, despite the general election. Speaking to the National newspaper, her spokesman insisted she would make the request this “calendar year”, saying: As the first minister has made clear, we will be demanding the transfer of power for a referendum before the end of this calendar year. Independence will be at the very heart of this election campaign, and another win for the SNP will be an unequivocal and irresistible demand for Scotland’s right to choose its own future. This assurance comes despite practical concerns about when exactly Boris Johnson’s government would be able to respond to the request, given that the Commons will shortly be dissolved and no policy announcements are made during the campaign period. Meanwhile, the Scottish secretary, Alister Jack, has left open the possibility of a no-deal Brexit. Speaking to BBC Scotland’s Good Morning Scotland programme, he said: “31 January is the next threat if you like for a no-deal Brexit, that’s the next deadline.” Jack added: “We have a deal which we’re going to put in our manifesto and we’re asking people to give us a mandate to put that deal through and that will bring the matter to a conclusion”. In his Today interview, Matt Hancock, the health secretary, was asked if drug pricing would be on the agenda in trade talks with the US after Brexit. The question was prompted by the Channel 4 Dispatches investigation saying drug pricing has been discussed at meetings between UK and US officials. Hancock said drug prices would be “off the table” in a future trade deal. Asked why it had come up in talks, as Dispatches revealed, he replied: It is off the table. There has been no agreement and no formal meetings. There is no mandate for how these trade talks will happen. He also said it was “against the government’s policy to make any changes to drug pricing”. Good morning. I’m Andrew Sparrow, taking over from Mattha Busby. It may feel like the first full day of the 2019 election campaign, but the legislation for the December poll has not cleared parliament yet and the Commons is still sitting. Here are the items on the agenda for the day. 10am: The first report from the public inquiry into the Grenfell Tower fire is published. 10am: The anti-Brexit Best for Britain campaign publishes research intended to assist anti-Brexit tactical voting at the election. 11am: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, launches the SNP’s general election campaign at an event in Stirling. 12pm: Boris Johnson faces Jeremy Corbyn at PMQs. Around 1pm: Johnson is expected to make a statement to MPs about the Grenfell Tower fire report. There will then be a three-hour debate on the report. After 3.30pm: Peers begin their debate on the early parliamentary general election bill. It is due to clear all its Lords stages today. In theory, peers could amend the bill but in reality, given that the House of Commons has agreed to an early election with the backing of all the main parties, it is very hard to imagine circumstances in which unelected peers would want to tamper with this legislation. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, was asked if he would like to apologise on behalf of the Conservative party for breaking their “do or die” promise that Brexit would take place on 31 October. He told the Today programme: No. Because it’s parliament that’s blocked delivering Brexit. Asked if he could clear up whether Amber Rudd would be a Tory candidate in the election, Hancock said: “I don’t know. I’m not in the whips office.” He said he considers Rudd a good friend, adding: “Amber chose to resign from the Conservative party,”, before adding: “What I’d say is the Conservative party is at its best when we’re a broad church.” He was questioned over his previous statements regarding a general election, after he said that “people didn’t want to do it” and it was “an unacceptable risk”. “Well I’m certainly not yearning for a general election and haven’t been, but its the only way to move the country forward,” the MP, who has a 17,000 majority in West Suffolk, said, adding: “We have to respect the result of the referendum because we’re democrats.” Asked if he thought the public could punish the Tories for not delivering Brexit this year: I don’t think anyone in this country thinks that that Boris Johnson hasn’t been doing everything he possibly can to deliver on Brexit. He was the architect of the campaign to leave and he’s now succeeded in getting a new deal with the EU, which many people said was impossible. It’s parliament that has blocked delivering Brexit and that’s why we need a general election. Parliament was given the vote and chose to delay. He said the Tory party had an “optimistic, positive one nation agenda rooted in the centre ground of British politics”, and that this was not the case in 2017. On what the party is offering voters, Hancock said: What we’re proposing is to be able to deliver Brexit on a deal, and then to be able to get on to the NHS, to having 20,000 more police, to the increases in spending on schools and strengthening school standards, on to strengthening the environment, and all the other things on the domestic agenda that only we can deliver, because it’s only by having a majority in parliament we’ll be able to move beyond all the things that have blocked this from all happening in the last few years. Asked if he had doubts about a general election, John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, said the Lib Dems “went into coalition with the Tories basically and the SNP jumped ship”. Meanwhile, no deal was taken off the agenda. Bring it on, let’s have a go, despite it being December and cold and dark .. we’re going to have a real go at this and I think we’ll win. I think we’ll have a majority government by Christmas, so I can’t think of a better Christmas present. Asked on the Today programme about Jeremy Corbyn’s personal popularity, McDonnell pointed towards Boris Johnson’s own ratings and said the Labour leader was “one of the best campaigners I’ve ever seen”. He said Labour in government would make sure there is a “sensible, Brexit option” in contrast to the “disaster” deal being offered by the Conservatives, but also give people the option to remain. “We’re saying, let the people decide.” On the possibility of deciding to go forward as an overtly pro-remain party, McDonnell said: “We’re a much more democratic party than that.” He added there would be “a range of views” in Labour, “like every political party”, confirming the party would seek to convey a nuanced message on doorsteps. The basic principle for us, not like the Lib Dems who are just saying ‘we’re just going to revoke, that’s it’, not like the Tories who are saying ‘we’re going to foist upon you virtually a no deal to damage the economy’, we’re saying – democracy, let the people decide. On the possible ending of EU freedom of movement laws, McDonnell said the UK needed immigration into the country. “We’re going to have an immigration policy which has as much freedom of movement as possible.” McDonnell turned his fire on to the government at the end of the interview. People aren’t mugs out there. They’ve listened to these Tories, they’ve seen what they’ve done over this near decade to our public services, they’ve seen what they’ve done to their living standards and quite honestly, most of them will never forgive them for what they have done. Upon the reinstatement of 10 Tory rebels who had the whip removed after backing legislation criticised as delaying Brexit, the Today programme has been speaking to former minister Ed Vaizey – who has returned – and Dominic Grieve, who has not. Asked what he had to be welcomed back to the fold, Vaizey said: I had an argument with the prime minister about no deal, and I voted against him to try and get no deal off the table but I have voted with the government ever since. Not because I was sucking up to the prime minister to try to get the whip back but because I wasn’t having arguments with him about his deal or the programme motion and timetable for his deal. So I suspect that is why I’ve got the whip back and others haven’t. Dominic has been a heroic figure in parliament. I’m perhaps, you can either take it, weak or vacillating or pragmatic, depending on your glass half-full, glass half-empty perspective. Asked whether the Conservatives would be fighting the election as a narrow, ideological, factional party, he said: “Yes.” Grieve, the former attorney general, said he had fundamental disagreements with Boris Johnson over his leadership and Brexit, and that he assumed the Tories would put a candidate up against him in his constituency of Beaconsfield. This deal is extraordinarily dangerous for the future of our country. It carries with it the implication for the breakup of the United Kingdom and I think also that the likely outcome particularly because of the role of the [European Research Group] in the party that we are going to end up at the end of transition, which is only a few months away now, in fact at risk of crashing out. The very thing Ed doesn’t want. If the prime minister wins a working majority .. in six months we will be in very difficult and dangerous waters for our country. I will run as an independent. I’ve made that decision. I have no idea what the outcome will be. Logically, I probably ought to lose. It’s a very safe Conservative seat. And if normal loyalties prevail then a Conservative candidate will be elected against me. But I think my constituents are entitled to a choice. The Liberal Democrats leader, Jo Swinson, has said her party’s “stop Brexit” message is resonating with remainers as she positioned herself as a future prime minister. She told the Today programme: People recognise our consistency and standing up for what we believe in. I don’t think that the choice that we are being offered between Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn is anywhere near good enough. Neither of those men are fit to lead our country and be prime minister. And I know there are millions of people out there who are longing for a positive alternative that is looking to the future. She said polling shows they are “within a small swing” of winning “hundreds of seats”, citing the massive increase in seats for the SNP in 2015 as evidence of sudden swings. Asked if she was ruling out supporting either Johnson or Corbyn as prime minister, Swinson said: I can’t be clearer. Neither Boris Johnson nor Corbyn is fit to be prime minister. Our country deserves a better choice, and I am standing as candidate to be prime minister. Asked if she would be prepared to enter into some kind of informal deal with the Tories or Labour without those two men at the helm, she said they are parties that want to “force through Brexit on our country”. She added: It’s going to be bad for our country. And they both have that shared vision for the future. The Liberal Democrats have a different positive alternative vision for the future. Laura Parker, Momentum’s national co-ordinator, says it would be “madness to stick with things as they are” and she claims that the “vast majority” of Labour MPs, voters and “most of the public” understand there is now an opportunity for fundamental change. “People can no longer tolerate the incompetence and callousness, and I would say dishonesty, of this government,” she told the Today programme. Asked if she will be giving advice on voting tactically, Parker said: We will be advising all of our members to get out there and campaign for Labour, wherever they are in the country. It’s only a Labour government that will both end this Tory Brexit madness and end austerity and help us rebuild Britain. Ben Bradshaw, MP and senior Labour backbencher, said his party will do better in the election than some may think, and said Labour will be “totally united” as candidates and MPs. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I actually think Labour will do much much better than the pundits and a lot of commentators are predicting. The reason that we thought the referendum was the best way is a democratic reason. In a binary issue like Brexit, the only way of resolving that with democratic legitimacy is to hold another referendum and Labour is the only party offering that now in the general election. That’s why you have to vote Labour if you want to stop Brexit. Conservatives’ manifesto being written by fracking lobbyist The Conservatives’ election manifesto is being written by a lobbyist for the fracking company Cuadrilla and major internet companies such as Amazon and Facebook, raising concerns about whether her paying clients could influence the party’s policies. Rachel Wolf is drawing up the Conservatives’ platform for the general election while continuing to work as a partner at Public First, a business that lobbies ministers on behalf of the shale gas industry. Cuadrilla is facing a battle to keep its fracking projects on track in the UK at a time when public opinion is moving against the extraction of shale gas, with the Labour party threatening to ban the practice altogether. Her company also represents the Internet Association, the trade body for major tech companies including Uber, Twitter, Facebook, Google, Airbnb, Microsoft and Amazon. The organisation is attempting to influence the government’s policies on online harms, the regulation of social media and taxes on digital companies – all of which are likely to feature in some form in the Conservative manifesto. There is no suggestion Wolf is breaking any rules by writing the Conservative manifesto while running a lobbying company representing major businesses, given her company makes regular declarations of its clients to the public lobbying registrar in line with current legal requirements. However, Francis Ingham, of the Public Relations and Communications Association, which represents many leading PR and lobbying agencies, but not Public First, said: “Communications professionals have a duty to avoid conflicts of interests. There is never an excuse. The PRCA code – to which all members are bound – is explicit in this regard.” Jon Trickett, the shadow cabinet minister with responsibility for the lobbying industry, said it was an “outrage to democracy that the frackers, the tax avoiders and the zero-hour exploiters will have the biggest say when it comes to Tory policy”. He pledged that a Labour government would strengthen lobbying regulations if it won the next general election. Full story is here: So, how are the parties selling themselves in these early days of the campaign that hasn’t officially launched yet? Well, the announcement of the general election barely been made before the online campaigns kicked off with videos on social media. The indisputable winner of the first round is Labour, which not only has the best backing track (Invincible by US rapper Jonezen), but has also racked up the most views – 1.2m at the time of writing – by a very large margin. Though points to the Lib Dems who didn’t launch with a campaign video, but did launch a Bring It On campaign meme. Very late last night Owen Smith, Labour MP for Pontypridd, and the man who made a bid to topple Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader in 2016, announced he would not be standing in the election. Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the day’s political news and won’t there be a lot of it over the next six weeks? So, we’re going to have an election, which means the politicians and party machines will be in overdrive trying to convince you of who to vote for. We’ll bring you the news, the speeches, the campaign events, the pitches, the pictures and the gaffes from the campaign trail over the next six weeks. As for today, the Lords are expected to debate the early parliamentary general election bill at 3:30pm, giving the rubber stamp of approval to the 12 December election. Boris Johnson will face prime minister’s questions at midday before a general debate on the Grenfell Tower inquiry. If the Lords pass Johnson’s legislation, as is expected, parliament will sit for one more week before dissolving next Wednesday for a campaign of five weeks. Speaking in the House of Commons yesterday, Johnson argued that a “new and revitalised” parliament was needed to take Britain out of the European Union. “We are left with no choice but to go to the country to break free from this impasse,” he told MPs. But he later struck a cautious note, telling a backbench meeting of Tory MPs that it would be “a tough election but we will do the best we can”. He told them he had not wanted an election but was forced to seek one because Labour would have “sliced and diced” his Brexit legislation beyond recognition. In a move to unite his party, the prime minister decided to readmit 10 of the 21 MPs he expelled last month for defying his Brexit plan. As always, you can get in touch with me on Twitter and via email (kate.lyons@theguardian.com), I’ll be at the helm for the next hour or so before handing over to my colleagues who will steer you through for the rest of the day.
4||AI becomes grandmaster in 'fiendishly complex' StarCraft IIAn artificial intelligence (AI) system has reached the highest rank of StarCraft II, the fiendishly complex and wildly popular computer game, in a landmark achievement for the field. DeepMind’s AlphaStar outperformed 99.8% of registered human players to attain grandmaster level at the game, which sees opponents build civilisations and battle their inventive, warmongering alien neighbours. The AI system mastered the game after 44 days of training, which involved learning from recordings of the best human players and then going up against itself and versions of the programme that intentionally tested its weaknesses. “AlphaStar has become the first AI system to reach the top tier of human performance in any professionally played e-sport on the full unrestricted game under professionally approved conditions,” said David Silver, a researcher at DeepMind. More than $31m in prize money has been handed out from thousands of StarCraft II e-sport tournaments since the game was released in 2010. Players start with a small number of worker units that can gather resources, construct buildings, develop new units and technologies, and embark on scouting missions to gain intelligence on opponents. Top players need adaptable short and long-term strategies to grow and defend their bases while laying waste to the opposition. To complicate matters, players cannot see the whole “map” of the game, so decisions are made on partial information. “Ever since computers cracked Go, chess and poker, the game of StarCraft has emerged, essentially by consensus from the community, as the next grand challenge for AI,” Silver said. “It’s considered to be the game which is most at the limit of human capabilities.” DeepMind created AlphaStar “agents” that play as each of the races in the game, namely Protoss, Terran and Zerg. Each race has different capabilities and technologies which favour distinct defensive and offensive strategies. AlphaStar first learned the basics from watching top human players. Then it entered the “AlphaStar league” where it played not only itself, but “exploiter” agents, which are versions of the AI that specifically targeted AlphaStar’s weak points. The training ensured that AlphaStar became a formidable opponent against all three races and every strategy. The DeepMind team restricted AlphaStar’s capabilities, ensuring for example that it could not perform moves at superhuman speeds. This proved crucial to the AI’s success, because instead of beating humans through speed alone, it was forced to learn winning long-term strategies. Oriol Vinyals, the lead researcher on the project, said AIs like AlphaStar could potentially be used to improve personal assistants, self-driving cars, weather predictions and climate models. The work was published in the scientific journal Nature. Dan Klein, a professor of computer science at the University of California at Berkeley, who was not involved in the work, said it was an exciting achievement driven by key advances. “What’s great about StarCraft as a testbed for AI is that all its complexities happen at once,” he said. While DeepMind states that it will never be involved in military work, and Starcraft II is not a realistic war simulation, the results will be of interest to the military, said Noel Sharkey, emeritus professor of AI and robotics at the University of Sheffield. In March, a US government report described how AI enriched battlefield simulations and allowed wargamers to assess the potential outcomes of different tactics. “Military analysts will certainly be eyeing the successful AlphaStar real-time strategies as a clear example of the advantages of AI for battlefield planning. But this is an extremely dangerous idea with the potential for humanitarian disaster. AlphaStar learns strategy from big data in one particular environment. The data from conflicts such as Syria and Yemen would be too sparse to be of use,” said Sharkey. “And as DeepMind explained at a recent United Nations event, such methods would be highly dangerous for weapons control as the moves are unpredictable and can be creative in unexpected ways. This is against the laws that govern armed conflict.”
4||'The challenge was to play like a human': AI takes on the gamersWhen DeepMind, Google’s AI research outfit, set out to demonstrate its latest breakthrough, it had to confront an added twist: how do you set your robot free to play games on the internet without anyone realising they’re competing against it? The company caused a stir when it announced that its AlphaGo AI had beaten a world-class player at the ancient Asian boardgame Go. A few months later, it beat the world number one player. But for the deeply strategic real-time war game StarCraft II, it had a different goal: to reach “grandmaster” standard – putting it in the top 200 players worldwide – on the game’s public servers, building its ranking the same way any human player would. That meant being matched with a steadily improving cadre of other human players, and winning against them consistently enough to be promoted into those lofty ranks. StarCraft may seem like an odd next step, for a team that has previously taken on chess and Go, but the game has some qualities that make it interesting to researchers. It’s real-time, with millions upon millions of possible actions each second, and a vastly more complex roster than the six pieces of chess. Most importantly, it features hidden information: for the first few minutes of the game, it’s impossible to even see what your opponent is doing, let alone work out what they’re planning. That means strategies have to be flexible enough to account for surprises, and need to incorporate mind-games as well: feints and ambushes are possible in a way they aren’t in chess. And, of course, there’s an advantage in a community where even the best players in the world can be found playing each other online, ranked according to a very public algorithm, with a ton of data flying around. Players were told the new AI, dubbed AlphaStar, would be online, and were given the option of opting-in to play it, but in order to ensure it achieved its rank fairly, it had to play its games anonymously, so that opponents didn’t spend more effort trying to trick it or break it than they did trying to win. “There was a bit of a meme where people started asking ‘are you AlphaStar’ to others,” said DeepMind’s David Silver, one of the company’s co-founders and a lead author on the Nature paper announcing the StarCraft II victory, with a laugh. “We had the policy to just not chat – other than wishing people good luck, and then ‘good game’ at the end.” Staying silent during the game is not uncommon. But the need to remain anonymous did also turn the experience from a test of raw skill into a sort of “Turing test for video games”, said Silver’s colleague Oriol Vinyals. “AlphaStar needed to play like a good human, not like a superhuman.” That meant taking a different approach from previous StarCraft AIs, which tended to lean on the abilities that only a computer could have. In a game where human competitors track their “actions per minute”, for instance – how many times they use their mouse or keyboard – a professional-level player may hit three or four hundred, while some AIs were acting thousands or tens of thousands of times over a sixty second period. At other times, AIs were given near omniscience, with all the information available over the entire map plugged into their systems at once. “We really wanted to have an interface that we believe was reasonable from a capability standpoint,” says Vinyals. “So we added this notion of a camera view, which is very crucial for players to control where in the map they’re actually focusing on, and we also reduced the peak actions per minute, to 22 actions in a span of five seconds.” In other words, the AI is forced to play much more like a human, only being able to have a portion of the game world “on screen” at any one time, and clicking a reasonably limited amount of times. All of which is moot if the AI gives itself away by, well, playing like a robot. Luckily, it doesn’t – quite. In the first series of matches played publicly, in January, AlphaStar did exhibit one slightly mechanistic behaviour, falling prey to an almost cartoonish tactic where its opponent, the human player MaNa, moved a unit into and out of its field of view, changing its behaviour each time. Picture Winnie the Pooh following his own footsteps in the snow, and you’d get an idea of what the approach looked like. Hardly elegant, but it worked for MaNa to eke out the only win the humans scored over those first 11 matches. More interestingly, the AI – which was initially trained through imitation learning, watching how human players performed to learn the basics of the game – did develop its own understanding of the best tactical play, occasionally differing from the generally accepted practice among pros. The intricacies are a bit specialist (Playing as Protoss, for instance, AlphaStar moved its probes to a second nexus earlier in the game than was seen as efficient), but reinforce the idea that simply teaching an AI to perform a task to human level can improve our understanding of the work itself. “AlphaStar has been an amazing experience,” Oriol says. “Not because we beat most humans – I mean, we’ve beaten 99.8%, let’s not forget the 0.2% that are quite incredible. But it’s more like that we were able to see what some limitations might be, to inspire research that will come, you know, hopefully in the next few months or years and decades. Picking harder and harder problems and trying to be very good at them has been clearly the way so far.”
0||Eoin Morgan backs England rookies for T20 action against New ZealandThree months on from the heart-stopping super-over finish to the World Cup at Lord’s, England and New Zealand will be reunited for the start of a five-match Twenty20 series amid the more sedate surroundings of the picturesque Hagley Oval. Friday’s opener in Christchurch could scarcely be further from that famous day by way of distance, magnitude or personnel. Kane Williamson, so gracious after his Black Caps side were denied by the barest of margins, is lying low until the Tests due to a longstanding hip issue, while the tourists have rested a raft of senior players. Though symptomatic of the modern schedule, it means plenty of fresh English faces to take in. As well as being a first assignment for Chris Silverwood as head coach, the squad features six uncapped rookies – Tom Banton, Saqib Mahmood, Lewis Gregory, Pat Brown, Sam Curran and Matt Parkinson – and a host of past fringe players – Dawid Malan, Sam Billings, James Vince and Joe Denly – all out to impress. Eoin Morgan, the white-ball captain, insisted his first team will be tough to crack once the likes of Jason Roy, Jos Buttler, Ben Stokes, Jofra Archer and Moeen Ali return (Joe Root feels less of a certainty). But with T20 World Cups in Australia and India in the next two years, there is a desire to widen the pool of players. “First and foremost we want to try and win the series,” said Morgan. “We’ll pick teams that we feel are good enough to win the games but also we need to look at these [uncapped] guys – there’s no use not picking them in the XI. The majority of the guys will definitely get games and exposure to find more out about them.” Morgan himself needed the summer of all summers to end before he could fully process what had transpired and assess his occasionally angry lower back before deciding to continue as captain. The result is another 12 months at the very least, even if the 33-year-old is telling himself to look further. He said: “We have a special group of players at the moment. I feel very lucky to lead and I think we can do something even more special down the line. I won’t say I’ll be finished after the next T20 World Cup as I’d be afraid I’ll only creep over the line and maybe tail off. I don’t want to let anyone down. I want to drive through to Australia and then make a call after that.” Such clarity of thought is typical of Morgan, so too the appraisal of his new partnership with Silverwood. Root’s Test team may require some fresh leadership from the head coach but for limited-overs cricket it is very much a case of putting the support into the term “support staff”. Morgan said: “It’s been seamless. We have a lot of leaders in the group and they drive the intensity of practice. They are very demanding in terms of what they want from the coaches. So facilitating that and coming back with stuff that’s challenging is important. Silvers is the man to do that.” England go into the opener after a win and a defeat in the warm-ups, with Morgan describing the latter, inflicted by a century from Colin Munro, as the more instructive for the newcomers. Jonny Bairstow – one of only three English survivors from the World Cup final along with Morgan and Adil Rashid, and fresh from an unbeaten 78 in the first outing – is clearly one to watch too after being left out of the Tests that follow. Should there be a tie over the course of the next five matches, a super over will follow. But unlike on 14 July, these will keep being played until an outright winner emerges, rather than reverting to boundaries struck. How New Zealand, currently cracking wry jokes about a run of English sporting success after last Saturday’s rugby union semi-final defeat for the All Blacks, must wish this change had come earlier.
1||Russia-backed Syria constitution talks begin in GenevaRussia underscored its role in the political future of Syria as the Moscow-backed Syrian constitutional committee met for the first time under UN auspices to chart a political settlement to end the eight-and-a-half-year civil war. The meeting – a key proposal from Moscow – in Geneva is being overseen by the UN special envoy for Syria Geir Pederson with expectations low that the Syrian government, in an increasingly strong military position, will see the need to make any major political concessions to secure western recognition. The talks are being held against the backdrop of fresh fighting in north-east Syria between the Syrian army and Turkish-backed troops. The clashes took place near the border town of Ras al-Ayn on Wednesday, Syrian state media reported, as Ankara warned it reserved the right to launch another cross-border offensive against Kurdish forces in the region. Foreign ministers from Russia, Iran and Turkey were in Geneva on Tuesday night to meet negotiators, even though Pedersen had asked all countries to stay away and leave the talks as an exclusively “Syrian owned, Syrian led process”. The three countries put out a joint statement before the opening, welcoming the committee they helped to create and insisting no external timetable should be imposed upon its work. But in a sign of Russia’s influence, the government and some of the opposition delegation arrived in Geneva on a Russian-chartered plane. The aim of the meeting is to agree a new constitution for Syria, but it is unclear if this will mean redrafting the existing constitution, written in 2012, or starting from scratch. No deadline has been set for the end of talks, but Pedersen has said all sides had promised to work expeditiously. Speaking at the opening ceremony in Geneva, the Syrian opposition co-chair, Hadi al-Bahra, said: “The memory of 1 million victims must guide us out of this dark tunnel.” He added: “It is time for us to believe that victory in Syria is achieving justice and peace, not winning the war. We must respect the right of families to know the fate of their loved ones.” He pointed out that 65% of Syrian infrastructure had been destroyed since the war started – compared with the 60% that had been destroyed in Germany in the second world war – and that half the country’s population had been displaced or had become refugees. The Syrian government co-chair, Ahmad Kuzbari, gave little ground in his speech, pointing out the country already had a modern constitution, but said he was open to considering “any possible amendments or even a new constitution that would improve the reality of our people”. He said the outcome had to ensure the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria, alongside the rejection of any direct or indirect interference in Syrian affairs. Pederson, sitting between the two chairs, acknowledged it was hard for the 150 people to be in the same room, but the very fact the meeting was happening could be considered a sign of hope. Previous Syria peace talks in Geneva foundered over a Russian unwillingness to press the negotiating team of President Bashar al-Assad to engage, but the current process is a largely Russian construct, and the most senior Russian diplomat on Syria, Alexander Lavrentiev, has been preparing the ground. Donald Trump, by withdrawing US troops from north-east Syria, has reduced the little remaining leverage Washington possessed at the talks. Russia first proposed a 150-strong committee in January 2018 at a meeting in the Black Sea resort of Sochi, and the idea was implicitly seen as Moscow’s alternative to the UN’s brokerage. The committee has 50 Syrian government delegates loyal to the Syrian president,, 50 members of the Syrian opposition largely supported by Turkey and Saudi Arabia, and 50 civilian representatives. Disputes between the regional powers over the composition of the civilian group, some still unresolved, held up the committee being announced until September. The weakened opposition team is a coalition of at least five different platforms and has nominated Hadi Bahra as co-chair for the committee. Bahra said his side had already prepared a draft constitution, adding that he believed the negotiations need not last longer than two to six months. A smaller tripartite 45-strong committee is due to undertake the detailed drafting of the constitution. The talks – the fourth attempt to end the war through negotiation – face myriad obstacles and Pedersen has played down the prospect of a breakthrough. One difficulty is that the committee must adopt resolutions either by consensus or with a 75% majority, seen by some as a recipe for paralysis. Although seven Kurds are on the committee, the political wing of the Kurdish Syrian Democratic Forces in north-east Syria has been excluded. The Kurdish Syrian autonomous administration objected to the exclusion on Monday. Istanbul regards the Kurdish YPG, the primary component of the Syrian Democratic Forces, as the political wing of the “terrorist” PKK, and is driving their forces from the border with Turkey. Deserted by their former allies, the US, the YPG has been forced to start Russian-brokered talks to form a military deal with Assad’s forces. Assad in the past has opposed a federated Syria with an semi-autonomous Kurdish province. Assad’s foreign minister, Walid al-Muallem, has already warned that “the hostile Turkish incursion into north-east Syria seriously threatens the work of the constitutional committee”. There is intense pressure on the Syrian opposition to recognise the weakness of their position and scale back their demands. They have already complained the committee’s remit abandons previous vital commitments in UN resolutions to form a transitional governing body within six months, release detainees and provide information on missing persons. Pederson, like his predecessor, Staffan de Mistura, is searching for positives, pointing out that the committee – with terms of reference and core rules of procedure – marks the first political agreement between the government of Syria and the opposition. The committee also commits the government and the opposition, and their nominees, to sit together face-to-face in dialogue and negotiations.
10||Rex Tillerson denies Exxon misled investors over climate crisisRex Tillerson, the former chief executive of ExxonMobil and former secretary of state in the Trump administration, has denied in court that the oil and gas giant committed fraud by concealing from investors the true financial impact of the climate crisis. Tillerson told the New York supreme court that Exxon had acted properly over disclosing its financial exposure to climate-related regulations while he was chief executive. Leticia James, the New York state attorney general, is suing Exxon over claims it misled investors over the costs associated with the climate crisis. Exxon is accused of misleading investors over the business risks caused by regulations to address the climate crisis. The company is accused of covering up the costs it will incur from government rules designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The case represents just the second time a climate case has gone to trial in the US. Exxon has long been a target for environmentalists, not only for being a major contributor to the climate crisis but also over revelations that it knew for decades that burning oil and gas would dangerously heat the planet. New York’s lawsuit accuses Exxon of using a public “proxy cost” of up to $80 per ton of carbon emissions to account for regulations that would limit planet-warming emissions, while internally using figures of $40 a ton, or nothing at all, to allow it to make more environmentally damaging investments. An Exxon spokesman has previously said that it properly applies two different metrics – a “proxy cost”, intended to reflect the impact of all climate policies on global demand, and a greenhouse gas cost which relates to actual levies placed on fossil fuel projects in a certain jurisdiction. Under questioning, Tillerson said: “We don’t know how else to model what future policy impacts might be. But whatever policies are, ultimately they come back to either your revenues or your costs.” The former Exxon head, who served as US secretary of state in Donald Trump’s government for just over a year before being fired in March 2018, added: “If you go back to the history of this, this was all fairly new.” Tillerson said he did not remember the climate costs being a determining factor in any decision made during his decade-long tenure at the helm of Exxon, which ended in 2016. James’s office has sought to cast Tillerson as a central figure in the securities fraud case, with Kevin Wallace, acting head of the attorney general’s investor protection bureau, telling the court last week that the former chief executive was “deeply involved” in working out the impact of climate science upon Exxon’s business prospects. On Wednesday morning, Tillerson said several times that he did not recall email conversations with colleagues on the cost of carbon. During his time at Exxon, Tillerson used an email alias, calling himself “Wayne Tracker”. Tillerson did, however, say that he supports the Paris climate agreement, which Trump announced during Tillerson’s tenure as secretary of state that the US planned to withdraw from, and that he favoured a price on carbon emissions. Exxon has denied any wrongdoing over its pricing of carbon and accused the lawsuit of being politically motivated. The case is among the most high profile of around a dozen rather different lawsuits launched by jurisdictions across the US that are attempting to claim compensation from fossil fuel companies for the damage caused by rising sea levels, storms, heatwaves and other impacts stemming from the climate crisis. “The attention this case received certainly places a harsh light on Exxon which must make them uncomfortable,” said Michael Gerrard, an expert in climate law at Columbia University. “They tried for years to stop this case from happening. This is all at least as much about reputation as it is about money.” Climate activists staged protests at the start of the Exxon trial and have kept up their criticism of the company since then. “Rex Tillerson is a climate criminal,” said Dominique Thomas, north-east regional organizer of climate group 350.org. “Yesterday was the seventh anniversary of Superstorm Sandy; a grave reminder that the lies of people like Rex Tillerson cause that kind of climate destruction.”
15||Cycle through forests or kayak at sundown: an adventurers’ guide to IrelandWet bouldering in the Mourne Mountains Generally speaking, scrambling over slippery, wet boulders isn’t a great idea. But when you’re decked out in neoprene boots and gloves, a thick wetsuit and a buoyancy aid, it’s terrific fun. At the Bloody Bridge in the Mourne Mountains, you can head out “wet bouldering” with One Great Adventure, where you’ll clamber over boulders, scramble through rock pools and leap into the water. Surfing in Sligo One of the top surf spots in Ireland, County Sligo is a place where everyone can hop on a board, whether you’re a beginner learning the ropes on gentle breaks, or an extreme surfer tackling 50ft waves. Strandhill is the best spot to give it a go, with numerous surf schools running lessons each day – there are plenty of cosy pubs and restaurants where you can warm the cockles afterwards, too. Take a look at Ireland.com’s Sligo hub to see them all in one place, as well as the other adventures available nearby. Night kayaking in Cork Nothing beats heading out on a peaceful lake in a kayak, with just the ripples in the water for company. Ireland is packed with beautiful lakes where you can head out for a paddle, but for a really special experience, go night kayaking on Lough Hyne in Cork. A trip with Atlantic Sea Kayaking takes you out on to the saltwater lake as the sun sets, finishing up in the starlight. If you’re really lucky, you’ll experience the incredible bioluminescence in the water. Hiking Carrauntoohil in Kerry Probably the ultimate goal for all hikers in Ireland, Carrauntoohil is the highest mountain on the island, and certainly one of the most gorgeous. It’s not exactly an easy climb – the shortest route to the top and back will take you about six hours – and it can be challenging in part. The best idea is going with a guide who knows the mountain well, so you don’t have to worry about whether or not you’re on the right path. Try Kerry Climbing, with treks available for all levels. Kite surfing in Achill Island, County Mayo Achill Island is a dream for adventurous souls – you can surf, hike, try standup paddleboarding, or kayak, all on this beautiful isle off the west coast. But its windy location means that Achill is a kite-surfing paradise. And while it might look fairly tricky, it’s a lot of fun to learn. Pure Magic runs lessons on the calmer Keel Lake, so you can master the art before heading out on to the waves. Wakeboarding in Dublin Think you have to be in the countryside to have an adventure? Think again. At Wakedock, you can go wakeboarding right in the middle of Dublin. A cable replaces the boat, and pulls you along a course (with some obstacles along the way, if you’re feeling daring). The park is set up in the Grand Canal, so you can learn how to wakeboard among the buildings of the Docklands. Water-skiing on Killary Fjord This stretch of Connemara is an absolute stunner, the moss-covered mountains rising from the edge of the perfectly still Killary Fjord. But it’s not just a gorgeous viewpoint – this is the land of adventure, where you can do anything from giant standup paddleboarding to bogland obstacle courses at Killary Adventure Company. One of the most ambitious activities on offer is water skiing – you’ll learn the ropes as you zoom over the lake. And don’t worry … falling off is half the fun. Coasteering on the Causeway Coast The Causeway Coast is a ruggedly handsome stretch of shore, with dramatic cliffs, hidden coves and crumbling ruins along the way. And while a gentle stroll along it is always a pleasure, you’ll get the best views (and a mighty adrenaline kick) by throwing yourself in the water. Coasteering incorporates many activities into one – cliff jumping, climbing and swimming – with the main goal of scrambling along the coastline, whichever way you can. Give it a try with Causeway Coasteering. Mountain biking in Blessingbourne Ireland is a cyclist’s dream, whether you want to pedal along the Wild Atlantic Way or tackle the jumps and drops of a mountain. At Blessingbourne Estate in County Fermanagh, you’ll find mountain bike trails designed by Phil Saxena, from simple paths for kids and beginners to the challenging black trail for the pros. The estate itself is beautiful, with numerous walking paths through the forests and along the lakeshore. Fill your heart with Ireland From the Causeway Coast and the Wild Atlantic Way to Ireland’s Ancient East, and the 11 cities in between, Ireland has plenty to explore. Now’s the time to start. Get inspired at ireland.com
15||Walk this way: five of the best winter hikes in IrelandSheep’s Head Loop Right on one of the most southerly points of Ireland, Sheep’s Head is a beautiful peninsula in West Cork. A dramatic outcrop jutting out into the Atlantic, it makes for an exceptional walk, with little loughs and rocky peaks, alongside the ever-present sea views. In its entirety, the whole walking trail is 55 miles in length, though there are plenty of shorter loops you can do along the way. Your best bet is to go right to the tip of the headland, where the only way to explore is on foot. This Lighthouse Loop is 2.5 miles long, and takes you on a gorgeous route past the tiny Lough Akeen and right out to the Sheep’s Head lighthouse. Along the way, you’ll be met with dreamy views of the Cork coast, from the Beara peninsula to Mizen Head. If you’re peckish when you get back, stop off at Bernie’s Cupan Tae (Irish for cup of tea) for a mug of something warm, a homemade scone or a bowl of soup. Head back a little farther inland and you’ll reach Ahakista and the Tin Pub, a charming, ramshackle spot that’s cosy on a chilly day. Knocknarea in Strandhill, County Sligo You can see the mountain of Knocknarea from all over Sligo, the dome of Queen Maeve’s tomb giving the peak its characteristic silhouette. It’s always been a brilliant mountain to climb, but the launch of the Queen Maeve Trail has made it a much more manageable ascent, with wooden stairs and boardwalks working their way to the top. You’ll walk past megalithic remains, through thick forest, and over the final slope right to the very summit. When you get there, the views out to Sligo Bay and the surrounding mountains are stunning – on a clear day, you can see for miles, from the long sandy beach of Strandhill out as far as Donegal. When you’re finished, pop into locals’ favourite Shells Cafe, and tuck in to a hearty plate of fish and chips. If you fancy a real treat, go to the Voya Seaweed Baths for a uniquely Irish experience – a bath is filled with piping hot seawater and freshly cut seaweed. Afterwards, you’ll feel like a brand-new person. Pollnagollum Cave, Enniskillen While Fermanagh is a county known for its beautiful lakes, there’s also plenty going on beneath the earth. Walk around Fermanagh’s “cave country” and you’ll be walking over an extensive system of caves, many of which you can explore in the Marble Arch Caves Global Geopark. You can still see plenty without heading underground, though – the walk through Belmore Forest takes you to Pollnagollum Cave, where a waterfall flows over the top of the cliff. If it looks familiar, there may well be a reason – it was used as a location in season three of Game of Thrones, where it doubled up as Beric Dondarrion’s hideout. The walk is just over 4 miles long and showcases all that’s great about this region, from glimpses of Lough MacNean to Cuilcagh Mountain. But it’s also a haven for wildlife – you might spot buzzards, jays, hares and even bats around the entrance to the cave. When you’re done, head to the village of Belcoo to refuel. Customs House Country Inn is the perfect place for a homemade bun or a bowl of crab tortellini, but if you’re sticking around for the night then MacNean House and Restaurant is one of the best spots, just over Belcoo River in Blacklion. Mussenden Temple, Castlerock The striking route along the Causeway Coast is home to many picturesque spots, whether it’s the ghostly ruins of Dunluce Castle or the Giant’s Causeway, a Unesco world heritage site. But Mussenden Temple is certainly one of the most beautiful. Balanced right on the edge of the cliffs, there’s something that looks a little miraculous simply in its precarious existence, as the waves crash down on the shore 37 metres (120ft) below. The temple itself – originally lined with books and heated by a fire in the basement below – is dreamily romantic. Walk the length of the cliffs and you’ll pass through the grounds of the Downhill Demesne (well worth a detour for a look around the remains of this beautiful old house). Back towards the car park you’ll find Al’s Coffee, a little shack built under the arches of two tree branches, where you can get a decent flat white and some retro sweets (as well as some homemade dog biscuits for your canine friends). Howth Head Cliff Walk It’s only a short hop from the centre of Dublin, but Howth, with its wide-open clifftops and glittering expanse of ocean, feels like it is a million miles from the city. The four-mile loop starts right at the Dart station (less than a 30-minute train ride from the city) and leads you along the harbour and out on to the cliffs, where you’ll stroll among the gorse and the heather, with incredible views out over the water. You’ll also spot Lambay Island (home to a troupe of wallabies) and the uninhabited island Ireland’s Eye, as well as the Howth lighthouse and Dublin Bay in the distance. Keep your eyes peeled, and you may see dolphins, seals or even whales swimming off the shore. It’s a leisurely enough walk (though a little tougher when the wind is up) and won’t take longer than about 2.5 hours. The best news? When you finish up you’ll be back in the village, where you’ll find any number of places to eat – try East below the King Sitric restaurant, a cosy cafe/pub where you can get a creamy bowl of fresh chowder and a pint of the black stuff (you’ve earned it, after all). Fill your heart with Ireland From the Causeway Coast and the Wild Atlantic Way to Ireland’s Ancient East, and the 11 cities in between, Ireland has plenty to explore. Now’s the time to start. Get inspired at ireland.com
1||Italy mafia networks are more complex and powerful, says ministerItalian mafia networks have become less high profile in recent years as they spread their activities into new sectors, but they are just as dangerous, the interior minister, Luciana Lamorgese, has said. Citing new data, Lamorgese said that organised crime groups “have made extensive transformations” while adopting “increasingly complex” models of criminal activity. “Criminal organisations are ever more sophisticated as they manage to infiltrate important economic sectors in order to clean up illicitly accumulated money,” said Lamorgese at a hearing with the Italian parliament’s anti-mafia commission. “The mafia continues to weigh heavily on our institutions and economic system.” Lamorgese, who was appointed interior minister in early September, said ’Ndrangheta, which emerged in the southern region of Calabria, continues to be Italy’s most powerful mafia organisation. The crime group is made up of networks of hundreds of family gangs, which, over recent decades, have managed to extend their influence to industries in Italy’s richer north and across the world, raking in billions from drug trafficking, extortion and money laundering. A study by the Demoskopia research institute in 2013 claimed the ’Ndrangheta made more money than Deutsche Bank and McDonald’s put together, with a turnover of €53bn (£44bn). The organisation is even more feared and secretive than Sicily’s Cosa Nostra, which fell into a state of flux in November 2017 when its boss of bosses, Salvatore “Totò” Riina, died in prison, where he had spent almost a quarter of a century. Nicknamed “the Beast” because of his cruelty, Riina was an unrepentant criminal who not only assassinated his criminal rivals on an unprecedented scale in the 1980s and 90s, but also targeted the prosecutors, journalists and judges who stood in his way. “Cosa Nostra has reorganised,” Lamorgese added. “It is still a pervasive, dynamic and dangerous organisation, even if reduced by the hard blows inflicted on it by the state, which brought to justice most of its prominent members.” Meanwhile, the Camorra, which hails from the Campania region, is “less solid” but remains perilously widespread within its territory, managing to establish an “insidious collusion” with public administration. Mafia groups have infiltrated almost every area of business, including healthcare, renewable energy, waste management and tourism, while maintaining a hand in their more traditional construction sector. Gangs have also penetrated the food chain, seizing control of farms, controlling distribution and counterfeiting food products, including cheese, wine and olive oil. Their growth beyond Italy also remains strong, especially in Europe and South America. One of Italy’s top cocaine dealers, Nicola Assisi, from ’Ndrangheta, was arrested in Brazil earlier this year after five years on the run. Lamorgese reiterated that the fight against the mafia was a government priority as she revealed that almost €3bn (£2.6bn) assets, including businesses, property and furniture, had been either seized or confiscated from the mafia since the beginning of the year. In 2018, mafia assets totalling €9bn were seized or confiscated, up from €5.4bn in 2017. In 2018, 59 mafia fugitives were arrested, and 45 since January. Meanwhile, 2,090 people were either arrested or reported for mafia association last year, with 1,687 arrested or reported since January. The mafia also meddles in elections, with 22 people arrested or reported in 2018, and 15 so far this year. Twenty-two local authorities have been dissolved for mafia infiltration since June 2018. Lamorgese also noted the “alarming phenomenon” of mafia intimidation of local administrators, with 599 cases being reported in 2018 and 336 during the first six months of this year.
12||Tributes paid to man who died in Carlisle chimney tragedyA man who died after hanging upside down for hours from a chimney in Carlisle has been named as Robert Philip Longcake, known as Phil to his family and friends. His family described Phil, 53, as a “strong, brave man” who had been struggling with his mental health after recently disclosing past trauma. He scaled the 88-metre grade II-listed Dixon’s Chimney in Carlisle city centre in the early hours of Monday morning but somehow ended up hanging from one foot at the top of it. A major operation was mounted to try to rescue him, including the help of Cumbria fire and rescue, a coastguard helicopter, police, paramedics, Great North air ambulance, Penrith mountain rescue team, and rope rescue specialists from the Lancashire fire and rescue service. But by the time a cherrypicker tall enough to reach him had been brought from Glasgow, he had died. His family said in a tribute on Wednesday: “Phil was a strong, brave man who achieved a lot in his short life. Sadly, due to recent disclosures he made about historic trauma he suffered, Phil was battling with his mental health, with the love and support of his family and health professionals whilst trying to overcome this. “He was a keen motorcyclist and would often spend weekends away with his son, Robert. He loved fell walking with his dog Ted and was a passionate musician who played the guitar, piano and accordion. He also loved to sing, and did his own covers of popular music. “Phil was a fantastic grandad to his three grandchildren. They adored him. Phil had many wonderful and happy times with his family, and these memories will be treasured by his loved ones. “Phil will be very much missed by his wife Andrea, his two children Robert and Laura and their partners Sarah and Darren, grandchildren James, George and William, dad Bill and brother John, and all his friends and those that knew him.” They asked that donations can be made in Phil’s memory to the mental health charity, Mind. Investigations are ongoing to establish how he managed to climb the chimney, which has no ladder at ground level. A temporary ladder used during recent repair works was damaged and only started 15ft above the ground, according to Carlisle city council. A council spokesperson said the chimney had recently been repaired by specialist contractors and was not accessible to the public.
10||‘This is war’: activists mourn Katie Hill, but vow to fight for next female DemocratThe grassroots activists who propelled Katie Hill to victory in one of the country’s most hotly contested congressional districts last November are mourning her resignation at breakneck speed and vowing to fight for another young, dynamic, female Democrat who has already launched a vigorous campaign to succeed her. Hill’s resignation on Sunday – prompted by an ugly divorce, the publication of explicit photographs, and what Hill herself has described as “a smear campaign built around cyber exploitation” – caught both supporters and detractors off guard because she quit without being accused of any specific act of wrongdoing. At first, many of Hill’s supporters were angered by what they saw as a double standard that penalized her as a Democrat, a woman and a millennial. They pointed to many other politicians – including Donald Trump – who have either done or been accused of far worse and stayed in office unperturbed. But that anguish has quickly given way to a resolute fighting spirit as California’s 25th congressional district in the north Los Angeles suburbs gears up for a special election to determine Hill’s successor. “This is a war,” said Seamus Garrity, a Los Angeles-area political operative who helped Hill with fundraising and introduced her to donors early in her congressional campaign. “Nobody’s about to lay down and let Republicans take that seat … The best way to get over the grief of losing Katie is to get back up and keep fighting.” Torie Osborn, a prominent LA-area political consultant and activist who campaigned for Hill, expressed similar sentiments in a social media post. “Go weep or gnash your teeth for Katie – and, no it’s not fair! – but we must hold that seat,” she said. Steve Knight, the Republican former police officer who was defeated by Hill in the last election, has said he is “looking” to run again. He maintains significant support in what is still considered a swing district and a potentially valuable pickup for the GOP. George Papadopoulos, the former Trump campaign adviser and a key player in the Mueller inquiry, has also thrown his hat in the Republican ring. The Democrats have moved just as quickly. Less than 24 hours after Hill announced her resignation “with a broken heart”, a local state legislator named Christy Smith – who attracted many of the same grassroots supporters last November – said she would stand as a Democrat to replace her. Smith has announced a long list of early endorsements including union leaders, more than 50 federal, state and local elected officials and more than 30 state party delegates from within the district. “Our communities, our people and our families need a fighter who will advance a common sense agenda in Washington that lifts up all of our neighborhoods,” Smith said in a statement. She commended Hill for “her willingness to put country first” by stepping down. The announcement raised eyebrows because it looked to some people as though Smith might have been primed to launch her run even before Hill resigned. Such speculation, though, did not stop Hill’s more ardent supporters from throwing their support behind the new candidate. “I think people are going to enthusiastically support Christy Smith. I’ve already started my outreach game as a volunteer on her behalf,” Garrity said. “This is about Donald Trump, but it’s also about women’s rights, it’s about healthcare, it’s about making sure kids aren’t being thrown in cages. There’s so much on the line, nothing else matters.” Smith is older than Hill and has a different profile. She is a married mother of two college-age kids, with a no-nonsense approach to policy and legislation. Unlike Hill, who invited Vice News to make a reality-type behind-the-scenes documentary series about her campaign, Smith has shown little interest in blurring traditional lines between her personal and her public life. Smith’s strong entry into the race may be enough to deter other interested Democrats – who include Alex Padilla, the California secretary of state, and Henry Stern, a state legislator. It could also be what the party is looking for to move the conversation away from Hill’s personal life, her possible lapses in judgement, the vengefulness of her ex-husband and the potential criminal penalties for disseminating revenge porn. Indeed, on Monday a columnist for the Los Angeles Times, Robin Abcarian, was listing all the ways Hill appeared to be facing a double standard – comparing her not just to Trump, but to Duncan Hunter, a San Diego-area congressman facing federal indictment for misusing campaign funds, including money he is accused of spending on affairs with women other than his wife, but is still in Congress. Elsewhere, people nevertheless debated her judgment, her boundaries and whether she had been fully forthcoming in her official statements. By Tuesday, though, the conversation had moved on. “We don’t have that much time,” said Emily Weisberg, a Democratic activist who won an award for the volunteer time she put in on both Hill’s and Smith’s campaigns last year. “We are all trying to understand what the process is – all sorts of issues like who is going to run for Christy’s seat [now she’s running for Congress]. There are so many unknowns right now – it’s been a crazy couple of days.” Hill, who worked as an advocate to end homelessness before running for Congress, had made what looked like a promising start on Capitol Hill, winning the confidence of Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, and earning a spot as vice-chair on the powerful House oversight committee. She worked hard to secure grants and other funding for the many veterans in her district and spoke out frequently on subjects including homelessness, gun violence and voting rights. At first, only partisan rightwing media outlets published the explicit photos and other material that Hill has accused her ex-husband of disseminating. Her troubles quickly mounted, however, after the House ethics committee launched an investigation. Hill admitted to the affair with the campaign worker but denied reports that she had since started an affair with her legislative director, in violation of new House rules forged in response to the #MeToo era that she herself endorsed in the spring. That’s not to say the grieving in Democratic party circles is not deep or continuing. Hill herself has announced she intends to work to protect other women from violations of their privacy online. Many of her supporters were quick to question how Republicans could possibly accept the candidacy of Papadopoulos, who is a convicted criminal who pleaded guilty to lying about his contacts with Kremlin operatives, while at the same time gloating over Hill’s political demise for which the only available evidence is a handful of nude photos. “The schadenfreude is pretty disgusting,” Weisberg said. “Tens of thousands of us spent weeks and months of our lives working as hard as we could to get Katie elected, so it feels personal … As her supporters, we were ready to dig in and fight. I’m a little blown away at how quickly she resigned.” • This article was amended on Wednesday 30 October to remove an inaccurate reference to Christy Smith’s age.
16||Study offers fresh hope to premature babies with brain injuriesA potential route to reducing brain injury in premature babies has been found, say researchers who have discovered a way to tackle overactive immune cells in the brain. Microglia are a type of immune cell that play an important part in the building of a baby’s brain. However, if these cells go into overdrive as a result of inflammation – often because of a bacterial infection of the foetal membranes, a maternal infection or even sepsis after delivery of the baby – they can cause harm to the child’s brain. In particular, they can damage white matter, reducing the degree to which neurons are insulated and thereby affecting connectivity in the brain. It is thought that of the 15 million infants born before 37 weeks every year, up to 9 million are left with lifelong harm to the brain, sometimes resulting in conditions such as epilepsy or cerebral palsy. Now researchers say they have found a signalling pathway in these immune cells that is behind their transformation. “We have actually identified the immune switch that turns these immune cells in the developing brain from being helpful in building a brain and taking care of the brain to causing damage,” said Dr Bobbi Fleiss from RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia, a co-author of the study. What is more, the researchers say, it might even be possible to intervene and turn rogue microglia back into helpful workhorses. Writing in the journal Brain, Fleiss and colleagues reported how they took mouse pups just after birth and injected them with proteins that mimic an infection in the mother or foetus, inducing the transformation of microglia from helpful to harmful. The team said mice of this age were comparable in their development to a human pregnancy of 22 to 32 weeks. The team then found that if they selectively killed off these microglia, the mice ended up with less of a reduction in the insulation of their neurons. That, they said, backed up the idea that overactive microglia were involved in brain injury. They then looked at which genes were switched on or off when the mouse was exposed to the inflammation-causing proteins, and identified a signalling pathway known as Wnt that appeared to be involved in the microglia going into “overdrive”. The researchers carried out further experiments in a range of animals, finding drugs that specifically dampen down the signalling pathway that activates the microglia. Analysis of human tissue from premature babies also showed that when inflammation was triggered, microglia became activated and lower levels of molecules linked to the Wnt pathway were produced. In other words, the team had found the “switch” that turned the microglia bad. Further work combining genetical analysis of premature babies with brain imaging data backed up the idea that the Wnt pathway is important. “We were able to show that in the human even the natural, normal level of variation in this pathway actually has an effect on brain development, so [targeting this Wnt pathway] may actually be a really novel way for us to move forward to develop a treatment to prevent brain damage in those babies,” said Fleiss. If these genetic findings hold up, she added, they might help to predict which babies with brain injury might be at greater risk of poorer long-term outcomes. “At the moment it is very difficult to predict from one baby to the next what will happen,” said Fleiss. And there could even be treatments. The team found that by injecting mice with nanoparticles carrying a substance that blocks the damping down of the Wnt pathway, they were able to reverse the activation of the microglia. This was linked to an improvement in the development of the insulating sheath around neurons and, it would seem, a reversal in memory problems triggered by the inflammation. While premature births are often unexpected and so a drug could not necessarily be given in pregnancy, the team said it might be possible to give a drugs to premature babies after birth to limit damage from inflammation. “Even if some of the injury will have occurred, there is still injury happening [after birth] and things progressing in the brain,” said Fleiss. However, there is still some way to go. “We think we are five to seven years away from this being a clinically applied therapy,” she said. Neena Modi, professor of neonatal medicine at Imperial College London praised the work but was cautious. “It’s a study that has identified one potential pathway to reduce brain injury caused by inflammation,” she said. “It is important to a mechanistic understanding and a good study but it’s a very, very long step from here to achieve benefit for human babies.”
12||Grenfell inquiry chair demands end to 'stay put' advice for all high-risesHundreds of thousands of people who live in tower blocks should be prepared to evacuate in the event of a fire, according to a key demand made by Sir Martin Moore-Bick, the chair of the Grenfell Tower public inquiry. In what fire safety experts said would be a significant change to the default advice for most tower blocks that residents should stay put, he told ministers to develop national guidelines for total or partial evacuation of towers and to make it illegal for owners and managers of high-rise buildings not to draw up evacuation plans. There was no contingency plan to evacuate Grenfell, and when the order finally came it was too late for many people who subsequently died. There was no alarm or PA system to broadcast an evacuation instruction to residents, and firefighters had to lend their breathing apparatus kits to fleeing residents because they did not have specialist evacuation equipment such as smoke hoods. Moore-Bick said new guidelines were needed, which should include ways to protect fire exit routes and procedures for evacuating people who are unable to use the stairs or may require assistance, such as disabled people, older people and young children. The retired high court judge said all tower blocks should be fitted with speakers or sirens to alert residents to get out and fire brigades should undergo training for evacuations. The London fire brigade said this month it had not carried out an evacuation drill on a residential tower since Grenfell. Most of the UK’s estimated 4,000 high-rise apartment blocks over 18 metres tall have a “stay put” strategy based on the theory that the buildings are designed to contain fires within a single flat or at least a manageable zone. It is supposed to mean it is safer to keep people in their homes rather than order an evacuation from buildings that are not designed for it. Moore-Bick also recommended that “the owner and manager of every high-rise residential building be required by law to prepare personal emergency evacuation plans for all residents whose ability to self-evacuate may be compromised (such as persons with reduced mobility or cognition)”. Arnold Tarling, a fire safety expert, said: “This is a big change to how we respond. But single-staircase tower blocks are not suitable for immediate evacuation. You will have people tripping over, you will have all the ill and toddlers, so how are they going to get out of there safely?” He also questioned whether cash-strapped fire and rescue authorities would have the resources to safely evacuate buildings. “With all the cuts, do they have enough equipment to evacuate a block?” he said, adding that many did not have rescue lifts or second staircases. The government said it was considering all of Moore-Bick’s proposals and this week it announced a cross-departmental steering group to review stay put policies and to assess what to do if evacuation was needed. Officials stressed that stay put remained the safest strategy for many towers, especially those not designed for mass evacuations.
7||People are passionate about politics again – and they want radical solutionsFor two and a half years, British politics has been a pantomime played out in the corridors and boardrooms of Westminster and Brussels. The electorate has barely managed to press their noses against the glass and peer in: much of the Brexit debacle has unfolded out of sight and scrutiny. Instead, ever since Boris Johnson’s ascent to the premiership, the country has effectively been treated to a one-sided general election campaign; the opposition has been all but squeezed out of media coverage. All of this now changes: the spectators can storm the stage. In the 00s, it was often claimed that political apathy had replaced political participation. Membership of political parties and electoral turnout were both said to be in irreversible decline. Who can bemoan the lack of political participation now? This is our age of mass politics: the Scottish independence movement, Farageism and Brexitism, a youth-led climate emergency movement, and Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour, which began as a husk and flowered into western Europe’s biggest political party. And it is this, in large part, that makes the election so unpredictable, so volatile. There is a politicised populace united around a single but fundamental point – desire for rupture with a status quo that never enjoyed enthusiastic support and now has lost popular acquiescence. If Johnson triumphs, his government will wrench Britain out of the EU with a deal that threatens to punch a hole the size of Wales in the economy, and use Brexit to remake British society in a hyper-Thatcherite mould. Labour’s mission, on the other hand, is to up-end a generation-long experiment in market fundamentalism and redistribute wealth and power away from its principal beneficiaries. Each represents an abandonment of the old order, even though the Tories’ version will benefit the vested interests who bankroll them. The Tories’ strategy is clear: use Brexit to torture Labour by dividing its electoral coalition and drowning out its domestic agenda. Their secret weapons are Jo Swinson’s Liberal Democrats, who they hope will siphon enough votes from Labour to deliver scores of marginals to the Conservatives – even though Labour is now the only major party committed to a referendum with remain on the ballot paper. Most of the British press will act as Johnson’s cheerleaders, and the Tories’ traditional donors – hedge fund managers, financiers, magnates – will keep them flush with money. But it is mass politics that presents the party with a challenge. After MPs voted to approve a December election, the grassroots pro-Corbyn Momentum movement launched an appeal to raise £50,000 in 48 hours; instead, it raised £100,000 in the first 12 hours, twice as much as in the same time period in 2017, and with an average donation of £24.40. It belies claims that enthusiasm for the Labour leadership has collapsed among a demoralised membership. And if that commitment to part with money is matched by a willingness to knock on doors, the party will be able to partly bypass an overwhelmingly hostile press and talk to voters one-on-one. It is mass politics, too, which challenges the Tories’ ability to monomaniacally focus on Brexit at the exclusion of all else. Polling shows that the environment has risen dramatically as a political priority for voters since January: a new poll finds that two-thirds of Britons believe the climate crisis is the biggest issue facing humanity, with more than half declaring that it would affect how they voted. This is, in part, down to protests by the Youth Strike 4 Climate and Extinction Rebellion. Labour’s radical policies for a Green New Deal – which link tackling the climate emergency to creating jobs, overhauling public transport and improving living standards – have yet to cut through. But in an election campaign, we can expect there to be an appetite to hear such proposals. Johnson’s strategy is to distance his administration from a lost decade of Tory rule. That deception cannot be allowed to pass. And he must now contend with how those nine years have politicised large sections of the electorate. Wages are still lower than they were before the crash. Parents have been roused to protest over the slashing of per pupil funding. As homeownership collapses, and council housing stock has been sold off en masse, an entire generation has been driven into a private landlord sector where rents are extortionate and security absent. As cuts to benefits have expanded from disabled people to the low-paid, attitudes towards social security have transformed, with most no longer deeming entitlements as too generous. It is for Labour to pin the blame for these crises on Johnson and his colleagues, and to portray attempts to shift the conversation away from them as arrogant Tory indifference. Brexit itself cannot necessarily serve as the distraction Johnson desires, either: in the last pre-election prime minister’s questions, the Tory leader was left rattled by Corbyn’s focus on the risk of the NHS being flogged off to US multinationals under a Trump trade deal. But focusing on the misery of Tory Britain is a trap. Instead, Labour’s campaign should exude a relentless optimism: a sense that a nation this wealthy has the resources to overcome every injustice and challenge if the willpower is there. The age of mass politics is one that demands radical solutions rather than tinkering. Labour may begin the campaign with dire polling, but Tory despair under Theresa May has given away once again to hubris. The movements and struggles of the last decade have politicised millions to demand a breach with a failing social order. It is that resurgence of people power that Labour must tap into – and which Johnson’s Tories should surely fear. • Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist
1||Quebec raises legal consumption age for cannabis to 21The day cannabis was legalized in Canada in 2018, the line outside of Quebec’s government-run pot shop in downtown Montreal ran hundreds deep down multiple city blocks. At least some of those enthusiasts will be gravely disappointed after a new law passed by the provincial government has raised the legal consumption age from 18 to 21. The change, announced this week, is intended to “protect” teenagers and their developing brains, according to the junior health minister, Lionel Carmant. The new law, which comes into effect on 1 January, also prohibits the consumption of cannabis on public roads, in bus shelters, under big-top tents and in playgrounds. These changes take effect this week. No other province in Canada has a legal cannabis consumption age over 19. When campaigning for the seat of Quebec premier last year, the Coalition Avenir Québec party’s leader, François Legault, promised to increase the age limit for cannabis. A government spokesperson said 65% of Québécois agreed with the new age limit. Quebec’s stringent cannabis laws are unique in the country. The province also prohibits people from growing their own at home, it has one of the lowest allowances for home storage of processed cannabis and it also prohibits the sale of edibles, which only became legal in Canada this month. The government is also in the process of appealing against a ruling in a legal challenge to its no-home-growing law. In September, a Quebec court judge said the law was invalid because it trespassed on federal rights given to Canadians. Quebec has vowed to fight that ruling. Despite these laws, legal cannabis has been extremely popular in the province – and lucrative for the government. In its first five months of operation, the government cannabis store network (SQDC) sold $71m worth – 9.9 tonnes – of the stuff to Quebec consumers. Opponents to Quebec’s new age limit say that the law is unfair and that it will encourage the sale of grey- and black-market cannabis. Gabriel Nadeau-Dubois, a spokesman for official Opposition party Québec Solidaire, said that it creates “two classes of adults”. The legal age to vote, buy cigarettes and drink in Quebec is 18.
0||Darren Gough ‘honoured’ to work with England in run-up to New Zealand seriesDarren Gough will work with England’s seamers before their upcoming two-Test series in New Zealand after being hired on a short-term consultancy deal. The 49-year-old is a former Yorkshire teammate of Chris Silverwood, whose promotion to head coach at the start of the month left a vacancy in the backroom staff. Though not expected to be a contender for a full-time bowling coach role because of his commitments with TalkSport, Gough will join the squad for their two-week warm-up period before the first Test in Mount Maunganui that begins on 20 November. Earlier this month Jeetan Patel was appointed as a spin-bowling coach for the tour on another short-team deal. Silverwood said: “I’m delighted to have Darren on board. I have known him a long time and his vast knowledge and experience at international level will drive our bowling unit forward leading into the two-match Test series. He will be excellent around the group and will settle in quickly.” Gough, who claimed 229 Test wickets during his playing career, has been invited to England training sessions previously. While he has forged a media career since retiring as a player in 2009, the former fast bowler has also taken his coaching badges up to level three. He said: “It is a tremendous honour to be asked by Chris Silverwood and [the director of England cricket] Ashley Giles to be involved in this elite environment. I very much look forward to working with all the bowlers and helping them improve. “I will gain a lot from the experience and to work at this level will benefit me as a coach for the long term. I can’t wait to get cracking.” England’s Test players arrive in New Zealand on 5 November with Graham Thorpe, the batting coach, set to break away from the back end of the five-match Twenty20 series and lead the start of their preparations in Whangarei.
10||California wildfires: new blaze threatens Reagan library amid extreme windsCalifornia battled wildfires fueled by fierce winds across the state, including a new blaze that swept dangerously close to the Ronald Reagan presidential library in the Simi Valley near Los Angeles. The fire is one of several that firefighters are battling in the north and south. Meanwhile more than a million people across the state remained in darkness amid widespread power shutoffs. Meteorologists had warned southern California could see extreme winds on Wednesday that would severely complicate the efforts to control several blazes, including a fire near the Getty Museum in Los Angeles that had prompted evacuations on Monday. Winds gusts topped 50mph (80km/h) in some southern California areas before dawn. The Simi Valley fire spread quickly and prompted the evacuation of the Ronald Reagan presidential library and nearby homes. Gusty winds fueled several other, smaller new fires on Wednesday, including one north of Malibu, and another in Kern county in the Central Valley. Currently more than 5,000 firefighters in California are working the wildfires. Fire agencies in other states have offered backup, Montana sending 20 engines and 72 firefighters to California, while Idaho plans to send five fire engines and 17 personnel. In the wine country north of San Francisco, winds topped out at 70mph (112km/h) and began to ease early on Wednesday, but forecasters said fire danger would remain because of continuing breezes and very dry air. Firefighters said they made progress overnight in tackling the Kincade fire, which had burned 86 homes and charred an area more than twice the size of San Francisco. Sixty-mile-an-hour winds complicated efforts to beat back the blaze near the Reagan library, named the Easy fire, at times scattering water aircraft that tried to drop on the fire below. As of the early afternoon, the fire had mowed through 1,300 acres and was only 5% contained. Meanwhile a fire in Riverside county, dubbed the Hill fire, broke out around 11 and quickly grew to 200 acres. Frustration mounts Electricity remained cut off to roughly half a million homes and businesses in northern and central California as a precaution by the state’s largest utility, Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&amp;E). Southern California Edison, which had previously made safety shutoffs and then restored power, cut power to 38,000 customers in the south of the state and warned that it could black out more than 300,000 customers, or about 600,000 people. More than 130,000 people remained under evacuation orders in northern California as firefighters continued to battle the Kincade fire. Frustration and anger mounted across the region as PG&amp;E began the third round of sweeping blackouts in a week aimed at preventing its electrical equipment from being fouled by wind-whipped branches or toppling and sparking wildfires. PG&amp;E said Tuesday’s blackouts would affect about 1.5 million people in about 30 counties including the Sierra foothills, wine country and the San Francisco Bay Area. The utility said on Wednesday it would not proceed with some of the blackouts in the Bay Area. However, hundreds of thousands of people who had lost power over the weekend remained in the dark. People who were not facing another day as fire refugees were worried about charging cellphones and electric vehicles, finding gasoline and cash, staying warm and keeping their food from spoiling. Some ended up at centers set up by PG&amp;E where people could go to power their electronics and get free water, snacks, flashlights and solar lanterns. In Placer county, Angel Smith relied on baby wipes and blankets to keep her 13-month-old son Liam warm and clean. The family has been without power since Saturday night and cannot draw well water without electricity. She ran a cord from her neighbors’ generator to keep her phone and tablet charged so the two could watch movies. Temperatures were expected to drop below freezing overnight in parts of northern California. “The hardest part about this for me has been making sure I keep my son warm as it gets cold here,” Smith said. Extreme red flag warning On Tuesday, the National Weather Service (NWS) had issued an “extreme red flag warning” for much of Los Angeles and Ventura counties, starting late Tuesday and into Thursday evening. Coupled with tinder-dry brush and low humidity, they could blow smoldering fires back to life and spread embers to start new blazes, authorities warned. On Monday, thousands of people had been forced to evacuate because of a fire near the Getty Museum in Los Angeles. About 9,000 people, including Arnold Schwarzenegger and LeBron James, remained under evacuation orders on Wednesday. The Getty fire was caused when a dry branch from a eucalyptus tree was flung 30ft (9 meters) by high winds into a city department of water and power (DWP) line, which short-circuited and sparked, the utility and fire department announced on Tuesday. The power line had been operating safely and the DWP had cut away brush and trees from around the line, officials said. Los Angeles’s mayor, Eric Garcetti, called it an “act of God”. The cause of the Kincade fire has yet to be established, but firefighters battling the blaze over the weekend discovered what appeared to be a broken jumper by a PG&amp;E transmission tower that had lost power. PG&amp;E had shut off power to the area as part of planned shutoff, but the transmission lines remained energized. No deaths were reported from the current fires but the wind gusts over the weekend may have claimed three lives. A 55-year-old homeless woman was crushed by a falling tree during high winds on Sunday at a Santa Cruz campsite and a couple was killed the same day in a remote area of Madera county when a tree fell on their Jeep, which then crashed. PG&amp;E criticized PG&amp;E, which is in bankruptcy after its equipment was blamed for a string of disastrous fires over the past three years, including a blaze that all but destroyed the town of Paradise and killed 85 people, has said its foremost concern was public safety. But California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, and top utility regulators have accused the company of mismanaging its power system and failing for decades to make the investments needed to ensure it is more durable. He and others have also complained that the utility has botched the outages by not keeping the public adequately informed. PG&amp;E’s president, Bill Johnson, said the utility has agreed to provide a “one-time bill credit” for people impacted by an 9 October power cutoff that affected about 2 million people. But he did not confirm a figure, saying the mechanics had yet to be worked out. Investigators are now reportedly looking into whether PG&amp;E started two other fires on Sunday that led to evacuations in the Bay Area.
5||Soggy soufflés: have Bake Off’s impossible technicals soured the whole show?No one has had much fun with Bake Off this year, have they? For a show lauded as the balm for all our pains the 2019 season has been one massive upset. As upsetting as a deflating soufflé, in fact. Which, coincidentally, is exactly what played the star role in the final’s ultimate technical. Our finalists had to double bake six stilton soufflés, with biscuits, in under 70 minutes, and, boy, did they struggle. Alice had never made a roux; Steph didn’t know what a bain-marie was. Instead of impossibly light creamy, cheesy clouds, we got puddles. And underbaked crackers. The general feeling is that the show has got too difficult, too obscure and too cruel. But has it, really? To find out, I went through the final technicals in every year’s Bake Off since it started. The first season, in 2010, didn’t come with a final technical. But given that contestants had to make a total of 96 mini bakes, the entire episode qualified as a mountain to climb. The following year, the bakers had to make a sachertorte in two hours and 40 minutes. Cookbook author Luisa Weiss tells me that, as long as you have a recipe, this wouldn’t be beyond the pale. Similarly, 2012’s 25 fondant fancies and 2013’s 12 perfectly shaped pretzels would not have been impossible. In 2014, things heated up. The finalists had to do victoria sandwiches, tartes au citron and scones – 12 of each – in under two hours with little instruction. Jeremy Lee, the chef-proprietor of Quo Vadis in London, shrieks in horror. “You do wonder why anyone would enter this,” he says. “The reality is most really good baking recipes are quite lengthy.” Having to do this much in that little time seems to him “brutal and unkind”. Meanwhile, in 2015 the contestants were given a Paul Hollywood recipe for raspberry-flavoured mille-feuilles iced, as professional pâtissiers would do, in fondant. Regula Ysewijn, one of the judges on the Belgian version of the show, winces at the thought. “That’s a very, very hard one,” – the hardest, for her, of all the years’ final technicals. The pastry alone would flummox you, and did for Tamal Ray that year. In 2016, they had to make a victoria sandwich without a recipe in 90 minutes. Lee says you would have to have made a fair few in your time to swing that. As this is the Great British Bake Off, though, you’d be forgiven for expecting contestants to have done that. It strikes Ysewijn that the iced ginger biscuits in 2017, last year’s campfire pittas with accompanying dips, and this year’s soufflés haven’t been any harder. She says her team, without consulting their British counterparts, considered soufflés this year, too, because of their instructive value. As she points out: “You’re making a programme, not just a competition. You want people at home to learn something from it.” She says the challenges are tested, both by the setters and amateur bakers, to ensure they are not impossible. Perhaps, as fans, we are homing in on the wrong thing to criticise: it’s not the challenges but the judges. As the Delish website put it when Prue Leith suggested it’s not up to them to get it right, but the contestants: “Blimey, Prue.” If the warmth has eluded our favourite heartwarming show, she and Hollywood might have something to answer for.
17||Director of QuickQuid owner kept watchdog role as lender hit rocksA former director of QuickQuid’s owner continued to sit on an influential committee at the City regulator as the payday lender headed for administration amid mounting claims for compensation from customers sold-high interest loans. Nick Lord joined the Financial Conduct Authority’s regulatory decisions committee (RDC) in 2017, two years after he became a non-executive director of CashEuroNet UK, whose best-known brand was QuickQuid. The RDC reviews FCA decisions on fines, including whether companies or individuals should be allowed to trade and other matters. It can veto FCA decisions or tell the watchdog to do further work on a case. Lord resigned from CashEuroNet in October 2018, a month after the collapse of Wonga exposed the mounting pressure on payday lenders, which charge high interest rates to people struggling to make ends meet. He continues to sit on the RDC. CashEuroNet’s US parent, Enova, put the business into administration last week after a dispute with the financial ombudsman over how many customers to compensate over past loans. CashEuroNet was deluged with customer complaints last year and received more than 3,000 claims in the first half of 2019. The regulator declined to comment on whether Lord would stay on the committee after CashEuroNet’s failure, which has left more than a million customers facing financial uncertainty and may cause claimants to miss out on compensation. An FCA spokesperson said: “Nick’s role as a non-executive director at CashEuroNet was disclosed and considered during his recruitment process in 2017. Other than the chair, who is an employee of the FCA, the RDC is made up of independent members who are drawn from industry and consumer groups and who take certain decisions relating to how the FCA uses its formal powers. All members adhere to a conflicts-of-interest policy.” The FCA investigated CashEuroNet after taking over regulation of consumer credit in 2014. It ordered the company to write off more than 2,500 loans and refund 1,500 customers in November 2015 at a cost of £1.7m because it lent people more than they could afford to repay. The FCA appointed Lord to the RDC in April 2017. Damon Gibbons, the director of the Centre for Responsible Credit thinktank, said: “QuickQuid have been playing fast and loose with the rules for a number of years. It’s shameful that it has gone into administration leaving hard-up customers without compensation while its parent company in the US is profitable and a former director of the company is sitting on an influential FCA committee.” Payday lenders have been squeezed by political and regulatory pressure over their high-interest loans and complaints brought by claims handling companies. A QuickQuid customer taking out a £250 loan for three and a half months would be charged interest rates equal to an annual percentage rate of 1,300%, according to an example on the lender’s website. Lord’s biography on the FCA’s website says he has spent more than 30 years representing the interests of consumers in financial services. It says he was an adviser to the Treasury on a review that produced the Money Advice Service and a former member of the Financial Services Consumer Panel. Lord’s employment at CashEuroNet is not listed in his biography. He was not available to comment.
1||The treatment of Meghan is racist. We should feel able to say soThe silence surrounding the Duchess of Sussex’s treatment by the press has become a roar. More than 70 female MPs signed a letter this week in “solidarity” with Meghan after she spoke about her treatment by sections of the media. The letter outlined attempts “to cast aspersions” on her character. It also attempted to address the nature of these attacks: “We are calling out what can only be described as outdated, colonial undertones to some of these stories,” it read. However, this treatment can be described as only one thing: racist. Not saying so explicitly is part of a growing trend – the word “racist” is now dodged with more fervour than racial slurs themselves. At one point, there was concern that “racist” was being used willy-nilly; now, it feels as if those in power are thumbing through a thesaurus with kid gloves, searching hastily for synonyms. The phrasing has become almost comically creative: take “racially charged,” “racially loaded,” “racially divisive” and “racially tinged”, as if bigotry is administered in doses with a pipette. “Homophobically tinged” and “sexistly charged” sound equally ludicrous, but I am yet to see them used in lieu of the real terms. When Trump tweeted that some of the people of colour in Congress should “go back and help fix the totally broken and crime infested places from which they came,” Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary at the time, resolved not to “use the R-word” (his censoring of it, as if it were akin to the N-word, says it all). But who will resolve to use it? And if Trump’s tweets didn’t call for it, what occasion does? Many journalists are grappling with editorial guidelines that are making their jobs more difficult. Look at the censuring of the BBC presenter Naga Munchetty, after she said, in relation to Trump’s comment, that every time she had been told to “go back to where [she] came from, that was embedded in racism”. Attempts at impartiality lead to inaccuracy – when the Republican congressman Steve King asked why the terms “white supremacist” and “white nationalist” were offensive, NBC News originally told its staff to “be careful to avoid characterising [King’s] remarks as racist.” Almost no behaviour seems to merit the descriptor, bar donning a Ku Klux Klan costume (except at Halloween, of course, when its white supremacist roots are apparently neutralised by “banter”) and using the N-word (but not in song lyrics, of course, when its white supremacist roots are apparently neutralised by the beat). More and more, it feels as if racism is being defined by those least likely to experience it – namely when they themselves are targeted. Apparently, calling rightwing, red-faced, middle-aged white men “gammon” is racist, yet golliwogs, according to 63% of Britons in a survey, are not racist. As we tiptoe around the semantics and the word “racism” morphs into hate speech, hate crimes continue to soar. Unless something changes, this cycle will continue until “racially tinged” becomes equally as offensive and we replace it with another useless euphemism to protect the feelings of perpetrators. •Yomi Adegoke is a Guardian columnist
1||Chile protesters: 'We are subjugated by the rich. It's time for that to end'The spark that lit the flame was a 3% hike in subway fares, but after 12 days of mass protests and street violence, Chile’s worst unrest in decades has transformed into a nationwide uprising demanding dramatic changes to the country’s economic and political system. Eighteen people have died in the violence and 7,000 have been arrested amid widespread outbreaks of violence and arson, and credible allegations of human rights abuses by the security forces. The leaderless movement has forced the billionaire president, Sebastián Piñera, on the defensive, prompting him to replace eight ministers and announce a string of emergency measures including a small increase in the minimum wage and higher taxes on wealthy Chileans. But such moves have not been enough to defuse the protests, which are driven by deep-rooted disillusionment over inequality that has left millions of citizens frozen out of Chile’s economic rise. One per cent of Chile’s population earns 33% of the nation’s wealth, making it the most unequal country in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development group of nations. Many protesters are calling for a new constitution to replace the one written in 1980 during the reign of August Pinochet, which created the legal basis for a market-driven economic model that has privatized pensions, health and education. Juan Ángel, 60, school teacher “I want change and I want it now. The cost of living keeps rising and our money is badly distributed – in pensions, in healthcare and in education. There is privilege for armed forces, the priests, the politicians, the corporations. And to change that? You have to change the constitution. “This is a small country, we have natural resources. This could be a prosperous country if our riches were better distributed. We could be marvelous. A country that is prosperous and happy and in peace. “I’m not afraid. I have nothing to lose. I’m doing this for my granddaughter who is six months old.” Melissa Medina, 25, makeup artist “My grandmother fought against the dictatorship; my mother fought in her time; I am the mother of a six-year-old girl and now it’s my turn to protest. “We want long-term changes that I hope she will enjoy in 20 years. “We have shitty wages and 12-hour shifts. It takes me two hours to get back from work, and when I get home I don’t see my daughter because she is asleep. “Marching with us, there are children, students, workers, parents, aunts, grandmothers. Grandmothers screaming for change! At their age and still fighting. “Look at us: we carry spoons and pots and pans [to rattle in protest]. We have water and baking soda to combat the effects of teargas. “And they have buckshot, teargas, lockups, police brutality, rapes, tortures – so who is still winning and who is still losing? The fight must go on. “Maybe nothing positive will come out of this, and we will win nothing. But I don’t want to wait until I’m 50 and realize I wasn’t brave enough. I screamed and I fought. I ran from the police, I got shot in the leg. Next, it’s going to be my daughter’s turn. I hope she doesn’t have to fight.” Antonia del Almendro, 25, film-maker “The people are tired of being treated like slaves or criminals. If you don’t have an important last name or don’t have money you are nothing. “The first demand is to change the constitution: we are the only country in Latin America that has the same constitution it had under a dictatorship. We have the same laws and the same economic model brought in by the dictatorship. And we are seeing that they still violate human rights like they did under the dictatorship. “It is incredible how they think we are stupid. But people woke up and are showing the government that we are not stupid: they won’t be sticking their finger down our throats ever again.” Germán David Requena Zeta, 18, student “As a student it’s very expensive to live here in Santiago. My parents and I are from northern Chile, so I live here alone. “I am fighting for a better education that costs less, a subway fare that is fair, and a life with more dignity. Because what we earn now is not enough to survive on. I want to become [economically] independent but I can’t – life it is just too expensive. I want to be a student, to live in peace – these are little things. “I am not afraid of the police– even though many people have been wounded, and others have been killed. I just don’t understand why they attack us with so much force.” María Borgoño, 32, art history student “The people who run the government are the same people who have economic power, it is a perfect circle: they pass laws to make more money, and the rest of us become poorer. “During the protests the government has killed people, women have been raped, men have been raped. Many have lost eyes while they protested peacefully. “Human rights have not been truly respected since the dictatorship. We are subjugated by the rich –and now it is time for that to end. It’s time for the people to have a kind of life that makes them want to live. “People live with a lot of stress: they’re in debt to the banks and businesses – and then spend that money in the same businesses in order to live.” Cristian Quiroga, 43, television camera assistant “I want the government and big business to stop looting my country – to stop taking what belongs to all of us and selling it to the highest bidder. “They make deals made for the copper, the water, the lithium, the ocean – everything is up for sale and flogged off for a pittance to other countries. And none of the cash comes down to us. “The Chilean people have changed their way of thinking because of social media and the internet. Chile has changed; the people are more liberal. But labor laws and our education system have not changed in 30 years. If we do get a new constitution? I’ll go out with my broom and my rags, and I’ll help clean the streets and repaint the country.” Tammy Cabezas, 21 “I came out to represent trans people. The average life expectancy of a trans person in Chile is 35, and demands that many are fighting for – like a decent pension – we can’t even dream of that. We are protesting because without a sexual revolution there is no social revolution. “My goal is to see Piñera and his ministers in prison for all that they have done – and that there is a law protecting trans and non-binary people. “I never imagined the protests would reach this size. Things were bad: people were dying; trans people were dying; the [indigenous] Mapuches were dying – and in the end the people woke up and realized this was wrong. “In a democracy, the people have the power. And the government has to listen to us.”
18||Here's the story of Pirate the cockatoo, the hissing white ghost who became boss of my heartThis is a story of Pirate, Australia’s proper number one rex regum et volucres, king of birds. As a fledging, so I was told, he was rescued in a relocation of sulphur-crested cockatoos from the vicinity of Tullamarine airport, so that he would not end up being a bird-strike victim caught up in a jet turbine of one of those long-haul international Boeing jetliners taking off at about 180mph to Hong Kong, London, Paris or wherever else these people carriers fly to on the planet. This wild young cockatoo was taken to central Australia, where the skies would eventually be large enough for his freewheeling temperament to roam. Within days of arriving in Alice Springs he came to live with my family as a basically wild, and seemingly untameable, rebellious adolescent. He hated everyone and hissed like a mad white ghost whenever anyone went near his cage. Every day I talked to him, paid him many compliments for his extraordinary beauty, and gave him the name of Pirate. Somehow I managed to clean his cage with all the newspapers he ripped up without having my hand bitten off while he was going completely bananas, and then I brought him fresh gumtree foliage to beautify his home, which he destroyed along with the newspaper, and gave him saucers of cut-up fruit, vegetables, seed and water. In other words, he was the boss and I was his slave. The little king spent his days watching me with his beady black eyes while listening to either classical or country and western music, and while I wrote my novel Plains of Promise. He took a keen interest in everything I did and ate, who I spoke to on the phone, the endless trail of visitors and, probably, he picked up all the local intrigues of the crazy ins and outs of Northern Territory politics, the confidential strategic thinking in Aboriginal campaigns, and whatever conversations were going on. One day, about six weeks after he arrived in our lounge room in a big cage and simply within no particular moment, instead of trying to bite me as usual, he let me pat him. We became the best of friends and he never bit me again. He did not care much for the rest of the family though, and his behaviour towards them was unpredictably lovable or full of jealousy, with wings expanded, screeching and hissing – especially if they got too close. We could not bear to see him in a cage so he became free range, and he sat beside me on the back of his own chair as I wrote. He then begun to sit on my shoulder, where he liked to groom strands of my hair, while watching the words of stories appearing one by one on the computer screen, and the world going by outside the window. It was from my shoulder that he begun to fully rule his new world. It got to the stage where he had to have everything I ate or drank. If I was having tea, he had to have his own small cup. If I was having cereal for breakfast, he had to have the same in his bowl. If I was having a baked-bean or cheese-and-salad sandwich on a plate or cracker biscuits, then he would have to have the same too. And all the while he was learning to speak very good English. If I pointed out that what he was listening to passing in the sky was an aeroplane, he would repeat the word straight back to me. He grew bored living in the house, and would let himself out of his cage to destroy stuff. He chewed practically all the window sills. He chewed the buttons off a number of TV remote controls – making it impossible for my husband to watch AFL, tennis or cricket. He would have chewed off the back of all our chairs if we had let him. He became an artist. He chewed along the covers and edges of pages of many books he selected from the bookshelves or found around the house. Some of these books of Pirate’s artwork became treasured possessions of friends. We put a small padlock on what was now his inside winter cage, where he really only slept in at night. This was to stop him roaming around the house when we were sleeping. But this bird was Houdini reincarnated. He was an escape artist. He had watched how we turned the key in the lock, and now he did this himself every morning so he could jump on the bed, lie on his back, and have his feathers scratched for hours if he could have gotten away with it. Although he basically had his own aviary in the backyard under the citrus trees he roamed freely in the garden, while doing a few odd jobs like pulling up all of my husband’s vegetable seedlings. He was always in my thoughts as my constant companion while writing my longer novel Carpentaria, so I ended up incorporating him into it. Why not? This is where he now looms larger than life, if that were at all possible, as the cockatoo named Pirate who belonged to the main character, Norm Phantom. Pirate soon took to the skies in Alice Springs, with complete freedom to fly around, and where perhaps he joined his cockatoo mates roosting in the palm trees in the mall until the honeyeaters chased him home. He would fly back at the end of the day to his aviary full of gum foliage, fresh water, fruit and seed. This was where he chatted to himself – sometimes in remembered bits of rhythms from his memory of either classical or C&amp;W music, and while telling the stories of his life in a jumble of sentences, random words and his own cockatoo language, interlaced over and over with his own name, Pirate. When we parted I felt as though I had lost my right arm. He still flies free, and loves a girl who cares for him. This is the way I always remember the boss in my heart. My family call all the sulphur-crested cockatoos we see in Melbourne Pirate. They’re all his relatives I am sure …
6||Still no inflation to speak of in a stagnant Australian economyThe hunt for signs of exuberance in the Australian economy will have to continue as the latest inflation figures released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Wednesday showed that demand in the economy remains utterly stagnant. Whenever I look at the inflation figures I always think the best financial advice anyone can ever get is to quit smoking. That of course is not the main reason why you should do it, but once again in September the biggest contributor to inflation was tobacco. Over the past year tobacco prices – due to the increases in excise – grew by 15%, well above the price rise of any alcohol: While the overall rate of inflation in the past year was 1.7%, for non-smokers it was closer to 1.3%. That, even with the massive rises in tobacco prices, we still are seeing inflation below the 2% floor of the Reserve Bank’s target is a good pointer of just how much the economy is lacking any growth in demand. While the consumer price index rose 1.7%, up from 1.6% in the June quarter, the average of the Reserve Bank’s two core inflation measures was a record low 1.4%. People are not spending. In effect there is less pressure for the Reserve Bank to worry about rising prices now than at any time in its history. In the past quarter, average core inflation was just 0.36%, down from 0.41% in June, and well below the 0.5% growth needed to get to the annual 2% target: The CPI did increase by 0.5%, which might have you thinking there is some sense of a return to normal demand, but really, if we look at what has been driving the increase in prices we see little evidence of a strong economy. Aside from tobacco, the big drivers of prices in September were recreation and culture and clothing: Now that might, again, seem like a good thing – if the prices of recreational and more discretionary items such as clothing are rising, then surely that means people are opening their wallets, going shopping and doing fun things? Well, no. The big increase among recreational and culture items was international travel prices – up 6.1% in the September quarter alone – and the increase in clothing and footwear occurred not due to a big jump in people buying such products but for the same reason for the increase in the price of international holidays – the falling Aussie dollar. The Australian dollar has fallen 7% in value against the US dollar since the start of the year. That makes travelling overseas and imports (which is basically all our clothing and footwear) more expensive. The falling dollar is good for our exporters and also helps local companies compete against imports, so the RBA would be very happy that the dollar is now as low as it has been this decade. It probably wouldn’t even mind it falling even further. The reason for the falling dollar is a combination of factors – our low interest rates (which makes putting your money in Australian bank accounts less profitable and so big investors seek higher returns elsewhere) and because the US dollar has been particularly strong since the middle of 2016. Usually the value of our currency rises and falls with the prices of our major commodities. But since the end of 2016, while the price of iron ore and coal has risen, the value of our dollar has fallen: The other main contributors to inflation have come via the drought – with strong rises in the price of meat, cereal and dairy foods: It all suggests no real sign of any great surge in household spending off the back of the tax cuts. After the June quarter GDP figures the prime minister and treasurer were suggesting we would need to wait until the September quarter figures to see any improvement. These figures are not out until the first week of December (coincidentally the final parliamentary sitting week of the year) but so far there is little sense of any good news to come. • Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian Australia
11||Labor’s Clare O’Neil says party cannot afford to just shift to the left or rightLabor frontbencher Clare O’Neil will challenge her colleagues to move beyond election postmortems centred on whether the ALP needs to shift to the right or left, arguing more resonant fault lines are emerging at the ballot box. O’Neil will use a speech to a Labor thinktank on Thursday to argue Labor needs to rethink its economic program, consider how it engages with voters on cultural issues, recalibrate how it campaigns to change minds rather than confirm pre-existing biases, and think about how it projects political leadership in an era of strongmen and reactionary populism. Joining Bill Shorten, Jim Chalmers, Joel Fitzgibbon, Mark Butler, Michelle Rowland and other frontbench players ruminating publicly on the consequences of May’s election defeat, O’Neil will argue left and right are no longer defining political divisions. “I see a bunch of new faultlines emerging which are increasingly important at the ballot box,” O’Neil will say. “I see a faultline between winners and losers in a digital economy which provides vastly more economic rewards to people who live in our cities. I see a faultline dividing Australians who want the community to look more like it did in the past, and those who love and value change. “A faultline dividing people who are worried about global interdependence, and those who see opportunity for global influence. A faultline between those who relish economic change and those who resist it. “Between young people who feel locked out of a life enjoyed by older generations, and those who think that kids have never had it better. Between open and closed, authoritarian and decentralised, the elites and the masses. “Political allegiances aren’t static. We don’t have a Brexit to smash open old loyalties. But slowly and surely, tectonic plates are on the move. In these moments, the parties that survive look alive.” O’Neil will argue that confusion, anxiety and complexity are critical to understanding the public mood in 2019, because technological disruption has upended the way people get and process information, form judgments about it, and share those judgments with others – and that revolution has played out in only 10 years. She says that disruption makes forming and holding on to stable majorities more challenging. O’Neil says cultural issues, rather than more complex economic ones, have become “the preferred shorthand for who speaks for voters and not to them”. The Labor frontbencher says rather than playing to populist or strongman models of leadership, which are flourishing in a fractured political climate, Australian Labor can look across the Tasman to Jacinda Ardern, who models “irrepressible likeability and [a] vivid, genuine commitment to her country”. She will say Labor is well placed to project leadership predicated on common values post-election because “there is no more authentic person in Australian politics than Anthony Albanese”. O’Neil will say Labor needs a new narrative on the economy, because the model Labor has pursued since the 1980s of growing the economy by opening it up is broken. She will say the evidence for new approaches is national wealth increasing but families going backwards, business investment at record lows and stalling productivity growth. “We have not told a sufficiently compelling story to Australia’s 2 million small businesses, or to our friends in digital,” she will say. “Technology is another issue where every political party is underdone. How families are coping with technological change may be the barbecue stopper of the teenies. Yet it is largely peripheral to what we talk about in politics.” She argues that there is a strait jacket culture developing in progressive circles “where membership is granted with a box of ideas, and if you don’t accept one of the ideas in the box, you do not merely have a different opinion, you are obviously wrong, probably stupid and possibly subhuman”. O’Neil says while she supports most ideas in the progressive box, Labor also needs to engage in the conversation about political correctness. “Not everyone with a concern about the immigration rate is a bigot,” she will say. “Not everyone with a hesitation about changing gender roles is sexist. Not every social change is inarguably a good one.” She says Labor will not be able to implement social change without a mandate “and if Australians feel they can’t question assumptions and positions in conversation with us, they will find someone else to talk to about it. The current environment can see political discourse descend to a form of tribal performance art.” Nothing is gained, she says, when everyone plays to their audience, no one learns anything, no one listens and no minds are changed. O’Neil’s speech on Thursday follows the first major speech of Albanese’s leadership. On Tuesday, the Labor leader outlined his approach to jobs and the future of work, and began the task of presenting climate change as opportunity for blue collar workers.
3||The bond between adult children and their grandparents is an under-told love storyIn Lulu Wang’s recent autobiographical film The Farewell, a 20-something Chinese-American woman travels back to China to spend a week with her Nai Nai, her paternal grandmother, who is dying of stage-four cancer but doesn’t know it. The whole family has chosen to keep the diagnosis secret, lest the distress hasten Nai Nai’s demise. The central character, Billi, spends time with her ailing grandmother but it quickly becomes clear the trip nourishes something in the younger woman too. Billi leaves behind her empty city apartment, career disappointment and recent rejection from a prestigious fellowship program. With her grandmother she finds an intimate bond, a sense of identity rooted in cultures she has been dislocated from – both Chinese culture and the idiosyncratic, close culture of her family – as well as some perspective on her own existential malaise. “Life is not just about what you do,” Nai Nai tells Billi. “It’s more about how you do it.” The film is about immigration and identity, and has resonated strongly with Chinese-American and other diaspora communities, with layers of meaning white Australian viewers like myself could not fully understand. It is also a love story, about one of the lesser discussed but most meaningful relationships some of us are lucky enough to experience: the bond between an adult child and a loving grandparent. The importance of grandparents in the lives of young children is widely studied and intuitively understood: they can provide deep attachment bonds and safety. Practically, they are an increasingly critical source of unpaid childcare for working parents. While caring for small children can be taxing and imposing, studies suggest there can be real benefits for the grandparents too. The ABC’s recent hit series Old People’s Home for 4 Year Olds chronicled the positive impacts infants had on their elderly companion’s lives and physical health. As adults, our relationships with our grandparents shift, and though we may no longer rely on them to look after us in a literal sense – and the caring dynamic may even reverse – it can be just as fulfilling. If you’re lucky, these relationships are rooted in unconditional love, acceptance and family ritual. With grandparents, there aren’t the complex intricacies of the relationship between a parent and “adult child” – the term is an oxymoron of course, but it’s an apt descriptor of who we become among our families. For some, grandparents might be bridges back to old countries, languages and cultures. For others, they can be a connection to a different time and way of life. I had a similar experience to Billi last year when I returned to Australia from New York. After three years, I’d said goodbye to a city, a partner, a journalism job, an apartment and my 20s. Unmoored and uncertain about what would come next, one of the first things I did was make the six-hour drive west, across the mountains and parched plains to spend a week with my 94-year-old grandmother, Gwynne, in her redbrick home in Dubbo. We had nothing and everything in common – she was raised on a farm to mainly Irish descendants, married at 19, had six children and never held a paying job – though she worked hard all her life. Family and community were her whole world – “my people”, she called them – and loving, human connection was everything. My late grandpa – from more stoic stock – used to joke drily my grandma would hug you goodbye if you went to the toilet. For a week we hung out. I would make her favourite dinners – sausages burnt black, served with tomato sauce and a glass of white wine with an ice cube – and we would watch TV together. She would roll her walker out under the shade of the big golden rain tree in her front yard to chat while I turned the hose on the red earth. We would have cups of tea in rooms cluttered with family photos and stacks of letters and old Christmas cards. She would run through the familiar repertoire of family legends with her gnarled hand on mine – her mother’s buggy accident, her rainy wedding day, the time my mum, then a toddler, handed her a live redback spider. I spent much of the time feeling stressed about my next career move. When I got a call offering me a phone interview for a new job, I reluctantly told her I would need a few hours alone with my laptop to prepare. Less than half an hour later, I could hear the wheels of her walker rolling into the kitchen. “Joey,” she said. “I don’t want to disturb you, but I’ve just got to read you this poem,” she said, holding up a tattered little book. She launched into Banjo Paterson’s A Bush Christening, only pausing to hoot between stanzas. I wanted to be annoyed but how could I be? She had never done a job interview in her life, and of course enjoying a poem together was more important. For people of my generation this is why these relationships can be so powerful. Our lives and identities are so deeply rooted in our work, in our digital lives, in often impermanent relationships and transient homes. Through our grandparents, we can access a different way of being in the world, a pre-neoliberal worldview, a different sense of belonging and identity. They gift us the wide sense of perspective that comes with age and witnessing the sweep of history. The Farewell has beautiful coda (spoiler alert – though it’s been widely discussed on the press tour). The real Nai Nai survived the cancer, in total ignorance, and is still alive today, years after the events depicted in the film took place. The title turns about to be something of a misnomer. Lulu Wang said in interviews that at every screening, people come up to her in tears to talk about their own grandmothers. “My goal is to leave people talking about the film, or talking about their own lives and their own family, or calling their grandma,” she said. “That’s my gift to the world. We should all call our grandmas more.” My trip was a farewell, of sorts, though I didn’t know it. Four months later, my grandmother had a stroke, which she would never fully recover from. The next time I drove out to Dubbo it was to put her in the red earth, to share stories and songs and poems from her life at her funeral, with my people. The final lesson these adult relationships with our grandparents teach us is the inevitability of loss. But through it we learn how we can become torch-bearers of histories, cultures and memories, if we choose to hold on to them. Even when they’re gone, they are lasting reminder: who we are is so much bigger than what we do.
11||Number of grandparents claiming childcare benefits plummets after 'tougher test'The number of grandparents claiming childcare benefits has dropped dramatically since an overhaul of the system last year, raising concerns that vulnerable children may have dropped out of formal care arrangements or ended up in foster care. Figures from the Parliamentary Library obtained by Labor’s early childhood education spokeswoman, Amanda Rishworth, shows the number of grandparents receiving the new grandparent childcare subsidy was 3,300 in March 2019, compared with the 4,340 in March 2018 who received the previous grandparent childcare benefit. The research suggests the drop of about 24% may be due to a tightening of eligibility requirements, but the reason for the decline was “unclear”. The number of children for whom the grandparent benefit is claimed has also dropped, from 7,570 in March 2018 to 4,760 in March this year – a 37% decline. A spokesperson for the Department of Education said that because the payments were different and “operated under different policy settings” it was not possible to compare the figures, but it was unable to say how many grandparents were now accessing childcare benefits compared to the old system. Rishworth said the figures were “deeply concerning”, saying the payment was most often accessed by families of vulnerable children where the grandparent became the primary carer. “It is concerning that the new changes that came into effect have seen such a drop in grandparents accessing these payments,” Rishworth said. “The system is overly complex and I think that may have caught out a huge number of grandparents, but I think it is also a change in definition about how much care you are required to take which would have made whole lot of grandparents ineligible.” The new eligibility criteria requires the principal carer to provide at least 65% of ongoing daily care of the child compared with being the “major provider”, which allowed for 85 hours of the 168 hours in a week. Prior to the new childcare system coming into effect, the peak body in NSW, Community Early Learning Australia, said the new criteria may affect eligibility for grandparents, saying it was arguably a “tougher test”. Rishworth said her concern was what is happening to the children whose grandparents were not able to access the subsidy. “It is highly likely that they have dropped out of the system,” Rishworth said. “The chances are if they were accessing the payment and are no longer doing so, then they are unlikely to now be in formal care. “These are really vulnerable children and we do want to do everything we can to prevent them from going into the foster care system and if we can do that by properly supporting grandparents then that is a good thing.” A spokesperson for the department said grandparent carers who were not eligible for grandparent subsidy may be eligible for assistance through the child care subsidy “dependent on their circumstance”. “In certain situations, grandparents may be entitled to other additional childcare subsidy (ACCS) payments, such as ‘ACCS (child wellbeing)’,” the spokesperson said. “Additionally, grandparents who are not the principal carers of their grandchildren but provide between 14% and 64% of ongoing daily care may be entitled to childcare subsidy for any childcare they may use, provided they meet the relevant eligibility criteria.” The release of the figures come as a new report from KPMG on Wednesday found the government’s new system created a “workforce disincentive rate” which left some families financially worse off if they increased their hours. KPMG said changes to the system that removed the disincentive could help parents back to work and boost GDP by close to $700m, with its proposal costing less than half this.
11||Not a drop of water after government spends $80m on rights from agribusinessThe federal government has received not a drop of water for the $80m it spent on buying water entitlements from Eastern Australia Agriculture in 2017, a company once linked to the energy minister, Angus Taylor. Taylor was a director and co-founder of EAA, an agribusiness in Queensland, which was backed by a group of foreign investors. Taylor founded the Australian company in 2007 and served briefly as a director between 2008 and 2009, well before becoming an MP in 2013. His business partner, Tony Reid, was also a director and acted as a consultant on the controversial sale of overland flow entitlements to the government. The commonwealth environmental water holder, Jody Swirepik, confirmed last week during Senate estimates that the rights bought from EAA have not yielded any water at all. Swirepik explained that the entitlement volume was 71,456 megalitres and the long-term average yield should be about 28,740 megalitres. “Just that indication will tell you that you only expect to get it every couple of years. Since the purchase, there hasn’t been a flood down that system, so no water has become available,” she said. Under questioning, Swirepik said exercising the entitlement would depend on cyclones in Queensland and there could be a gap as long as seven years before the commonwealth would receive any water. However, she said the commonwealth environmental water holder was “very supportive of the purchase” because it could benefit the Ramsar-listed Narran Lakes. The drought has meant there has not been any heavy rainfall in south-west Queensland that would cause overland flows. The sale was controversial when it was made public in 2017 because the government purchased the water without a tender through direct negotiations with the company, invoking a clause in the purchasing rules that say the government can accept an unsolicited offer in “exceptionally advantageous conditions”. There have also been questions about value for money and the sale was referred to the auditor general as part of a broader review into water buybacks. EAA immediately booked a $52m gain on the water rights it sold. Following the sale, the two properties were sold to new owners and the original investors were paid out. There is no suggestion Taylor or Reid improperly influenced the purchase. The Guardian has subsequently revealed that the main beneficiaries of the sale were a number of foreign investors who held their interest through the Caymans-listed subsidiary. One of these was Pacific Alliance Group, whose chief investment officer, Chris Gradel, was at Oxford with Taylor. Taylor has said publicly that he resigned all his directorships in EAA and its Caymans subsidiary before entering parliament and that he neither he nor his family benefited from the sale of the water to the federal government. He has said he was not aware of the sale until it was made public. There is nothing to suggest that is untrue. However, Taylor’s business partner in a number of rural ventures, Tony Reid, was the adviser to Eastern Australia Irrigation, EAA’s Cayman parent company, during the sale process. Reid’s role included providing advice on the volumes of water that the government could expect under the overland flows. The Guardian has now received a number of documents under freedom of information laws which show the office of the former minister for agriculture, Barnaby Joyce, took an active interest in the controversial water purchase soon after he took over responsibility for water buybacks from the then environment minister, Greg Hunt. Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In an interview with the ABC in April, Joyce said the buyback was “negotiated at arm’s length” and he did not set the price or vendor. The new documents show the minister’s senior policy adviser, Richard Hyett, asked for background information on EAA soon after Joyce became minister and both he and the chief of staff, Matt Coulton, were kept abreast of negotiations with EAA. The documents also show the Queensland government had proposed buying both the EAA properties in September 2015 to Hunt, but this had stalled when there was a reshuffle of federal ministers in September 2015. Joyce had publicly opposed water buybacks in the rural press before he became minister because he was worried about how it would impact on the St George area, where he had lived. Instead the department came up with an alternative plan to buy just a fraction of EAA’s water, consulting with Joyce’s staff about the new approach. The staff worked with the Queensland government over how to sell the idea to their minister, even suggesting new wording for the letter. Joyce ultimately supported the $80m deal after he was convinced it would have minimal impact on the region. The documents underscore that the government knew that the water they were about to purchase would only be available intermittently, and that the real object of the purchase was to meet the targets for water recovery under the Murray-Darling Basin Plan on paper only. “The purchase of these entitlement would marginally constrain production [on the two properties] in higher flow years, but would have virtually no impact under low-flow years when the region is more vulnerable,” the department told the minister. In other words, there would be no water available under the purchased licences when there was lower rainfall and the two properties would continue to be able to take water from the river under its other higher security licences. The department said the purchase would only reduce the percentage of land under irrigation from 34% to 25% in high rainfall years, but this percentage reduction would be lower in normal rainfall years. When the purchase was announced, the then local member, David Littleproud, said: “This is overland flow. According to the independent study we commissioned NC Economics to do, this will mean 2 to 3 per cent of peak production will be lost.” Nonetheless the department has insisted that the $80m purchase was good value for the taxpayer and would deliver “valuable environmental water”.
0||Ultimate warrior Sam Burgess retires as one of England's best rugby league exportsIt was a true testament to Sam Burgess’ authenticity that he remained as popular and respected in the game amongst both players and fans as he did considering how much time he spent in front of the judiciary and how much time he spent engaging in the dark arts of rugby league. But no matter how high the tackle, how ferocious the hit, how close to the line he travelled, Burgess was beloved by nearly all and sundry. Perhaps it was his Englishness. Australians have long held a fascination with the great Brits who have come out and tried their wares in the premiership. From the likes of Dave Bolton and Tommy Bishop in the 1960s through to Mal Reilly in the 1970s, Ellery Hanley and Garry Schofield in the 1980s to Burgess, James Graham and the plethora now in Canberra, Australian league fans have long respected and admired the Brits for both their skill and their character. Perhaps it was his story. Sam lost his father when he was young. He grew up in league-mad Dewsbury and was playing Super League at the tender age of 17. Russell Crowe saw him and wanted him and soon brought out an entire clan, including his mother, to be both the face and heart of South Sydney. Perhaps it was his charm. Burgess became a media darling. He was equal parts loveable rogue and smooth operator, quick with a one-liner but always wearing his heart on his sleeve. He was not afraid to be himself, an increasingly rare quality in modern athletes. Most likely though, the game loved Sam because of his unrelenting toughness. He played rugby league the way it should be played: hard. He asked no favours and he certainly didn’t go about dishing them out. He was fearless in everything he did on the field, an enforcer from what seems like a bygone era. He would find the biggest, toughest bloke in a different jersey and he would make it his mission to alpha dog him until victory was attained and the final siren sounded. He wasn’t averse to picking out a halfback either and making their life hell for 80 minutes, spotting them up and hitting them at every opportunity. In what is the most physical and aggressive collision sport on earth, Burgess stood tall throughout his entire career as the most aggressive and most physical. He really was the ultimate warrior. While his ferocious hits will long be his legacy, arguably the finest demonstration of his toughness was his performance in the 2014 grand final, a showing that etched his name into the most revered annals of rugby league lore. In the early stages of the decider against Canterbury, Burgess collided with fellow Englishman James Graham. It resulted in a fractured cheekbone and fractured eye socket that would have ended the evening for nearly every competitor. Burgess refused to come off. He went on to play a grand final for the ages, winning the Clive Churchill medal and guiding South Sydney to their first premiership in 43 years. There was not a Canterbury fan who took the Burgess injury to be anything but a terrible omen. Not a single one thought Burgess would succumb to the pain. If anything, there was a gut-wrenching feat it would inspire. It did. Much like John Sattler over four decades before, Burgess playing through blood and pain and a busted face to guide the “Pride of the League” to a premiership has stood tall for all that is great about the game. A warrior became human. And a mere man achieved extraordinary things in the most dire of circumstances. It will endure as long as rugby league endures. Good players retire every year. Great ones often do too. A select few get the glorious fairytale farewell of a grand final victory. Some, If they are lucky, get the farewell season tour. Others are just happy to go out on their own terms. For the likes of Burgess though, a player who left it all on the field, the body just cannot take anymore, forcing a sudden and sharp departure that sends shockwaves through the game, a poignant reminder that even the most imposing of gladiators will fight their last battle. Sam Burgess is now gone. He did not go gently into that good night though. He blistered and blasted and burned like Guy Fawkes night, a true force of nature who imposed his will on the game until he could give no more. The game, of course, will roll on. It always does. But it has lost just a little bit of its character, a little bit of its charm and a little bit of its individuality with the departure of a player that will rightly be remembered as arguably the greatest British player in premiership history.
0||Twenty20 domination in view as Justin Langer corrects Australia's courseAs the Australian men’s team launched into their home summer over the weekend, powering their way to a T20 victory over Sri Lanka, one could almost hear the faint echoes of distant summers past. A sunny afternoon. A clinic of muscular first-innings batting, personal milestones, and sympathy for the opposition bordering on mild condescension. Then the innings break, when you ask, “is there a game here?”, during which time brutish Australian quicks have already stung the bodies and claimed the wickets of hapless top-order fodder in fading light, while commentary reminds us that they “must adjust to the bounce in Australia”. The match already over, it is then relegated (or promoted) to something of an exhibition, as we while away the remaining overs gawking at the superior speed, power and athleticism of an exciting Australian unit, whetting our appetites for further demolitions ahead. For Australian cricket fans who lived through the nineties and noughties vintage, these displays can be intoxicating in their familiarity. And after calamities industrial and cultural, such victories are frankly pretty welcome, too. So, with no looming crisis, no impending review, the Ashes safe, and five ODI World Cups to rest easy on, the question surely becomes: can Australia now conquer T20 cricket? Part of understanding the solution is to recognise the problem. While Australia have never been short of excellent T20 players, the national setup has rarely prioritised the format, and has often found itself playing catch-up with other nations. Despite Sunday’s annihilation, estimates have Australia around fourth in the global order, behind India, England and West Indies. Australia’s fortunes have often suffered at the hands of its own rigid cricketing ideology. We are self-appointed custodians of technique, and how a player is meant to “look”. It means the clever player can be overlooked for the thoroughbred, and there’s an uneasy relationship with the sort of lateral thinking T20 strategy demands. “Just go out and whack ‘em,” was how we used to do it, pre-Langer. Though as he’s done with nearly everything, Justin Langer is correcting the course. The team has managed to rid itself of a top order with five openers, and despite some hipster protestations to the contrary, Steve Smith’s inclusion introduces the sort of insurance that permits David Warner and Aaron Finch to explode early, safe in the knowledge any mess can be cleaned, should it not work out. Moreover, for every Adelaide flat-track that renders Smith ineffectual, the T20 World Cup will throw up tricky chases on low-slow wickets, with the wile and guile of world class spinners to overcome. Nobody in Australia solves these puzzles better than Smith, and this is where his value will come to the fore. While Warner, Finch and Glenn Maxwell pick themselves at this point, there will be sterner tests for Australia’s middle-lower order. Are Alex Carey and Ashton Agar able to finish an innings with a strike rate of 220, like the way Kieron Pollard or Hardik Pandya can? Will Australia take another look at Dan Christian – global T20 expert, inveterate closer of games and tournament winner – or does returning to a veteran risk losing face? On the bowling side, are “bouncy home pitches” enough to sustain a relatively samey, pace-on attack? India regularly commence with two spinners – would Australia consider Chris Green to defend 12 balls bowling around-the-wicket off-spinners during the powerplay? Or would that be too strange? Kane Richardson is great at the death, and AJ Tye has a knuckle-ball, but there are few other bowling tricks among the quicks. Adam Zampa regularly exceeds expectations with his slide-in spin and occasional wrong’un, and bowls fantastically to good players on flat wickets, but generally speaking Australian cricket is bereft of the sort of quality mystery spin and trickery that can stop an innings in its tracks. Options would be ideal. Given next year’s T20 World Cup is at home, it may be argued that high octane pace is indeed the answer. After all, Mitchell Starc, Pat Cummins, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Johnson did the business here in 2015. However, while the longer of the short formats can sustain a pace-on approach, the shorter of the two increasingly emphasises pace-off. And besides, Starc has not reached the dizzying heights of 150 for some time (as he did in 2015), while Cummins hovers somewhere closer to 140, too. International batsmen deal with pace regularly now – would Australia countenance the idea that thunderbolts have lost some lustre? There are 23 T20 games until next year’s World Cup commences, through which time we will form a sense of Australia’s approach. In a format that demands invention and original thinking, Australia’s willingness to emerge from the shackles of its own ideology will be instructive. So will the appointment, and age, of its next selector.
19||Yam dunk: how we fell in love with sweet potatoesHere’s a seasonal question for you. When James Taylor sat down to write about the childhood sweetheart who had finally agreed to be his girl, which vegetable metaphor did he plump for? The sweet potato. That’s right. “Oh Lord, I feel fine today,” he crooned on his 1988 album Never Die Young. “I’m walking on cloud nine today …” Why, you ask. “I’m prepared to tell you why,” he replies. “It’s strictly on account of my sweet potato pie.” Although few women would be delighted to be compared, however loosely, to a dish made with starchy tubers, Taylor does a decent job of selling it, and its main ingredient. It is tender, he says, it’s sweet, it’s soft and deep; it’s soulful. If you’ve ever had a slow-roasted batch of this succulent vegetable, you’ll know he’s right. Sweet potatoes – now at the peak of their season – are the business. They are also big business. Over the past decade, according to Kantar Worldpanel, demand for sweet potatoes in the UK has quadrupled. For a while, they mostly came from warmer climes – North Carolina, Israel – but in 2015, farmers in Kent pulled out all the stops to put a UK-grown crop in the supermarkets. That same year, the Office for National Statistics included the sweet potato in the illustrative shopping basket it uses to measure inflation. And last year, consumer research showed most people would opt for a sweet potato side dish over a straight-up potato one. Yet most of us have only begun to plumb those tender, sweet, soulful depths. First up, sweet potatoes don’t have to be orange. Those Kentish farmers chose to cultivate the familiar red-skinned, flame-fleshed variety, often known as yams in the southern US. But if you have a Caribbean market stall or an Asian grocer nearby, you can probably get hold of something different. There are purple sweet potatoes, white sweet potatoes, yellow sweet potatoes. With the variations in colour come differences in texture, density, flavour and uses. The food website Saveur has a tantalising guide to 16 kinds, from the tan-skinned hannah, which bakes into a soft, dry yellow, perfect for mashing, to korean purple, with its white flesh and magenta exterior yielding a subtle chestnut flavour. If you can, try them all. Sweet potato fries or baked wedges are, it would appear, the thing that has pushed the root veg into the mainstream. And it is hard to argue with them. The food writer Anna Jones recommends coating wedges in polenta before baking – it crisps them up nicely. She serves hers with a chipotle yoghurt dipping sauce. If you want to deep-fry yours, Felicity Cloake cautions that they are best thick-cut, par-boiled (with a little bicarb) and coated in a cornflour paste (she spikes hers with paprika), then rolled in cornmeal. There is, however, more to sweet potatoes than chips. The Mississippi-born chef Brad McDonald, in his book Deep South, does a smoked pork belly served with a spiced sweet potato casserole topped with pecan praline and Italian meringue. Yotam Ottolenghi mixes them, roasted, with pickled onion, coriander and goat’s cheese as an accompaniment to fish or chicken. Vegans and “clean-eaters”, meanwhile, routinely tout the virtues of the sweet potato just as much as any meat eater. Depending, of course, on what you load them up with, sweet potatoes are a healthier option than conventional potatoes. They are lower in carbohydrates and calories, and higher in fibre and vitamin A. Their sweetness marries with a host of aromatics – from paprika to cinnamon, thyme to cumin and coriander. And their creaminess suggests all manner of pairings: sour cream, salsa verde, miso, chilli. Nigel Slater steams slices to make a fragrant split orange lentil dal that he serves with fresh coriander. And Melissa Hemsley uses chunks as the base for a lemongrass-infused chickpea and coconut curry. Sweet potatoes also make an excellent starting point for a soup, a stew, a bake or a pie. The traditional sweet potato pie – a Thanksgiving classic – is made with butter, flavoured with vanilla and cinnamon, encased in shortcrust and served with whipped cream. Deb Perelman of the Smitten Kitchen blog went through a southern food infatuation, as she put it, a few years back, but hankered after something a little lighter for afters. She found it in the Lee Brothers’ buttermilk sweet potato pie – more cheesecake than stodge. Tanya Harris, of the My Forking Life blog, does a mean vegan take on the trad Jamaican sweet potato pudding using coconut milk, brown sugar and allspice, but forgoing the rum you would find in other recipes. Jamaican sweet potatoes are of the denser kind, meaning the pudding is more cake-like. But even if you only have orange jewel sweet potatoes and have to spoon the resulting bake into a bowl, it will still be delicious. Then there are the many Japanese sweets to be made with the vegetable. The most popular is a double-baked beauty: sweet potato puree with butter, sugar, cream and egg. A scattering of black sesame seeds on top, and you’re golden. Mostly though, it’s best to remember that the sweet potato doesn’t need much doing to it to be perfect. It is one of those culinary failsafes, a foil to every kitchen foible. There are vendors in Japan who park vans on street corners and belt out: “Ishi yaki imo”, which means stone-baked sweet potato. That is all they are selling. One bite of the piping-hot tat wrapped in newspaper and you’re sold. You’re going home to rustle up more of the same in a hot, hot oven. Slow-roasting the potato in its skin means the moisture is retained and the sugars in the skin caramelise. As savoury as it is sweet, this is a whole warming meal for cold hands on a winter’s day. And that’s something to sing about.
20||Counter-Strike trading found to be 'nearly all' money launderingThe gaming firm Valve has halted trading of some in-game items in its popular multiplayer shooter Counter-Strike: Global Offensive after discovering that “nearly all” of the trading was part of a money-laundering scheme run by “worldwide fraud networks”. In CS:GO, players can earn containers with cosmetic items, which can be unlocked using keys bought either in-game or for real money from other players. Valve said it had closed the market between players, and in patch notes for the latest version of CS:GO – first reported by Motherboard – it gave its reasons. “In the past, most key trades we observed were between legitimate customers. However, worldwide fraud networks have recently shifted to using CS:GO keys to liquidate their gains,” it said. “At this point, nearly all key purchases that end up being traded or sold on the marketplace are believed to be fraud-sourced. As a result we have decided that newly purchased keys will not be tradeable or marketable.” Valve did not go into detail, but it is likely the trading was used to launder income from credit card fraud and other financial crimes. Buying and reselling digital goods is a popular way for financial criminals to cash out from identity theft. In the past, iTunes and Amazon gift cards have also been popular. Counter-Strike has previously faced criticism from regulators for enabling gambling by children. In July the Gambling Commission’s programme director, Brad Enright, told MPs that CS:GO was responsible for more enquiries than any other game. “We’ve had dialogue with Valve Corporation,” Enright said. “Where we draw their attention to particular games where British consumers including children are gambling on those sites, they have closed them down. “We’ve said that’s not a sustainable approach. They’ve created this situation … and there’s an onus and responsibility on them to address the byproduct of how they’re operating.”
21||Richard Phillips obituaryMy brother Richard Phillips, known as Dick, has died at the age of 56. Despite the fact that illness stamped much of his life, he lived with determination, wit and cheer, travelling widely and pursuing what pleasures he could. Born in London, Dick was the son of Nigel, a lecturer at Soas, and Hazel (nee Chesterman), a nursery school teacher. He attended University College school, Hampstead, and later won a scholarship to Cambridge to study classics. Dick was diagnosed with schizophrenia in his 20s and multiple sclerosis (MS) in his 30s. The record of his life was never going to feature worldly success. Yet he worked while he could – as a tennis coach, dispatch rider and carpenter. And he built numerous pieces of furniture for family members, including a wonderful treehouse. MS brought a growing catalogue of problems: urinary tract infections, impaired kidney function, poor vision, wasted legs that he could no longer feel, and a growing inability to swallow or, in the end, to talk. The strong sedatives he took for schizophrenia blunted his thinking. Yet he loved – and lived for – music (especially funk and R&amp;B), food (especially Chinese crispy duck), sharp clothes and haircuts, and tobacco (Cutters Choice). He enjoyed shooting the breeze with relatives, carers and anyone else who would hear him out. And before MS shrank his world, he roamed widely, visiting Egypt, Israel, Greece, Turkey, Portugal, India and the US, which he drove right across. Later, he travelled solo to Venice and Amsterdam, turning a new motorised wheelchair into a scuffed near-wreck in the space of a few weeks. Nearer home, he enjoyed many camping trips in the UK. To the very end, he valued his life. In his last months, when even eating and smoking were impossible, two things still earned the description “perfect”: having his hair washed, and chewing on small pieces of ripe mango. Anguish, anxiety and impatience all dissolved in the satisfaction of bringing pleasures like these to someone who could not pursue them independently. Dick is survived by his father and his sisters, Penny and me.
4||‘Extraordinary’: TfL criticised over Uber licence extensionTransport for London made Uber promise to verify drivers’ identities and ensure their documents are genuine in exchange for a temporary licence to operate, in a deal that drew an incredulous response from the trade body for black-cab drivers. The ride-hailing firm was granted a two-month extension to its licence in September after TfL refused to issue it with a full permit to operate in the capital amid concerns over the company’s attitude towards the safety of passengers. The temporary extension came with several new conditions attached, according to documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act. One condition, headlined “driver identity”, demands that the company put in place systems to ensure that any drivers using the app are licensed by TfL and registered with Uber. TfL asked for the pledge after a case in which a woman in Leeds was raped by a man using his brother’s login details to drive an Uber, which is not permitted by the app. Among other new conditions is a requirement that Uber ensure that drivers do not use “fraudulent” documents for their licence or insurance. In a letter to TfL, seen by the Guardian, the Licensed Taxi Drivers’ Association (LTDA), which represents black-cab drivers in London, said it was “extraordinary” that such conditions needed to be imposed in the first place. “It should go without saying that London private hire vehicle operators … should have robust policies and procedures in place to ensure that drivers are who they say they are, and that they have the requisite valid licences and insurances in place,” lawyers for the LTDA wrote. “It is extraordinary that [Uber] needs to be told to undertake appropriate checks to verify that documentation provided by drivers is legitimate and to notify TfL where potentially fraudulent documentation is submitted.” They said the content of the conditions fuelled concerns that Uber’s enthusiasm for innovation was “not matched by any corresponding interest in dealing with the public safety pitfalls such innovation causes”. Uber said it had made “significant changes” to its business over the past two years, amid mounting concern about the risks that its business model poses to passengers. “This includes launching new safety features for riders, introducing better protections for licensed drivers and we’ve improved our corporate governance and compliance,” said a spokesperson. A TfL spokesperson said: “We have granted a licence to Uber London Limited to operate for two months while we request additional material from them and will consider that information as part of any future licensing decision. “As with other operators, we have attached a number of conditions to Uber London Limited’s licence, which we consider necessary and appropriate to ensure passenger safety and security.” The ride-hailing app is expected to seek a permanent licence or another extension at the end of the two-month period.
21||Law banning assisted dying must be reviewed, say MPsThe law banning terminally ill people from being helped to end their lives must be reviewed because it may not be working, a cross party group of MPs have said. They say the government should examine whether a total ban on assisted dying should be ended. The call was triggered by police chief Ron Hogg telling the Guardian in September he wanted the right to end his own life to free him from the agony of motor neurone disease. Furthermore, 17 of his fellow police and crime commissioners who oversee forces across England and Wales say a change in the law should be considered. Ron Hogg, 67, the elected police, crime and victims commissioner of Durham, was diagnosed in August with motor neurone disease, an incurable condition that leads to muscle wasting and death. He said he already needs help to breathe and wants the right to end his suffering at a time chosen by him and his family. The MPs who have written a letter to the Guardian calling for a review include Oliver Letwin and Nick Boles, as well as Labour MPs and the former Liberal Democrat leader Vince Cable and the Green party MP Caroline Lucas. Some of the MPs believe a review is needed but are not convinced the law should change; others believe assisted dying should now be allowed. They write: “MPs from across the House of Commons have repeatedly asked the Ministry of Justice to look at the effects of the current blanket ban on assisted dying and how it is enforced. “This week we heard from a group of police and crime commissioners who have now also called on the government to examine the consequences of section 2 of the 1961 Suicide Act, which criminally implicates anyone providing assistance to someone to die. “No matter our views on whether and to what extent assisted dying can be legalised safely, we should all agree that the only way to ensure the law is fit for purpose is to hear from those it affects most.” The law on assisted dying is a hugely emotive issue that keeps coming before the courts and into the criminal justice system. In September, Mavis Eccleston, 80, was cleared by a jury of murdering her terminally ill husband, Dennis, after they formed a pact to end their lives together. Earlier this year, Ann Whaley was investigated for accompanying her husband to Dignitas, the suicide clinic in Switzerland, where he ended his life after suffering from MND. Others who have supported their terminally ill loved ones such as James Howley were also investigated by police. In their letter, 18 police and crime commissioners, elected to oversee police forces, say even officers who end up investigating such cases find it distressing. He said: “Many will have experienced or heard of cases where the blanket ban on assisted dying has caused distress, confusion and pain for dying people, their loved ones, and even the investigating police officers themselves. “We believe it is time for a renewed look at the functioning of the existing law on assisted dying. While there are clearly differences of opinion as to whether or how the law should change, we contend that the law is not working as well as it could and seek an inquiry to confirm that. “We owe it to dying and bereaved people, and their families, to try and find a better way of dealing with terminal illness, including the position around assisted dying.” The letter is signed by Hogg and PCCs including those for West Yorkshire, Merseyside and Thames Valley. Objections to allowing assisted dying include fears some people would be pressured into ending their life. A spokesperson for the Ministry of Justice said: “We have the deepest sympathies for families in these terribly saddening circumstances. This is a matter of individual conscience, and any change in the law is for parliament rather than government to decide.” MPs voted against a change in the law in 2015.
12||Grenfell inquiry: Boris Johnson tells families 'justice will be done'Boris Johnson has said the government will fully accept the findings of a report on failings in the Grenfell Tower disaster, promising survivors and relatives that “the truth will out and justice will be done”. Responding to the report by the inquiry chairman, Sir Martin Moore-Bick, on the causes of the blaze at the west London block in June 2017 that killed 72 people, the prime minister opened a Commons debate by promising a rapid official response. “I can confirm that where Sir Martin recommends responsibility for fire safety be taken on by central government, we will legislate accordingly,” he told MPs. “And more widely, we plan to accept in principle all of the recommendations that Sir Martin makes of central government.” Watched by relatives, survivors and campaigners from the public gallery, Johnson said he would “not allow the lessons of this tragedy to fall through the cracks”. He said: “The night of 14 June was a horrendous night. But in the darkness we have also seen the best of humanity: the residents who sacrificed their own lives to save their children or neighbours; the local community that rallied round in such an incredible fashion, holding the survivors in a tight embrace as the authorities failed to step up.” Paying tribute to the Grenfell community, he added: “To them I say once again that the truth will out and justice will be done, and that Grenfell Tower and the people who called it home will never be forgotten.” Responding for Labour, Jeremy Corbyn called the fire “an avoidable tragedy”. He condemned the government’s response as “too slow and too weak on every front”, including on rehousing survivors and replacing flammable cladding on other buildings. Moore-Bick called for urgent action by the government to improve safety in high-rise blocks. Grenfell United, which represents hundreds of affected members of the community, condemned what it called systemic failings that had left the London fire brigade unable to cope with a cladding fire and evacuation. The Labour MP David Lammy, who lost a friend, Khadija Saye, in the fire, intervened during Johnson’s statement to ask about action to remove flammable cladding elsewhere. “It is still the case that there are men, women and children up and down the country sleeping tonight in buildings with that cladding,” he said. “So many years after the tragedy, does he not think, in this sixth richest democracy in the world, we could not have done more to get rid of people sleeping in infernos across our country.” Johnson replied: “All I can say is that he is quite right. We cannot afford to wait for the full conclusions of the report.” The prime minister said relatives would be most concerned about the issue of Grenfell occupants being told to remain in their homes even when the fire was clearly out of control. “The so-called stay put policy is the bedrock on which all plans for fighting fires in tall residential buildings are based. Building regulations are supposed to mean that fires cannot spread beyond individual flats and that they are compartmented,” he said. “When that is the case, it is indeed safest for most residents to stay in their homes until the fire is extinguished, but at Grenfell that was not the case.” Paying tribute to campaigners, Johnson said he hoped the report’s findings and Commons debate would “bring some measure of comfort to those who suffered so much”. He said: “They asked for the truth, we promised them the truth, we owe them the truth. And today the whole country, the whole world, is finally hearing the truth about what happened at Grenfell Tower.” Corbyn said it was disgraceful that there had been no formal review of the stay put policy. “The government’s response has been inadequate, uncaring and frankly insulting,” he said. “Grenfell Tower would not have happened to wealthy Londoners. It happened to poor and mainly migrant Londoners.” He added: “Grenfell must never happen again. It happened because of the negligence and recklessness of a Conservative government, a Conservative council and a Conservative mayor of London. “The night of 14 June 2017 will never be forgotten, but just as importantly it must never happen again. The shameful fact that this government has dragged its feet – that the exact same cladding is on similar high-rise blocks, that sprinklers have not been fitted, that thousands of people will go to bed tonight and tomorrow night not feeling safe – should shame this government.”
22||The Gatwick trial - and six other ways to make travel much less stressfulGatwick airport is experimenting with new ways to board passengers to ease the journey from gate to seat. A trial has begun with EasyJet to board people in “columns” – window seats, then middle seats, then aisle seats. This technique, nicknamed “WilMA”, has been used by other airlines, including Delta and United. How else could travel be sped up and smoothed out with a few simple tweaks? Board airline passengers in alternate rows This would enable passengers to put their bags in the overhead locker without preventing others from reaching their seats. “Carry-on luggage is the thing that takes the most time,” says Burak Boyaci, a lecturer at the Centre for Transport and Logistics at the University of Lancaster. A 2008 study in the Journal of Air Transport Management showed that a full plane with two doors and no carry-on luggage could be boarded in three minutes 18 seconds. Ask passengers to stand on both sides of the escalator Transport for London experimented with this at Holborn underground station in 2016. It found that the escalators could carry an average of 151 passengers per minute compared with 115 when travellers were permitted to stand on the right and walk on the left. However, this approach doesn’t work on short escalators. Hong Kong, Washington DC and Tokyo have also experimented. Or better still, walk on both sides “If you make everybody walk on an escalator, you could probably improve [capacity] even more,” Boyaci says. Introduce more variable speed limits Reducing the speed limit on a motorway helps to keep traffic flowing. “If you increase the density of traffic, after a certain point, the system starts to fall down,” Boyaci explains. Slowing the traffic enables a greater capacity because it reduces the safe distance needed between vehicles. Install more diagonal pedestrian crossings It can be frustrating to wait for two sets of lights at a crossroads. The diagonal crossings at Oxford Circus in London and Shibuya in Tokyo allow high volumes of pedestrians to cross simultaneously. Help road users to reach green lights A Green Light Optimal Speed Advisory system can inform motorists of the speed necessary to reach a traffic light on green. This not only helps to minimise delay but can also reduce fuel usage and emissions.
4||Apple lets users opt out of having Siri conversations gradedApple customers can now opt out of having their conversations with Siri listened to by human “graders” and delete any clips that have already been uploaded, three months after the Guardian revealed the practice based on a whistleblower report. In the latest software updates for Apple’s products, including iOS 13.2 and macOS 10.15.1, users have the option to disable the grading feature while still using Siri as normal. The preferences are not particularly prominent. To opt out of future grading on iOS, in the settings app, under the heading privacy, users can tap on “Analytics &amp; Improvements” then disable the preference to “improve Siri dictation”. To delete their uploaded clips, they go to Siri &amp; Search in the settings app, tap on Siri &amp; Dictation History, and then hit a red button marked “Delete Siri &amp; Dictation History”. Apple first promised to roll out the new settings in August, a month after the story broke. The company apologised for not living up to its “high ideals”, and committed to building the ability to opt out, as well as ending the outsourcing programme that it had previously used to grade clips and bringing the work in-house. Under the old system, Apple contractors reported “regularly” hearing accidental activations of up to 30 seconds, which included deeply personal recordings of sexual activity, medical consultations and drug-dealing. Apple initially dismissed the concerns, saying Siri responses were “analysed in secure facilities”, before opening an internal investigation a week later. Alongside the ability to opt out of Siri grading, iOS 13.2 brought a number of other changes to iPhones. A new set of emoji introduced non-binary variants for all previously gendered emoji, allowing users to express themselves as a firefighter, astronaut, or merperson without gender connotations. The new “deep fusion” feature on the latest iPhones also aims to blend together multiple exposures for an image with higher detail at low light.
21||Assisted dying laws are in need of reviewIn this time of divisive politics, we are rarely afforded the opportunity to support a proposal that cannot, or should not, be opposed by anyone of any political belief. When it comes to assisted dying, it remains a divisive issue that not even all the signatories of this letter agree on. But as parliamentarians we must make policy decisions based on robust evidence. MPs from across the House of Commons have repeatedly asked the Ministry of Justice to look at the effects of the current blanket ban on assisted dying and how it is enforced. This week we heard from a group of police and crime commissioners who have now also called on the government to examine the consequences of section 2 of the 1961 Suicide Act, which criminally implicates anyone providing assistance to someone to die. We know from cases such as Ann Whaley’s and Mavis Eccleston’s just this year the difficult decisions that some dying people and their families are forced into as a result of the current law. No matter our views on whether and to what extent assisted dying can be legalised safely, we should all agree that the only way to ensure the law is fit for purpose is to hear from those it affects most. Nick Boles MP, Oliver Letwin MP, Karin Smyth MP, Lucy Allan MP, Paul Blomfield MP, Crispin Blunt MP, Vince Cable MP, Sarah Champion MP, Frank Field MP, Jim Fitzpatrick MP, Kate Green MP, Stephen Kinnock MP, Norman Lamb MP, Caroline Lucas MP, Huw Merriman MP, Nigel Mills MP, Andrew Mitchell MP, Sarah Newton MP, Melanie Onn MP, Claire Perry MP, Antoinette Sandbach MP, Anna Soubry MP, Stephen Twigg MP, Dr Sarah Wollaston MP • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
23||Are you a teacher who has left the UK to work abroad?Schools in England are struggling to recruit and retain sufficient teachers. Around one in five teachers plan to leave education in less than two years, citing “out of control” workload pressures and “excessive” accountability, according to a poll by the country’s largest teaching union. The government missed its teacher recruitment targets in most secondary school subjects last year and is trying to tackle the problem by introducing higher starting salaries and bonuses. However young teachers are still leaving their careers at an early stage in record numbers. However some teachers have opted not to leave the profession but instead find jobs in education abroad. We’d like to find out more about the reasons teachers are leaving and what their experiences are like outside the UK. Share your experiences We’d like to hear from teachers who have left schools in England and are in teaching jobs abroad. Why did you leave and how does your experience compare to your job now? How do pay, working conditions and workload compare? We’re also interested in teachers who are thinking about leaving for work overseas. You can share your views and experiences by responding to the encrypted form below. Only the Guardian will see your contributions. We’re planning to feature some of your responses in our reporting. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
12||Hillsborough chief said Liverpool fans 'forced' gate open, court hearsThe police commander of the 1989 FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough, where 96 people were killed in a crush, said as the disaster unfolded that Liverpool supporters had rushed in after a gate was “forced”, his trial for alleged manslaughter has heard. David Duckenfield , then a South Yorkshire police chief superintendent, said that to Graham Kelly, the Football Association’s chief executive, at 3.15pm on 15 April 1989, after the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest had been stopped due to the crush on the Leppings Lane terrace. Glen Kirton, the FA’s then head of external affairs, recalled that conversation in his evidence at Preston crown court, where Duckenfield is being prosecuted for gross negligence manslaughter of 95 of the people who died. Kirton said after the semi-final was stopped at 3.06pm by a police officer at the Leppings Lane end running on to the pitch, he and Kelly went up to the police control box to find out what had happened. Asked by Christine Agnew QC, for the prosecution, what Duckenfield had said, Kirton replied: “I recall that Mr Duckenfield said to Graham Kelly that a gate had been forced, and that there had been an inrush of spectators.” Benjamin Myers QC, defending, clarified with Kirton that Duckenfield had said the inrush was of Liverpool supporters. Kirton said Duckenfield had indicated the CCTV monitors in the control box, but it was not clear what he was referring to. “As I said in my statement at the time, it meant nothing to me,” Kirton said. Duckenfield did not identify which gate he was referring to, or when the “inrush” had happened, Kirton said. There were a number of other police officers in the small control box, including Walter Jackson, an assistant chief constable, he said. He and Kelly left the control box, then between 3.30pm and 3.45pm Duckenfield came to a meeting within Hillsborough, attended by senior officials of the FA, Sheffield Wednesday, Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. Asked about the scene after he left the control box, when he could see people being brought out from the Leppings Lane “pens” on to the pitch, Kirton said: “It all looked, to my untrained eye, extremely chaotic.” Duckenfield has pleaded not guilty. He is not charged in relation to the 96th victim, Tony Bland, who suffered critical brain injury at Hillsborough due to loss of oxygen and died in 1993 after life support was lawfully withdrawn in hospital. According to the law in 1989, no criminal charge relating to a death could be brought if the victim died longer than a year and a day after the acts alleged to have caused it. The trial at Preston crown court in front of judge Sir Peter Openshaw continues.
24||Nanna Heitmann's best photograph: a wild horse race in sweltering SiberiaI shot this last year at the annual horse race in the Tuvan Republic, in southern Siberia. All the young boys in the area take part, racing each other without saddles over 30 kilometres. The race usually takes place in August, when the weather has cooled down. But last year, it was changed to coincide with the national holiday in July. I shot this at about 10am and it was 45C. I found out later that several horses died that day from the heat. Here, this horseman has broken away from the pack, but he wasn’t the frontrunner. The horses were racing on a track alongside a road. I don’t know exactly how many participants there were, but there were cars everywhere. Each family wants to drive next to their horse, everyone is beeping their horns, shouting. It is like a car race too, some slowing down, others speeding up, people overtaking on all sides. There’s some crazy driving, and so much dust in the air. I tried to take pictures before they started, but nobody really wanted to speak with me then and everyone was really nervous. When the race began, I took some shots from the ground, but then I jumped into a car and just hoped the photos would work out. I couldn’t really focus on what I was doing – you’re just trying not to have an accident. There were maybe 40 to 50 cars, and they were all quite beat up. You could tell they’d had accidents before. Afterwards, there was a huge party, right there, in the middle of the steppe. The horses were all beautifully dressed up and traditional Tuvan music was playing. The shaman had prayed the evening before for the spirits to be gentle. People come there to ask for healing. In Soviet times, Tuvan culture was suppressed. The shaman masks and guardian spirits – little puppets, sculptures, stuffed animals – were destroyed, and the people who continued to follow their ancient religions and traditions were persecuted. Now there’s this big revival, a newfound sense of pride. I grew up with Slavic fairytales about shamans and Baba Yaga. My mother is Russian and my grandfather was from Siberia. But I never really saw more of the country than Moscow, where I’d go to visit my grandmother in the summer. So last year I decided to go an exchange to Tomsk State University, in Siberia. I wanted to explore my roots. My plan was to travel the length of the Yenisei river. I couldn’t get to the actual source, which is further south in neighbouring Mongolia and only accessible by private helicopter. So I travelled to Tuva. You drive through what feels like endless Siberian woods and forested landscapes, you traverse one last mountain and suddenly you emerge on to the steppe. It feels like you’ve entered another world. People have gone there in search of freedom: adventurers, apostates, the Cossack riders pushing deeper and deeper into Siberia, criminals fleeing the Tsar. I met a man called Yuri who lived on a landfill. He told me if they chase him away, he’ll just find another landfill to live on. An ex-army officer I met, called Valentin, described himself as an anarchist ecologist. He sleeps outdoors, even when it’s -50C. This is one of the last remaining places where you can be removed from all western cultural influence, and live at one with nature. People in Tuva are tough. I’m attracted to people who are shaped by their environment, who choose to live or work in extreme situations. I think this kind of life fosters a certain kind of character. Not everyone chooses to live here, though. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Tuva has become a place of great isolation, spiritual, physical and social. One day I went to a village where mostly Tuvan people live. Two grandmothers came outside. Perhaps because of the way I was dressed, they thought I was American. “What the hell are you doing here?” they said. “It’s Friday today. Everyone just got paid. Everyone is drunk, on their horses. Get out of here, it’s too dangerous.” And right then, two very drunk guys rode up to us. Nothing happened. But the horse came to symbolise for me this dualism – the quest for freedom and the pervasive isolation. • Nanna Heitmann is the winner of 2019’s Leica Oskar Barnack newcomer award for her series Hiding From Baba Yaga. Nanna Heitmann’s CV Born: Ulm, Germany, 1994. Training: Photojournalism and documentary photography, University of Hanover. Influences: “The Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow with its old Russian masters, the Magnum archive, Joel Sternfeld, Tarkovsky.” High point: “Every time I go out to photograph, to dive into other people’s worlds. Also, becoming a Magnum nominee – I have admired their photographers since I was a child.” Low point: “Questioning my work, and dealing with the emails and bureaucracy that keep me from making work.” Top tip: “Be empathic with the people you photograph.”
23||Battle over Glasgow’s last single-sex school intensifies before key voteParents fighting to keep Scotland’s last remaining single-sex state school girls-only have hit out at Glasgow city councillors for declaring their support for mixed education before a crucial vote to determine the fate of the school. In a row that has gripped the community and prompted wider debate about the contemporary value of single-sex education, the council will vote on 28 November on whether Notre Dame high school should become coeducational for the first time in more than a century. With parents and local residents split on the issue, both sides are pledging to continue lobbying councillors until the final votes are cast in a long-running battle that has led to the formation of two opposing campaign groups: Girls for Notre Dame and Notre Dame High for All. While the majority of single-sex state schools in Scotland closed or were amalgamated in the 1970s and 80s, this Catholic establishment in Glasgow’s affluent West End, founded by nuns in 1897, has continued to educate solely girls, who nowadays come from a diverse mix of ethnic backgrounds across the city. But co-ed campaigners argue that the school should be open to local families – parents currently have the option of a mixed secondary but on the far side of the catchment area, across busy roads. They point to the fact that the school roll is not at capacity as evidence of the waning popularity of single-sex education. Other parents, including many current and former pupils, firmly resist the proposed change, insisting that girls grow in confidence, both intellectually and socially, in a single-sex setting, also noting that minority ethnic girls are strongly represented in placing requests. Speaking to the Herald newspaper last year, current senior 5 pupils reported that they felt more assured speaking up in the classroom and choosing more science-oriented subjects than they would in a coeducational environment. A consultation on the future of the school, which closed in May, attracted nearly 5,000 responses, with respondents asked to vote on three options: to maintain the status quo, remain single-sex but expand the catchment area, or go mixed. The findings were shared with interested parties, including the campaign groups, which both argue that the results support their position. The council’s minority Scottish National party administration has decided to support coeducation, meaning other parties would have to unite in opposition for the school to remain single-sex. Both Greens and Conservatives have suggested they also favour mixed schooling, while Labour has said it will wait for a key paper that includes an analysis of the consultation responses as well as an equality impact assessment and is expected to be made public next Tuesday. A parent spokeswoman for the Girls for Notre Dame group said the councillors’ early declaration “begs the question if the result was predetermined in the first place”. She said: “It is disappointing that some of our local politicians who agreed to holding a public consultation have also ignored their own due process. Reports being compiled by officials have not yet been shared so we are keen to understand how their decision was reached a full month before cross-party committee discussion and a vote is scheduled.” The Girls for Notre Dame group also noted that a decision to enforce mixed education set a unique precedent for schools across the city. “Parents can now demand entry for their children to any secondary they decide is ‘local’, not what the council designates. It opens up questions around access requirements to the Gaelic school, the School of Dance, the School of Sport and even Jordanhill.” (Jordanhill, also situated in the West End, and operating on a strict catchment policy and lengthy waiting list, is unusually funded by direct grant from the Scottish government, and regularly records among the best exam results in Scotland.) Jill Grady, of the Notre Dame for All parents’ group, said co-ed campaigners were delighted by the declarations of support, but were sitting tight until the final vote. Grady, whose son and daughter attend Notre Dame primary, added that the critical part of the coming report would be what transition arrangements it proposed for the school. She said: “It needs to be mindful and respectful of the girls already at Notre Dame but also of the primary kids who are in this unusual situation. It’s hard to explain to a six-year-old why he can’t go to the same school as his sister. “The school has a terrific ethos and is very successful and nobody wants to change that, but it continues to evolve and we shouldn’t be fearful of change.”
1||Chilean president cancels Apec and climate summits amid wave of unrestChile’s embattled president has been forced to cancel two major international summits after government concessions failed to defuse weeks of violent protests that have seen thousands of arrests, left at least 20 dead and sent shock waves across Latin America. Sebastián Piñera made the announcement on Wednesday morning, telling reporters Chile would no longer be able to host November’s Apec trade summit and the COP25 UN climate conference the following month. World leaders including Donald Trump and China’s leader, Xi Jinping, had been due to attend the first event while climate champions including the teenage activist Greta Thunberg were expected at the second. Piñera blamed the “difficult circumstances” Chile was facing for the decision and said his government’s primary concern had to be “fully restoring public order, security and social peace”. “This has been a very difficult decision – which has caused us great pain – because we understand perfectly the importance [of the events] for Chile and for the world,” Chile’s centre-right president said. “When a father has problems, he must always put his family before everything else. Similarly, a president must always put his own countrymen ahead of any other consideration,” Piñera added. Patricia Espinosa, the UN’s climate change executive secretary, said the UN was “exploring alternative hosting options” for the climate summit after being informed of the decision in a letter from Chile’s environment minister. Piñera said he had warned other world leaders of the cancellation. Chile’s protests began in mid-October as a student-led fight against a 3.7% hike in metro fares. But those demonstrations quickly swelled into a much broader mutiny against inequality, the cost of living and police repression. According to Chile’s Human Rights Institute, 3,535 people have been arrested since 17 October while 1,132 people have been taken to hospital – 38 of them with gunshot injuries. On 18 October Piñera declared a state of emergency after violence broke out on the streets of the capital, Santiago, later declaring the country “at war” with “evil” delinquents. After such moves failed to quell the unrest, Chile’s president tried to placate protesters with a conciliatory televised address in which he asked forgiveness for the “shortsightedness” of the country’s political leaders. Piñera also unveiled a string of progressive economic reforms, a cabinet reshuffle and the decision to end nightly curfews in an effort to calm tensions. But those concessions appear not to have been enough. Daily street marches continue to call for Piñera’s resignation. Schools and offices are functioning sporadically. Lines at supermarkets have eased but little remains of the routine that just two weeks ago led Piñera to declare Chile an “oasis” in an increasingly volatile region. On Saturday an estimated 1 million people poured on to the streets of Santiago for a peaceful protest that was reputedly the country’s largest since the dying days of Gen Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship in the late 1980s. “It is absolutely logical for no one to come. We’re in no shape to receive presidents at the moment. I support the decision,” said Marcia Ruiz, a 56-year-old protester who was outside La Moneda, Chile’s presidential palace, on Wednesday. “The president lost control of this on day one,” Ruiz added. “It’s sad.” The last-minute decision to cancel the UN summit is a blow to global efforts to tackle the climate emergency and will fuel fears that a vicious cycle is emerging in which divisions between and within countries make it impossible for states to act together to deal with the underlying causes of unrest. It is also the second setback for international climate talks in less than a year. Brazil had been due to host COP25 but pulled out last year after the presidential election victory of the far-right populist Jair Bolsonaro, who has pursued an anti-globalist agenda. A UK government spokesperson said: “We understand Chile’s decision to withdraw from hosting COP25. We will work closely with Chile and other important partners to help ensure that the crucial work due to be undertaken at COP25 is not affected. The UK government remains committed to bringing world leaders together to tackle climate change in Glasgow in 2020.” Miguel Crispi, a sociologist and founder of the Chilean political party Democratic Revolution, said: “The cancellation of #COP25 is very bad news. It was a great opportunity to debate the climate crisis. This means the government is assuming that they can’t guarantee public order from now until December – and that is also worrying.” Peter Hartmann, the director of CODEFF Aysen, an environmental group organizing to protect the wild ecosystems of Chilean Patagonia, said: “It’s a shame because the summit was an opportunity for Chile to be more coherent in their environmental outlook and to bring international attention to the environmental issues in Chile.” Many activists will now be cancelling flights and hotels in Santiago but several groups are already on their way. School climate strikers from Europe are in the middle of the Atlantic on their way to South America. “We just heard COP25 has been cancelled. We will have a meeting about this now on board, please keep us updated and any ideas are welcome. They can cancel the COP but can’t cancel the movement!” the group tweeted.
25||Dirty Crusty review – sex, secrets and ballet test the body's limitsDirty Crusty is about ballet and bodies and pushing ourselves to the limit. It’s about the stories we tell with our bodies and the secrets we keep hidden inside. It’s got a lot in common with Clare Barron’s later work, Dance Nation, but doesn’t have the same hot energy as that wild and exciting show. We open on a pristine model house with a huge silver moon glowing overhead. The model stands perched above Emma Bailey’s secretive set, which keeps many of the performance spaces hidden behind heavy curtains. This is Jeanine’s house. It is untainted and unreachable. It’s only later, with a dramatic sweep of the curtains, that we’ll discover the squalor inside. Jeanine (Akiya Henry, who is amazingly mercurial) is 31 and at a crossroads. Will new boyfriend Viktor (Douggie McMeekin) lift her up? Or how about dancer Synda (Abiona Omonua)? Could ballet help this young woman embrace her body and love herself? Both characters push and stretch Jeanine in beautiful and punishing ways. They empower her and they break her. In one fascinating scene, Jeanine learns a new dance move, which is riddled with contradictions. She flutters her arms delicately, then crosses them resolutely and shouts with increasing conviction: “Don’t touch me!” Strength and fragility dance side by side: sex games empower and then suddenly frighten; drunken nights liberate and later depress; expressions of love explode magically and quickly fade to nothing. Jay Miller’s production is playful and nimble and uses microphones, songs, dance and sex to explore Jeanine’s limits. It sometimes feels a bit deliberate and overworked – too much like a dramatic exercise – but it’s still a great workout for the mind. • At the Yard, London, until 30 November.
1||WhatsApp fake news during Brazil election ‘favoured Bolsonaro’The vast majority of false information shared on WhatsApp in Brazil during the presidential election favoured the far-right winner, Jair Bolsonaro, a Guardian analysis of data suggests. The analysis sheds light on the spread of misinformation on the Facebook-owned app, with fears it could be poisoning political debate in one of the largest democracies in the world. In a sample of 11,957 viral messages shared across 296 group chats on the instant-messaging platform in the campaign period, approximately 42% of rightwing items contained information found to be false by factcheckers. Less than 3% of the leftwing messages analysed in the study contained externally verified falsehoods. The figures suggest the spread of fake news was highly asymmetrical, accounting for much of the content being spread by and to Bolsonaro supporters on WhatsApp. The instant messaging app is very popular in Brazil, with more than 120 million users in a population of about 210 million people. Much of the fake news shared on WhatsApp reflected the far-right values promoted by Bolsonaro’s team during the two-month campaign. Almost all the major rightwing fake news stories fell into four categories, the analysis reveals: Up to 48% of the rightwing items containing externally verified falsehoods mentioned a fictional plot to fraudulently manipulate the electronic ballot system, echoing conspiracy theories promoted by Bolsonaro’s team and casting suspicion on the democratic process. Another 19% of the messages promoted misleading information about a stabbing attack against Bolsonaro in early September 2018. The stabbing, which forced the far-right leader to spend most of the remaining weeks of the campaign in hospital, was a turning point in the election. Sixteen per cent of right-leaning false content tried to dismiss the political system and mainstream media as corrupt, reflecting key elements of Bolsonaro’s anti-establishment rhetoric. A further 14% of the viral falsehoods targeted leftwing politicians and activists, often using homophobic tropes and anti-feminist slurs. Content exchanged on WhatsApp is protected with end-to-end encryption, so the study collected a sample of messages from WhatsApp Monitor, a database of viral content shared in hundreds of groups focused on political debate. Due to these sampling limitations, the research cannot be generalised to explain the behaviour of all WhatsApp users in Brazil. WhatsApp executives recently acknowledged Brazilian accounts were the target of massive spamming operations by digital marketing agencies before the election, in a breach of the app’s terms and conditions. Inquiries in Brazil’s congress and superior electoral court are examining whether Bolsonaro’s team was involved in these manipulative efforts. The investigations could potentially lead to the annulment of the election result. The Bolsonaro administration denies wrongdoing and has repeatedly dismissed media reports on the issue as “fake news”. Facebook, which has been under increasing pressure to do more to tackle misinformation, announced an update of WhatsApp in January that reduced to the number of times users can forward a single message to five. Recent studies suggested the upgrades succeeded in slowing the spread of false content, but failed to stop fake news reaching large audiences. According to Caio Machado, a computational propaganda specialist at the Oxford Internet Institute, social media platforms are struggling to cope with “democracy-hacking strategies”. He added: “Tech companies have an immense power in their hands, and no one knows whether or not they are actually capable of influencing election results.” A WhatsApp spokeswoman pointed to changes such as labels showing forwarded messages, the limit on forwarding messages, banning spam accounts using machine learning and improved safety and privacy settings. “WhatsApp has made significant product changes and worked with partners across civil society to help address the harmful consequences of misinformation,” she said.
26||Doctor Sleep review – sedate Shining sequel battles a new evil … boredomDid The Shining need a sequel? Well it’s got one now, adapted by director Mike Flanagan from Stephen King’s 2013 follow-up novel. It is more than half an hour longer than the Stanley Kubrick film, although it seems more than that – laborious, directionless and densely populated with boring new characters among whom the narrative focus is muddled and split. Your attention is distracted from the central figure, who might otherwise have been an actual object of fascination: Danny Torrance, once the kid in the Overlook hotel, pedalling his trike around the eerily endless corridors and eventually pursued by his axe-wielding dad, unforgettably played by Jack Nicholson. The Kubrick movie, from 1980, famously disliked by King, is a stylistic influence on this sequel, which references the big moments. (King has an executive producer credit. So perhaps he came round to it.) Now Danny (forthrightly played by Ewan McGregor) is all grownup, unemployed, homeless, addled with alcoholism and post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the grisly finale in the snow at the end of the first story. His mum, Wendy, died not long after they moved away; young Wendy is played in flashback by Alex Essoe. Adult Danny is still burdened with the telepathic power of “shining” (past tense “shined” not “shone”), but he has cultivated the art of shutting up his Overlook demons in imaginary boxes in his mind. After drifting, boozing and brawling from town to town, Danny finally goes into Alcoholics Anonymous. His fellow AA attendees find him a place to stay and a job as an orderly in a hospice, where he gets the fond nickname Doctor Sleep because of his telepathic empathy with those poor souls in extremis, gently shepherding them to the final slumber. Elsewhere, though, new supernatural forces both good and bad are on the march. A girl, wittily named Abra (Kyliegh Curran), has powers like Danny’s, and really needs his mentorship, like the guidance Danny once got from wise old Dick Hallorann (originally played by Scatman Crothers, here by Carl Lumbly). There is a sinister new evil band on the loose: a gang of vampiric parasites preying on children, led by a creepy hippyish figure called Rose the Hat (Rebecca Ferguson). They inhale the life-force “steam” from their horribly slaughtered young victims. The questions to ask about any Shining sequel obviously relate to the scariest thing in the first film: the hand-holding twins in the corridor. How about them? Could they somehow have grown up into ghostly adult twins now? Will they have an amusing and ingeniously conceived role to play in the sequel? Will Danny wind up getting off with one, without realising the other one’s hiding in the wardrobe? Well, I wish there were satisfying answers to these questions. Instead, the central evil role is disappointingly assigned to Rose the Hat, who just isn’t as scary or interesting. Eventually, after a long, long series of pointless narrative detours, we find ourselves back in the ruined Overlook hotel, and there’s a frisson there, undoubtedly – especially when we see the hole in the wall made by Torrance’s axe as he shouted “Heeeeere’s Johnny!” But it is almost cancelled out by the realisation that everything before it has been a bit redundant. Despite some big moments, this seems cumbersome and unnecessary: a dimming of the original. • Doctor Sleep is released in the UK on 31 October, in Australia on 7 Nov and in the US on 8 November.
12||Man appears in court charged with Libby Squire murderA man has appeared in court charged with raping and murdering the Hull student Libby Squire, whose body was found in March after a huge search. Pawel Relowicz, 25, appeared via video link at Hull magistrates court where he spoke only to confirm his name, date of birth and Polish nationality. He was not required to enter any pleas, and was remanded in custody to appear at Hull crown court on Thursday. Relowicz was charged by Humberside police last week. Squire, 21, who was originally from High Wycombe and was studying philosophy, was reported missing in the early hours of Friday 1 February after an evening out with friends. Hundreds of uniformed police officers as well as dog handlers and underwater officers took part in a search operation, and her body was recovered from the Humber estuary on 20 March.
1||Chinese province closes all glass bridges over safety fearsThey were meant to be futuristic marvels, allowing thrill-seeking tourists to feel like they were walking on air. But China’s growing obsession with glass bridges may be coming to an abrupt end, after a series of accidents led one province to close down all its glass-bottomed attractions. Hebei, a scenic mountainous province in northern China, has quietly closed all 32 of its glass bridges, walkways and mountain viewing platforms over the past year for safety reasons, according to Chinese state media CCTV. Among the attractions that have been closed is Hongyagu glass bridge, which until recently held the title of the world’s longest glass bridge. Not for the faint-hearted, or for those with any whiff of vertigo, the glass structure stretches 488 metres between two steep cliffs and is paved with more than a thousand panels of glass. Another Hebei glass attraction that has been closed is the East Taihang Glasswalk mountain walkway, notorious for striking fear into the hearts of visitors with a special-effect glass floor that appears, falsely, to shatter when it is stood upon. The decision to close dozens of bridges comes after a series of accidents, including at least two deaths, across China that have called the safety of glass structures into question. In Guangxi province this year, a glass slide became lethal after rainfall led a man to crash into the railing when going down and fall over the side. He died from severe head injuries, while six others were injured. There have also been reports of tourists being hit on a glass bridge by flying debris. In August 2016, the world’s highest and longest glass walkway opened to great fanfare, linking two cliffs in central Hunan province in China’s spectacular Zhangjiajie mountains – the inspiration for the Hollywood film Avatar. But the vast glass structure, which stretches 430m long and is made of 99 panels of glass, was open for just 13 days before being shut for an “urgent upgrade” after it could not handle the weight of all the visitors. The bridge had been built to hold 8,000 visitors a day, but demand exceeded that tenfold. It followed a huge publicity campaign to demonstrate the safety of the glass bridge, which included people being encouraged to try and smash the bridge’s panels with a sledgehammer, and another stunt where a car was driven across the Zhangjiajie bridge. The Chinese government has now called on authorities to carry out comprehensive safety checks on all glass structures, but it could be a momentous task, with an estimated 2,300 glass bridges alone in China, as well as more glass walkways and slides.
2||We know a thing or two about being told we’re useless at our jobHATERS GUNNER HATE For once, The Fiver feels as if we may be of use. According to Unai Emery, Granit Xhaka is still feeling “devastated and sad” about being jeered off by Arsenal fans during Sunday’s 2-2 draw against Crystal Palace. We know a thing or two about being told we’re useless at our job, you see. Each weekday at around 5.10pm we step outside Fiver Towers and clear up all the rotten fruit that’s been hurled our way after our latest attempt at tea-timely humour has been received about as well as news of another general election reaching Brenda from Bristol. Like a Xhaka lunge that results in a card, we too feel devastated and sad that the intention behind our energetic attempt at winning back the hearts and minds of our followers has been hopelessly misunderstood. Emery is of the opinion that Xhaka should say sorry to fans for telling them where to beeping go before hurling his shirt at the ground. “I think when we make individual mistakes we need to make apologies,” Emery blabbed of Xhaka’s fresh and funky departure. “We suggest to him to do it.” The Fiver would suggest he doesn’t do it in a hurry. On top of being given verbal pelters for his perceived on-pitch failings, he’s had to soak up a shed-load of filth directed at him and his partner on various social media disgraces recently, too. Oh, and he became a father four weeks ago. If certain entitled fans can’t understand why the poor chap might have been at breaking point on Sunday, they ought to poke themselves in their eyes to see if they can actually feel anything. Xhaka has since deleted a picture of himself on Instachat wearing the Arsenal captain’s armband and replaced it with a Switzerland one instead. With fans such as these, it’s a crying shame anyone has to captain Arsenal – but someone does. So step forward leader of men Mesut Özil, who has been located in an Emirates Stadium storeroom and dusted off just in time to be fitted for the Coca-Cola Cup armband he is likely to wear at Anfield on Wednesday evening against Liverpool U-16s. Xhaka has not been included in Arsenal’s matchday squad so that he can continue to let steam out of his ears. It’s a tricky one for Emery, who needs some kind of response from his side to help shift the dark cloud that’s been following him around for the past few weeks, even if he names a reserve XI including Gunnersaurus, Fiver Jr and Troopz from AFTV. It’s a free hit for Jürgen Klopp, though, who will give teenage man-bun extraordinaire Harvey Elliott another chance to become Liverpool’s youngest ever goalscorer. The 16-year-old is back in contention after serving a 14-day domestic ban for being idiotic and mocking Harry Kane with offensive language. Chelsea and Manchester United also play in the Rumbelows Cup at Stamford Bridge, with Frank Lampard’s Chelsea manager Frank Lampard expected to stick to his policy of playing only footballers who are young enough to know what the Fortnite dance is. As for Xhaka, maybe he should spend his night off in the away end at Anfield, where he can see if any disgruntled Gooners would like to share their views about him in person. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Gregg Bakowski from 7.30pm for hot MBM coverage of Liverpool 3-1 Arsenal, while Rob Smyth will be on hand at 8.05pm for Chelsea 1-2 Manchester United. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I was never close to signing. It was [weird]. People assumed because they’d seen it on [Social Media Disgrace] Twitter. I’ve never really been in that position before: I don’t think women’s football itself has. When I was at City, there was this thing about me going out with Sergio Agüero and I was like: ‘This is news to me.’ Honestly, it’s like: God bless the men’s players because they get it every week” – Toni Duggan gets her chat on with Sid Lowe about last season’s Women’s Big Cup final, rumours about joining Manchester United and why she left Barcelona for Atlético. FIVER LETTERS “What kind of sick, twisted, immoral creature would put milk, milk, in a SodaStream (yesterday’s Fiver)?” – Ferg Slade. “Dale Chase (yesterday’s Fiver letters) urges The Fiver to turn from its Stop Football campaign to Stop VAR. Doesn’t he realise that letting VAR continue might just well achieve both?” – John Myles. “Mike Wilner (yesterday’s letters) suggesting there’s a large bill coming The Fiver’s way to compensate for substandard output over the years. The funds owed would be a multiple of The Fiver’s daily wage, no? It’s been a while since I was in school, but one assumes that multiplying anything by zero still results in zero” – Derek McGee. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … John Myles. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Francis Jeffers has pleaded guilty to sending a grossly offensive message via a public communications network to his estranged wife Lucy. Sophie Leyland, prosecuting, told Liverpool magistrates’ court: “On 29 May there were messages sent via WhatsApp to the victim making reference to the fact her life was over and referencing a coffin. The victim felt this was a threat to her life.” Jeffers was handed a restraining order, fined £625 and ordered to pay £85 court costs and £62 victim surcharge. Bury have been given until 4 December to settle their debts in a bid to avoid a winding-up order. Diego Maradona has been enjoying a comfy throne after returning to Newell’s Old Boys to see his Gimnasia y Esgrima La Plata side win 4-0. Manchester City, Leicester, Colchester and Oxford are through to the Milk Cup quarter-finals, along with Magic Marco’s Everton after a 2-0 win over Watford. “It is hard against a team with nine men behind the ball but we were more assertive in the second half,” he cheered. Barcelona are back on top of La Liga after a Messi-inspired 5-1 shoeing of Real Valladolid. “He’s from another planet,” cooed Arturo Vidal. And after a winless run of 41 games which comprised six different coaches, lasted 14 months and featured players protesting at unpaid wages, Mexican side Veracruz have won a league match, with Colin Kazim-Richards scoring the only goal against Puebla. STILL WANT MORE? Which stadiums are lopsided, three-sided or just downright wonky? The Knowledge has the answer. There’s a big story coming out of Spain: Suzanne Wrack has all the latest. Telling Gareth Bale that Boris Johnson is PM took away b@nterpocalypse’s sole survivor, sighs Marina Hyde. Bargain buys and Peter Ridsdale [not often seen in the same sentence – Fiver Ed] are propelling Preston upwards, as Ben Fisher reports. People should stop throwing stones inside English football’s glass house, writes Proper Journalism’s David Conn. Tommy Doyle made his Manchester City debut on Tuesday, another part of the family’s fabric with the club. Martin Laurence checks out 10 of the most prolific forwards in Europe right now. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! RECOMMENDED ATTENDING Tickets are now available for Big Department’s year in review evening. RECOMMENDED BUYING This week’s David Squires cracker is now available to buy and you can get your hands on some of his other favourite cartoons at our Print Shop. NEVER STICK TO SPORTS
27||Stephen Colbert: 'Unlike Trump, Vindman's character is unimpeachable'Stephen Colbert “Regardless of the endless roadblocks the president and his axis of allies are trying to throw in front of it, the impeachment inquiry keeps moving forward,” said Stephen Colbert on Tuesday’s Late Show, “and the Republicans keep sinking lower.” Supporters of the president “hit rock bottom awhile ago but, in the last 24 hours, they have gotten out the blasting caps and they are fracking America’s moral bedrock”. Specifically, several Republicans were blasting the character of Col Alexander Vindman, the top Ukraine expert on the national security council, who testified before Congress with firsthand knowledge of Trump’s phone call with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in July. Vindman, who served for two decades in the American military and was awarded a Purple Heart for injuries sustained in Iraq, testified that he immediately raised concerns over the call, in which Trump threatened to cut off military aid to Ukraine unless they investigated his political rival, Joe Biden. His testimony contradicted that of the Trump supporter and EU ambassador, Gordon Sondland, who told Congress that no one had raised concerns following Trump’s call with Zelenskiy. Vindman, meanwhile, said the call prompted him to “convey certain concerns”, “share my concerns”, “reported my concerns”, and “again reported my concerns”. “It’s a classic case of he said, he said, he said, he said,” joked Colbert. “Unlike Donald Trump, Vindman’s character is unimpeachable, but that didn’t stop all the president’s toadies from questioning his loyalty,” said Colbert, pointing to the president’s supporters casting doubt on Vindman’s loyalty because he was born in Ukraine. Also on Tuesday, Nancy Pelosi officially declared that the House will vote to formalize procedures for the impeachment inquiry. “She even sent out postcards: save the date, and our democracy,” Colbert quipped. Vindman isn’t the only veteran speaking about the goings-on in the White House; at a panel over the weekend, the former chief of staff John Kelly revealed that when he left his job in January, he warned Trump against hiring a yes-man because “if you do, I believe you’ll be impeached”. “Yes, John Kelly has psychic powers – he can foretell the obvious,” said Colbert. “He’s Nostra-dumbass.” Jimmy Kimmel In Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel briefly flashed back 50 years, to 29 October 1969, when, just seven miles from his studio, the first internet message was sent. Scientists at UCLA tried to send the word “login” over Arpanet, but the system crashed after the first two letters. Things have progressed since then; now, “50 years later, our president is using that very technology on a daily basis to tweet gems like this,” said Kimmel, quoting a Trump tweet from Tuesday: “Nervous Nancy Pelosi is doing everything possible to destroy the Republican Party. Our Polls show that it is going to be just the oppodite [sic].” Trump was responding to Pelosi’s announcement that on Thursday, the House will vote to formalize the impeachment inquiry. In other words, said Kimmel, “for the past two weeks, Democrats have been meticulously gathering the evidence they’ll need to show us that Trump did what everybody already knows he definitely did”. Kimmel turned his attention to the testimony of Vindman, which enraged Trump. The president “keeps insisting this is a perfect call” and that he did nothing wrong, tweeting in all caps that people should read the transcript. “Yet we read the transcript! This is why you’re getting impeached right now,” said Kimmel. “And maybe the most disgusting thing going on today is the president and his sycophants are questioning the patriotism and loyalty of an American combat veteran,” Kimmel continued. “The people at Fox News found it very suspicious that our top Ukraine expert is from Ukraine. And it is suspicious when you learn someone in the Trump administration has actual expertise in his field.” Kimmel pointed to clips from Fox News in which anchors and commentators questioned the motivations of Vindman, who emigrated from the Ukraine, then part of the Soviet Union, to America when he was three years old. “Somehow the Ukrainians managed to indoctrinate a toddler to use our potties and do their bidding to one day bring down the president of the United States,” said Kimmel, who called the commentary “really ridiculous”. “I guess it all comes down to who do you believe? The guy with the purple heart or the guy with the orange face?”
28||Afghanistan’s Oprah: Mozhdah on fame, threats and why she won’t live her life in fearOne Friday, after the taping of her Afghan television chatshow, a woman from the studio audience came up to Mozhdah Jamalzadah to hug her. “She was so emotional and she wouldn’t let go,” says Jamalzadah. The woman said Jamalzadah’s programme, The Mozhdah Show, had stopped her husband beating their children, after it covered corporal punishment. “But from her face, I could tell that there was more to it,” says the 37-year-old. “I’m thinking that maybe he stopped beating her, too. That made me very emotional, and she just kept repeating: ‘We need you, Afghanistan needs you.’” Jamalzadah was five when her family escaped Afghanistan, eventually settling in Canada. In 2009, in her mid-20s, she returned to Kabul after being invited by a new TV station to host a talent show. She had started singing a few years earlier, posting music videos on YouTube; one song, Afghan Girl, had become a hit in her homeland (she would be invited to perform it in 2010 at the White House to mark International Women’s Day in front of the Obamas). She and her mother, Nasrin, travelled to Kabul. But unbeknown to Jamalzadah, Nasrin had no intention of letting her daughter present a mere talent show. Instead she had packed several DVDs of The Oprah Winfrey Show – which they had been watching for years in Nasrin’s hair salon in Vancouver – and during their first meeting with TV executives, she pitched The Mozhdah Show. Not just a chatshow, either, but a vehicle, modelled on Oprah, to change the lives of Afghan women. The TV station went for it – and it ran from 2009 to 2011. For a country reeling from years of war, followed by the harsh Taliban rule, Jamalzadah became an image of what a modern Afghan woman could be – and there were many people in the country of her birth who didn’t like it. Jamalzadah speaks by Skype from Toronto, where she is promoting a film, Red Snow. In it, she plays the educated daughter of an Afghan family who help a First Nations Gwich’in soldier in the Canadian army, who is captured by the Taliban. A biography of Jamalzadah is also just about to be published. In the film, she wears a blue burqa – it’s the same garment Nasrin wore, hoping to pass as a peasant, when they fled Kabul about 30 years earlier, making a perilous journey to Pakistan. Her father, Bashir, had been a teacher when word got to him that he was about to be arrested because he was suspected of opposing the Soviet-backed government. The Jamalzadahs – Nasrin and Bashir, Mozhda and her two younger brothers, one of whom was only six months old – fled. “I was well aware that there was a major possibility we might not make it,” she says. “My heart would beat every time a soldier would hop up on the bus, and I would think: ‘I hope they don’t find out we’re city people.’” They were granted asylum in Canada and moved to Ontario. Jamalzadah remembers the cold, mostly, and, while she made good friends, she also experienced overt racism. Yet, she says: “At the same time, I knew we were safe, and I didn’t have to worry about whether my family were going to be OK. In Afghanistan I had rockets firing over my head and didn’t know where they were going to land. I would be out in the yard playing with my cousin, and you could hear the rockets. The racism and all the other stuff didn’t compare to trying to survive.” The family settled in Vancouver, where Bashir opened a pizza restaurant and Nasrin a hair salon. As a teenager, Jamalzadah became obsessed with reports about the war in Afghanistan, searching online and watching the news as soon as she was home from school. “I wanted to know how my family was, because there was no phone, no contact. I would think the worst when the bombings were happening, right after 9/11.” Her parents had urged her not to take opportunities and freedoms for granted, and she didn’t, but it also made her feel guilty that she was living such a different life to the friends she had left in Afghanistan. “My parents wanted me to use all of it fully so they were constantly reminding me how lucky I was. But, constantly being reminded, I was becoming more and more depressed. While all my other friends were talking about shopping and boys they had crushes on, secretly, this was my torment. I was constantly looking for ways to do something to help and speak up for those people.” She had been writing poetry and realised that while she could never remember the words of political speeches, she always remembered song lyrics. So one day she told her mother she’d like to find someone to turn her poems into songs. Nasrin encouraged her to have singing lessons with the Afghan-Canadian musician Wahid Omid. He uploaded one song to YouTube and it went viral. “I think people were hungry for something new, different. I was a girl and after the war there were hardly any female singers, especially ones who pranced around in the outfits I did.” The online attacks soon started, and Jamalzadah says she almost gave up, but she realised that was what the trolls wanted. Her next song, Dukhtare Afghan (Afghan Girl), written about an acid attack on girls going to school, was played on Afghan radio and became a hit, bringing her to the attention of TV executives. Being in Kabul, she says, “was magical. I mean, there’s barbed wire, dust everywhere, it’s a war zone, but I was totally OK with that because I was around Afghan people, and they seemed exactly the way that they were before. The love and the hospitality, and everything that Afghans stand for, was still there.” She laughs now too at how naive she was. Once she thought she heard a door slam and someone at her guesthouse told her it was a bomb. Another time, she thought she heard fireworks, only for the CEO of the TV station to shout at her not to leave the building: “You’re going to get hit by a bullet: do you not hear what’s going on out there?” “So it was comical, but very dark,” she says. In 2009: “There were times where everything felt like it was OK, other than the few suicide bombings here and there – everyone was just out and about, there were restaurants, everything was lively, and I loved it.” She did have to make compromises, for instance, wearing a hijab. “There were many restrictions from the government, from the culture minister, all the pressure from the outside. And of course, [the TV station] wanted to keep us safe.” Her show started mildly, then began moving into territory such as domestic violence and divorce, as well as the cost of weddings, which can lead families into crippling debt. Alongside lighter material such as singers and children’s competitions, the show often included sketches to drive home the issues discussed, and interviews with experts, such as child psychologists. “That’s when we started receiving threats,” she says. Did she feel unsafe? “If I constantly lived in fear, it would stop me from doing anything, so I stopped myself from thinking about it.” She thinks her experience as a child, “not knowing if I’m going to live or not, affected me – it’s normal for me. I’d rather live a shorter life and have it be more impactful and live it to the fullest, then have a long one living in fear, afraid to go out and do something because I might get killed.” She was, she admits, protected to some degree by her Canadian citizenship. One girl, a contestant on a TV talent show, Afghan Star, that Jamalzadah presented from 2012 to 2013, told her: “If I had a foreign passport, I would dress like you. You can go back to Canada, but I can’t. I’m stuck here.” “She was right. I could see that in the way that I was treated. I’m sure that there were lots of people who would have liked to do all kinds of things but couldn’t get away with it. I think my fear was lessened because at any point, I could go to the Canadian embassy and be protected.” It couldn’t, however, protect her from a horrific attack by a man who she says assumed, because she was westernised, that she would be open to a sexual relationship. She alleges he lured her to an empty nightclub, then attacked her violently; and she only got away after threatening him with a gun she kept in her bag. “The attack that happened to me happens to girls constantly, and there is nothing they can do. Even I couldn’t do anything,” she says. She wanted to report it, “but as a woman there, you’re pretty much voiceless. Maybe I can’t do anything in Afghanistan, but I can in Canada. I can’t report it there, but I told my story.” In 2011, flying back to Kabul after a break in Canada, the Canadian embassy got in touch with her en route and told her there had been a serious threat, and that she should turn back. She ignored the warning, but in Kabul, her TV colleagues said the same thing and told her they were taking the show off-air. “It was devastating,” she says. “I felt defeated. When you’re on this high and think, ‘I’m making a difference’, then all of a sudden, all of that is shattered. I felt like a complete failure.” She returned to Canada wanting to give up. “I was like ‘it’s over. How stupid was I to think that I could make a difference?’ Then slowly I had to get myself out of that darkness and, and realise, no, I can’t let them defeat me.” She started thinking: “I could do so much more from here, and it doesn’t have to be The Mozhdah Show.” She has a strong social media presence in Afghanistan, where she is both supported and attacked for her posts. She sings in English, as well as in Farsi, and hopes to cross over to a bigger western audience. “I know it’s going to be a lot of work, but I have to do it. My goal is to be a women’s rights activist in the world,” she says. “I have to work to get myself to a position where I can speak for women who don’t have a voice, on a much bigger scale. That’s my goal now.” • Voice of Rebellion, the biography of Mozhdah Jamalzadah, by Roberta Staley, is published by Greystone Books on 7 November
23||Students who have unconditional offers more likely to quitStudents who go to university after receiving an unconditional offer before their A-level results are more likely to drop out in their first year, research shows. Analysis by the Office for Students (OfS), the universities regulator, found that the dropout rate was 10% higher for students who accepted unconditional offers than would be expected had they received conditional offers. Traditionally, universities offer places subject to the applicant achieving the required A-level results. In recent years, however, there has been a huge increase in unconditional offers, which guarantee a place regardless of results. According to the OfS analysis, in 2012 one in every 100 18-year-olds in England received an offer with an unconditional element, and by 2018 the proportion had gone up to more than one in three. Critics are particularly concerned about so-called conditional unconditional offers, by which a university guarantees a student a place regardless of A-level results but only if they select the institution as their first option. The government has accused universities of unacceptable pressure-selling tactics. The OfS said its analysis discounted factors linked to dropout rates such as what subject a student studied, what university they were at and demographics. It said if the pattern persisted, more than 200 students a year could drop out who otherwise would have been expected to continue. Nicola Dandridge, the OfS chief executive, said: “We already know that students who receive an unconditional offer are more likely to miss their predicted grades at school. It is a cause of real concern that they are also more likely to drop out of university once they get there.” Since a cap on student numbers was lifted, universities have been free to recruit as many students as they wish. The number of 18-year-olds in the UK population is falling and some institutions are struggling to fill spaces. “We have always been clear that some unconditional offers are necessary and in a student’s interests,” said Dandridge. “But many of them are not. Although it is up to universities to decide who to admit and how, they must take responsibility for the impact of those decisions and provide the right support for all students to be successful – especially if the offer they receive makes them less likely to do well at school.” The University and College Union, which represents lecturers and other university staff, said the OfS findings reinforced the need for urgent reform of the admissions system. “Universities scrabbling to attract students with unconditional offers are too often focused on the bottom line rather than student interests,” said the union’s general secretary, Jo Grady. “These latest figures show that many students are ill-served by the current admissions system and that there is a real need for urgent reform. A move to post-qualification admissions, where students receive offers after they get their results, would be much fairer to students.”
7||What could finally stir me to communism? Watching Made in Chelsea with my daughterI’ve been in Berlin this week for a few days with my younger daughter. I wanted to bring her to the city because she is studying the second world war for history A level, so there was half a chance I could get her into museums without a fight. Also, I’ve been reading Joseph Roth’s writings about Berlin between the wars. The collection is called What I Saw: Reports from Berlin 1920-33. Well, here are a few things I saw. First, I saw my daughter in the brilliant Topography of Terror museum, dedicated (if that’s the right word) to the SS and built on the site of the Gestapo secret police headquarters. What a young woman she must be to apply herself so assiduously to the astounding material in there and then repair to our lodgings and pay the same rapt attention to several episodes of Made in Chelsea on her laptop. Honestly, she must have done six on the trot. What a day we had. Perhaps because of my torment at involuntarily catching long snatches of Made In Chelsea, small communist leanings I didn’t know lay within me rose to the surface. On a sightseeing bus tour (I love those, but that’s another story) our guide pointed out a huge Coca-Cola logo structure atop some hulking, sulking building in the old East Berlin. This, we were told with some pride, was the first bit of proper western advertising to be visited upon the newly liberated east Germans. Coca-Cola? Honestly, is that the best the west could show them, an attractively packaged but incredibly sugary drink? Their joy must have been unbridled. If only they had known, too, that one day it would also be possible – without a knock on the door from the thought police – to lie in their beds watching absurdly privileged toffs talking tosh for hours on end.
6||Peugeot owner in merger talks with Fiat ChryslerThe French owner of the Peugeot and Vauxhall brands is in talks with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) over a €40bn (£35bn) merger that would create one of the world’s biggest carmakers. PSA Group on Wednesday confirmed the existence of the talks, which come months after a failed merger attempt between FCA and PSA’s French rival Renault. News of the discussions raised fears for the jobs of British workers at Vauxhall’s factory in Ellesmere Port, Cheshire. The Unite trade union, which represents workers at the plant, said it was seeking urgent meetings with PSA bosses. The 1,100 workers at the plant already face uncertainty after PSA issued a stark warning in June that the future of the site depended on a good Brexit deal. PSA also employs 1,200 workers making Vauxhall vans in Luton, Bedfordshire. FCA has long pursued greater consolidation in the car industry, with leaders of the Italian-American carmaker past and present keen to pool resources. Carmakers around the world are grappling with one of the biggest and most expensive upheavals in the industry’s history as they attempt to move away from fossil fuels and towards battery electric vehicles and autonomous technology. Shares in Fiat Chrysler rose more than 8% in Milan on Wednesday after the Wall Street Journal reported that talks were under way. Shares in PSA rose by 3% , while shares in Renault fell. In brief statements, PSA Group and FCA confirmed the talks were in progress. A merged carmaker would have combined sales of nearly 10m a year, based on 2018 results, when Fiat Chrysler sold 5.8m cars and PSA sold 3.9m. By comparison, both Volkswagen and Toyota sell more than 10m cars a year, and the Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi alliance almost 11m. The combined market capitalisation of both companies is about €40bn. A deal between PSA and FCA would still face obstacles, however. The talks between FCA and Renault fell through in June, with the carmakers blaming the intervention of the French government, Renault’s largest shareholder. The French state remains a 12% shareholder in PSA, which also owns the Citroen brand, after bailing the carmaker out in 2014, but analysts were more positive that a deal could be agreed this time. The failed Renault proposal was complicated by its alliance with the Japanese carmaker Nissan. The deal would give PSA access to the US market, which it previously had plans to target. It would also help FCA catch up in its efforts to avoid fines for excess carbon dioxide emissions. FCA has paid hundreds of millions of euros to “pool” its dirtier cars with Tesla’s zero-emission vehicles to avoid steep fines, but is still considered an industry laggard. Peugeot’s chief executive, Carlos Tavares, has been open about PSA’s willingness to pursue merger opportunities if they made sense for shareholders. In April, Tavares said he would consider buying Britain’s largest carmaker, Jaguar Land Rover, but its Indian owner, Tata, said the company was not for sale. Tavares, known for his turnarounds of PSA and the Opel/Vauxhall business bought from General Motors, would likely apply his “cost discipline” at a combined PSA/FCA, according to Brian Studioso, an automotive analyst at Creditsights, a debt ratings agency. “European auto [manufacturer] consolidation is often more of a cost-reducing exercise than a revenue-enhancing one, and jobs will inevitably be on the line, or at the very least called into question,” Studioso wrote. Cutting jobs in the UK could be less politically sensitive for a merged company, given Italy and France’s record of demanding that job losses are limited in car industry mergers, according to David Bailey, a professor of business economics at the University of Birmingham. Fiat has significant spare capacity in its European plants and Tavares has previously said the company could switch to a plant in southern Europe to build its Astra cars. “There is a real risk that Ellesmere Port, despite being an efficient plant, could be sacrificed,” Bailey said. Unite said that PSA should not continue to use the Vauxhall brand, which has a long history of carmaking in Britain, if it did not continue to manufacture in the UK. Des Quinn, a national officer at Unite, said: “Merger talks combined with Brexit uncertainty are deeply unsettling for Vauxhall’s UK workforce which is one of the most efficient in Europe.”
12||£250k antique violin left on train in London has been stolen, police sayA 310-year-old violin left behind by its owner on a train’s luggage rack has been stolen, according to police. Stephen Morris left the instrument worth £250,000 on a London Victoria to Orpington train when he got off at Penge, south-east London, last Tuesday evening. He had appealed to the public for help, saying losing it was “like having my arm cut off”. After examining CCTV footage from the journey, British Transport Police said another man took the violin as the train, which had left Victoria at 11.58pm, approached Bromley South, before getting on to another train to St Mary Cray. The force has released a CCTV image of a man they would like to speak to about the missing instrument. The instrument, which dates to 1709, was one of only a few made by David Tecchler, a master craftsman considered to be the leading violin and cello maker of the renowned Roman school of violin making. The recently restored violin was in a white case when Morris left it on the train. It is marked with Tecchler’s name inside. Morris has led a number of UK orchestras and performed as a soloist alongside the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, BBC Concert Orchestra and Royal Philharmonic Concert Orchestra, and as a guest soloist director with the Scottish Ensemble and Locrian Ensemble. As a session musician he has recorded with James Brown, Stevie Wonder, David Gilmour and U2.
12||Shark bite victims got first aid from paramedic coupleA Swedish nurse and paramedic said they used towels and rope to save the lives of two British tourists in a shark attack on Australia’s Great Barrier Reef. Danny Maggs, 22, from Plymouth, and Alistair Raddon, 28, were attacked on Tuesday by a shark while swimming at a popular snorkelling spot in the Whitsunday Islands, Queensland, during a day trip on a tourist boat. Maggs received four deep lacerations to his right calf. Raddon, from Southampton, had his right foot amputated. Both men were in a stable condition in a hospital in the mainland city of Mackay on Wednesday. Billy Ludvigsson and Emma Andersson, an ambulance nurse and emergency response nurse respectively, were on the day cruise vessel where the men were loaded after the attack. Andersson told a news conference in Cannonvale that they helped the man who was loaded on first, but his injury was less severe. The couple then made a makeshift tourniquet to stop the life-threatening bleeding of the man who lost his foot and were successful after a few minutes. “Injury-wise, we have seen worse obviously, but it’s different when it’s a shark attack and we’ve been in the water at the same time. It’s more personal like that,” Ludvigsson said. The CQ Rescue helicopter service reported on Twitter that the men had been “wrestling and thrashing about in the water” before the attack occurred. The tourist boat brought the men back to the Abell Point marina at Airlie Beach, where they were treated before being flown to by helicopter. Maggs and Raddon released a statement thanking everyone involved in their care, from the people on the boat to the ambulance, the helicopter service and Mackay Base hospital staff. “Everyone dealt with our situation well and remained calm and we are very grateful for your help,” they wrote. “Thanks also to friends and family back home for your messages of love and support. We are very grateful to everyone supporting us wherever you are.” Maggs was pictured smiling on Tuesday while being loaded into a rescue helicopter. Jamie Dart, owner of JD Plumbing and Heating Ltd and Maggs’s former manager, had previously told the Guardian that both men were extremely lucky that two trained medical staff who happened to be onboard the cruise boat as guests were there to help. Tracey Eastwick, a Queensland ambulance service manager, said it was fortunate there was a trained paramedic onboard the cruise because “any first aid in those sort of circumstances with those injuries would be extremely important”.
5||Alison Prince obituaryAlison Prince, who has died aged 88, was an author of more than 50 books for children, as well as an artist, poet and musician, and a TV scriptwriter best known for the BBC’s classic stop-motion animation series Trumpton. Her first script for children’s TV was for the BBC pre-school programme Watch with Mother, which she wrote following the birth of her children. With Joan Hickson, another young mother whom she had met in a local playground, Alison created Joe, a story about a little boy whose parents ran a motel. It was broadcast in 1966 and others followed. More Joe stories were published in comics and in a Joe annual and there were also books, including Joe and a Horse and Other Stories from Watch With Mother (1968), and Joe and the Nursery School and Joe Moves House (both 1972). Alison had studied at the Slade School of Art and taught art in a secondary school and this artistic background combined with her storytelling skills were exactly what was needed for developing ideas for the BBC’s children’s programmeJackanory. Alison both wrote and presented stories for Jackanory and was then invited by Monica Sims, the head of BBC children’s programmes, to write the script for Trumpton. A follow-up to the hugely successful Camberwick Green, Trumpton – which aired in 1967 – was also a puppet-based series, about the goings on of a small town as experienced by the local firemen. Writing for animated puppets was a new experience but, as Alison described in a later interview, she took up the opportunity. “I didn’t have a TV, but I had three kids to feed, so I said yes.” She soon realised that her storytelling would be shaped by what the technology could do. Going to see Trumpton’s creator Gordon Murray filming a test sequence, she saw the limitations. “It dawned on me how quaint the remit was. You can’t depict flames using stop-motion, nor can you do smoke and water. So I realised I would have to write 13 stories about a fire brigade that never went anywhere near a fire.” Alison also had a problem with the firemen characters. With their uniform and near matching faces they all looked more or less the same. Her first job was to give them different identities. “I looked at the sequence over and over again and thought: ‘Well, there’s one who looks a bit lanky. I’ll call him Dibble. Grub’ was the silly one who came tumbling in late, having obviously been interrupted halfway through a ham sandwich. Two were absolutely identical, so I felt they must be twins: Pugh and Pugh. Another one, who had a certain largeness of gesture, I imagined to be Irish. He became Barney McGrew.’” Alison wrote the 13 episodes at speed while watching the family washing go round at the local launderette. She saw it just as “a little job” and sold the script for each episode outright for £15, having no idea that the programme would become the success that it did. Scriptwriting for children’s TV launched Alison’s book-writing career, which was also almost all for children. She had an easy fluency that she applied to stories of any kinds and for all ages. Her tales were warm-hearted adventures with a variety of settings and characters, written with the express intention of entertaining and amusing readers. She had a light and humorous touch and particularly enjoyed writing for newly confident readers, especially when she put animals at the centre of the stories, as in Bumble (2001), the story of a hamster aptly named for his large rear, and Spud (2003), told through the eyes of the big-hearted and big-stomached eponymous doggy hero. For older readers she was deft at writing historical stories, including How’s Business (1987), set in the second world war, and The Lost King: Richard III and the Princes in the Tower (2014). In all her historical novels she balanced authenticity and accessibility, and was equally sure-footed with contemporary settings. She achieved critical success most notably for The Sherwood Hero, a contemporary remake of the Robin Hood legend set in 1990s Glasgow, for which she was a joint winner, with Philip Pullman, of the 1996 Guardian children’s fiction prize. Later, her thriller Oranges and Murder was the Scottish Arts Council’s children’s book of the year in 2002. Alison never stopped writing; interviewed when she was 86 she said she had no lack of ideas, just less time to write them down. Her books continued to be successful in the UK and were also translated into other languages, including Danish, German, Japanese and Welsh. Her notable contribution to children’s books from the 70s onwards was recognised in 2005 when she was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Leicester for services to children’s literature. For adults, Alison wrote a biography of each of the great children’s writers Kenneth Grahame (2015) and Hans Christian Andersen (1998). She also wrote The Necessary Goat (1992), a collection of essays on formative thinking created during a fellowship in creative writing at Jordanhill College, Glasgow. A lover of poetry from childhood, she wrote two collections of poems, The Whifflet Train (2003) and Waking at Five Happens Again (2016), and had many single poems published in magazines. She won the Literary Review’s grand poetry prize twice. Alison was born in Beckenham, Kent, where she was educated at the local girls’ grammar school. Her father, Charles, worked in the City as the manager of the Yorkshire Bank in London, while her mother, Louise (nee David), who initially trained as a nurse, was instrumental in developing the local arts council in Bromley and later became mayor of Bromley. From Beckenham girls, Alison won a scholarship to the Slade. Its influence never left her and she regarded herself as much an artist as a writer. On graduating, Alison found it hard to earn a living from her art; instead, she trained as a teacher at Goldsmiths College, London, and taught art at the Elliott school in Putney, south-west London. Following her marriage in 1957 to Goronwy Parry, a geography and sports teacher at the school, and the birth of their three children, Alison moved into teaching art classes for adults. She also got work as a reviewer and began writing short stories for magazines, before her success with television scriptwriting. From her early days as a teacher, Alison valued working with children and loved the responses they offered to her work. One of her most prized writing experiences was for How’s Business, created during weekly sessions in which the story was teased out with a group of children, under the auspices of a writers in schools project. The book was later made into a film (1992) and Alison remained in touch for the rest of her life with several of the children who had taken part. Among family and friends, Alison had the same enjoyment in being around children. She loved the directness of their thinking and their freedom and expression, and was happy to join them in make-believe and play. She loved the countryside and had a lifelong interest in green living and recycling, which she first put into effect when she ran a small farm in Suffolk for eight years. In the 80s she moved to the Scottish island of Arran, where she campaigned on green issues in articles under the heading “On the Green” for the Arran Banner. She also served on the Arran community council, helped sustain the local poetry society and writers group and, as an excellent clarinet player, was a member of the Jazz Café Band. Goronwy died in 1991. She is survived by their three children, Samantha, Andy and Ben, her son John from an earlier relationship, by six grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. • Alison Prince, writer, born 26 March 1931; died 12 October 2019
12||Clutha helicopter pilot ignored fuel warnings, inquiry findsThe pilot of a helicopter that crashed into the Clutha bar in Glasgow, killing 10 people including himself, decided to ignore low fuel warnings, an inquiry has found. The crash on the night of Friday 29 November 2013 killed the pilot, Captain David Traill, two police officers and seven customers of the bar. A further 31 people were injured. In his written determination following five months of oral evidence in a fatal accident inquiry, the sheriff principal, Craig Turnbull, said: “Captain Traill consciously took a risk in proceeding on the basis that the low fuel warnings were in some way erroneous (when they were not). That decision had fatal consequences.” Turnbull added: “The central issue was why Captain Traill allowed the supply tanks to deplete to the point that they did when there was more than sufficient usable fuel available to him in the main tank to allow [the helicopter] to return safely to [base].” He concluded it was “more likely than not that the quantities of fuel displayed on the fuel quantity indication system of [helicopter] contradicted the low fuel warnings, in a manner that persuaded Captain Traill that it was safe to continue flying”. Reacting to the report, family members of those who died expressed frustration that so little new information or explanation had been provided, given the pilot’s failure to follow the fuel warning had been established by a prior investigation. They were also highly critical of the time taken to hold the fatal accident inquiry. Turnbull said it was clear from the evidence that the accident was caused by Traill’s failure to ensure that at least one of the fuel transfer pump switches was set to on. The inquiry heard that the helicopter’s engines flamed out sequentially as a result of fuel starvation while the craft was airborne. However, Turnbull said there was no evidence to suggest the pilot deliberately caused the crash, and it was clear he “made a valiant attempt to land … after both engines had flamed out”. Turnbull said he did not believe he could offer recommendations to prevent further deaths occurring in similar circumstances, because the particular circumstances of this crash “appear to be unique”. He said: “Had Captain Traill performed the actions set out in the pilot’s checklist, the accident would not have happened.” Those who were in the helicopter were Traill, 51, PC Tony Collins, 43, and PC Kirsty Nelis, 36. The seven Clutha customers who were killed were Gary Arthur, 48, Joe Cusker, 59, Colin Gibson, 33, Robert Jenkins, 61, John McGarrigle, 58, Samuel McGhee, 56, and Mark O’Prey, 44. Witnesses told the inquiry that they heard a spluttering and grinding noise before the helicopter fell. The inquiry, roughly equivalent to an inquest, was charged with establishing what caused the fatal crash and how the victims died. It took place in a temporary court at Hampden Park football stadium to accommodate the scores of witnesses, aviation experts and family members. Breaks in the hearings were scheduled to fit around football matches and concerts. An Air Accidents Investigations Branch (AAIB) report published in 2015 found two fuel supply switches were off and the pilot did not follow emergency procedures after a fuel warning in the cockpit. The Crown Office, Scotland’s prosecution authority, ruled there was not enough evidence to justify criminal proceedings. The police interviewed 2,000 witnesses and amassed 1,400 pieces of evidence for the FAI.
12||Claire Andrews obituaryMy aunt, Claire Andrews, who has died aged 80, was a proud member of the Windrush generation, an LGBTQ rights advocate and a trade unionist. She was a spirited voice for justice, fighting unfairness and inequality in society in a practical and meaningful way. It helped that she was fiercely intelligent, passionate and obstinate. Born and educated in the town of Marabella, on the Caribbean island of Trinidad, Claire was one of the nine children of Mary (nee Barriteau), usually known as Jennifee, and Reginald Andrews. Her father was a carpenter and her mother played an active part in her local community and Roman Catholic church. In November 1961, aged 22, Claire moved to the UK, where she initially undertook a range of jobs, including one in a food-processing factory, to make ends meet. Her experience as an immigrant to postwar Britain inspired her to pay tribute to the Windrush generation in her 2003 book, Legacy. In a short documentary to accompany the book, Claire explained the hateful reception that many migrants faced after moving to the “mother country”. “We had lots of attacks. Some of our people were beaten up,” she said. “We were, more or less, treated [as] inferior. We weren’t well received.” Claire overcame this prejudice to not just survive in Britain, but to thrive. She briefly studied nursing, but decided against that path, instead carving out numerous careers for herself. She trained as an electrician and engineer, and also worked for many years in Hackney council’s trading standards office. A lifelong trade union member, she was active in Unison and mixed in political circles, among figures well known both in the UK and abroad, including the activist Angela Davis. No stranger to a picket line or a march, Claire campaigned for equal rights for Unison members and frequently represented Hackney council’s union members at employment tribunals. She also served on Unison’s national lesbian and gay committee and its national black members’ committee. Claire possessed tremendous joie de vivre. She loved a drink, was rarely seen without a cigarette and had a sharp wit. True to her Trinidadian culture, she loved soca music and playing “mas” at the Notting Hill carnival. Her only son, Roddy, died in 2002.
18||Is a plastic Christmas tree more sustainable than a real one?Residents of Penzance, Cornwall, the UK’s first “plastic-free” town, were understandably piqued this week to find that 150 Christmas trees had been put up – every single one made of plastic. Local business chiefs behind the move defended their decision to opt for fake trees for the community and insisted they were more sustainable than the fresh alternative – which would later have to be burned – and could be dusted off and reused for many years. Artificial trees used to be a manky wire frame with a bit of tinsel attached, typically left forgotten in the loft along with their tangled Christmas lights. But modern-day tree technology has leapt forward and uses injection moulding to create realistic sprigs. Even close up, the pricier artificial ones can fool most consumers into thinking they are real. But looks are not everything. With major retailers such as John Lewis reporting that “faux” or artificial trees typically made from plastic are now outselling traditional fresh trees, are the ersatz ones an environmental nightmare? According to the Carbon Trust, it is the manufacture of the plastic, from oil, that creates most – around two-thirds – of their carbon emissions. A further quarter is created by the industrial emissions produced when the tree itself is made. Their carbon footprint is boosted by the trees typically being shipped by container from China before arriving in the shops. Friends of the Earth is advising consumers who have fake trees to keep using them for as long as possible (and today’s versions will last for years) but to look into more environmentally friendly options when it comes to a replacement. Its tree campaigner Emi Murphy says: “Buying a potted tree with roots lets you grow it outside and use it again year after year, reducing its environmental impact and costing you less. A living tree will carry on absorbing carbon from the atmosphere for years to come. The other option to check out is the tree-rental service offered by many garden centres and plant nurseries.” Alternatively, string some fairy lights over a houseplant you already have. Meanwhile, Penzance could take inspiration from London’s fashion district Carnaby Street, which is promising a “world-first” sustainable ocean-style Christmas installation to be unveiled next week. Every element will use recycled and reusable materials. These include repurposed fishing netting to look like green kelp, more than 500m of post-use bubble wrap standing in for coral and more than 1,500 recycled plastic bottles for fish and bubbles. The finishing touches have been added in with over 100 litres of water-based eco-friendly, vegan paint. Eat your heart out, David Attenborough.
19||Winter weight: why our hunger is rising rapidly – and how to sate itI once did an idle poll of all the ways people’s mothers had called them fat and my favourite … well, it was a joint three-way between: “You could eat one more potato than a pig”, “Your brother is slimmer and more handsome, but that’s made him arrogant” and “Darling, you’re at what I would call your winter weight.” Ah, winter weight: is it a real thing or just a caustic critique? It’s both. Some people don’t get hungrier when the seasons change and think it’s one of those things that happens to women, and bears. Those people are the outliers; they just don’t know it. A drop in ambient temperature increases energy expenditure in both sexes (also in bears). It shouldn’t matter enormously on a basic calories-in-calories-out model, because we’re talking just 150 calories a day. You use extra energy, you eat a banana; this is the smallest inconvenience the change in seasons has to offer, less annoying than having to find your cagoule. However, the human body being somewhat more complicated than a basic book-keeping system, all your appetite hears is the activation. It’s like the Hulk. It doesn’t want to do just one job. It’s a force of nature, not a supplier of goods and services. It wants to burst out of its clothes and keep on going until you, too, have burst out of your clothes. There’s also a serotonin angle, as the sunlight recedes and your hormonal pathways try to source joy from other places, at which point a banana won’t cut it. And then, of course, there’s a feedback loop. You start by craving refined carbohydrates for a reason, but then you want more cake because you just had cake, as with heroin. There’s a strong argument that says: who cares? Be your winter weight. And, sod it, while you’re there, why not eat one more potato than a pig? But let’s say you’re one of those people who hates being at the mercy of uncontrollable forces under the skin. There are things to eat in winter that don’t come from Greggs. The point isn’t that you should eat hot food because it increases your body temperature from the inside. It doesn’t create a little pocket of heat in your stomach that emanates to your extremities for the rest of the day – it’s food, not uranium; the Ready Brek ad was basically mis-selling. But complex carbohydrates take more energy to digest, so will be both satiating and warming, which leads inexorably to the stew or hearty soup. I start with pearl barley. I’m always bored with it by Christmas and by June I’ve forgotten how to cook it (it’s easy, like rice, only takes four times as long), but in the first cold snap it is powerfully cheering and fills your kitchen with a delicious, heady smell, as if you were living in a 16th-century brewery and will be ready for a massive knees-up in six months’ time. Delia Smith’s One Is Fun – perhaps the most controversial work in her canon, having caused lifelong rifts since the 1980s as friends presented it to each other as a passive-aggressive gift item (“You’re going to be alone for ever, at least eat nice soup”) – has a pearl barley soup of such substance, such rough but pleasing texture (squishy; no, wait, chewy; no, wait, slightly sticky; ah, hang on, also crunchy) and such an ancient vibe – you can taste the centuries of embedded knowledge, one generation passing carrot-wisdom on to the next, back into the mists of time – that while you’re on the first bowl, you feel as though you could eat it every day, for every meal, for ever. This will, unfortunately, turn out not to be true. I don’t want to bang on about meat, painfully aware of how often I’ve claimed to be nearly vegan and then had a salt-beef sandwich. But the classic stew is barley with lamb, and William Drabble’s recipe is as close to perfect as it gets. This will all take a lot longer than pasta and someone is sure to bang on about their slow cooker, and how it revolutionised their lives, because suddenly they were chopping onions at 7.25 in the morning and coming home to a delicious meal of very intense onions. I find this a slightly saddening life fix because part of the pleasure of making a stew is feeling that it was your skill – browning it, poking it, going back to have a look at it – that brought it to that point of excellence. Also, all those delicious smells, like a full-house scented candle made of food, except not £65 (there is no stew as expensive as a candle, except cassoulet). It’s better to make it on a Sunday and eat it all week. When you feel the painful monotony on around Thursday, you can add aioli.
26||Making Waves: The Art of Cinematic Sound review – why Top Gun roaredHere is a valuable and deeply felt documentary, celebrating the work of the sound designers, sound editors and Foley wizards in the cinema, and if it feels like a feelgood in-house promotional video for Hollywood technicians … well, they’ve got an awful lot to feel good about. These are the people who create that world of sound, that palimpsest of exquisitely blended noise layers, which is perhaps the thing least consciously comprehended by the movie audience but which is indispensable for fabricating a total world in which a film can live and breathe. It requires an artistry and a delicacy, as well as resourcefulness and make-do-and-mend ingenuity that reaches back to the cinema’s beginnings. This film speaks to the great maestros of movie sound, such as Walter Murch, Ben Burtt, Kysten Mate and Victoria Rose Sampson who, with great frankness and amazing modesty, talk about their extremely difficult work. The great thing about a documentary like this is that it challenges the assumption – easily held – that sound is basically about simply capturing or tape-recording what appears to be taking place in front of the camera. In fact, the sound is “written” just as much as the screenplay. From this movie, I learn that the sound of fighter planes in Top Gun was not simply the sound of actual planes, but that noise mixed in with the modified sound of wild animals roaring. And this was not to make the noise of jets dreamlike or surreal or metaphorical, but simply to make it sound stronger on screen, more compelling, more real. Sound is part of cinema artifice. The other thing that this documentary does is emphasise that sound design is an important part of a film’s music – it is the film’s music, or part of it. It is Hollywood’s musique concrète. My one tiny regret is that this doesn’t show anything from Albert Brooks’s 1981 comedy Modern Romance, in which Brooks plays a film editor who in one notable scene improvises the sound effects for a sci-fi movie. • Making Waves: The Art of Cinematic Sound is released in the US on 26 October and in the UK on 1 November.
3||‘OK boomer': how the Gen Z retort of 2019 has been monetisedName: OK boomer. Age: OK boomer. Appearance: OK boomer. Stop saying that! Sorry, I just wanted to give you a taste of this annoying new craze. What new craze? Saying “OK boomer” as a dismissive riposte to anything said by someone over 30. Well, er, mission accomplished. Who is doing this? It’s mainly Generation Z. Are they the millennials I keep hearing about? No, Gen Z are younger. Basically they are the under-30s, people who grew up with social media. Many of them have started saying “OK boomer” this year on Twitter, Instagram and TikTok. Are there any over-30s on TikTok to hear them? Perhaps not. But the message is getting out nonetheless. And what is the message exactly? Kind of a weary shrug, as if to say that older people don’t understand what it is like to be young. Isn’t that exactly what young people always think? Yes, although Generation Z do have some specific grievances. Housing is very expensive for them, for example. Older people also tend to vote for Trump and Brexit, and some seem content to ignore climate change, which young people will have to deal with. Yeah, that stuff is annoying. Then again, baby boomers grew up much poorer, with corporal punishment, polio, racial segregation, high unemployment, the cold war, and being forced to fight in Vietnam. So, you know, they had their gripes as well. OK boomer ... Is this Gen Z motto like their version of “Make love, not war”? Kind of. It’s also a merchandising opportunity. Sorry, a what? A number of young people have already found a way to monetise this moment by selling hoodies, T-shirts, mugs, phone cases and other goods with “OK boomer” printed on them. That’s, um, enterprising. And often quite successful. Nina Kasman, an 18-year-old student, told the New York Times that she plans to put the money she makes selling “OK boomer” merch towards her college fees. Isn’t this what the hippies would have called “selling out”? Not in Kasman’s view. “The reason we make the ‘OK boomer’ merch is because there’s not a lot that I can personally do,” she says. “There’s not much I can personally do to restore the environment, which was harmed due to corporate greed of older generations.” Is it good for the environment to generate a lot of merch that no one really needs? Shush. Do say: “Resist our evil grandparents! Just like they did!” Don’t say: “What was wrong with that nice mannequin challenge, which we used to do in my day?”
18||Electric cars could be charged in 10 minutes in future, finds researchNew battery technology could give electric cars more than 200 miles of charge in as little as 10 minutes, according to new research. Lithium ion batteries have had a dramatic impact because of their ability to store a large amount of energy in a small, compact battery and be recharged again and again. A trio of scientists were awarded the Nobel prize in chemistry for their contributions to the development of the batteries earlier this month. However, lithium ion batteries also present a worry for drivers: that their vehicle will run out of power mid-journey and leave them potentially facing a lengthy recharge. Now scientists say they are addressing the issue by making it much quicker and easier to charge the battery, meaning cars will spend less time at charging points and get back on the road faster. “If we have a ubiquitous fast-charging infrastructure on the roadside, drivers need no longer to worry about the cruise range. After driving 200-300 miles per charge, one can pick up another 200-300 miles by charging for 10 minutes,” Dr Chao-Yang Wang, a professor at the Pennsylvania State University and co-author of the study, told the Guardian. Rapid charging in a matter of minutes requires a high current. However, at low temperatures – even at 30C (86F) – such charging of lithium ion batteries can cause problems as metallic lithium forms in spikes around the anode. Higher temperatures of about 60C (140F) would allow the lithium ions to move fast enough to avoid this problem – but keeping a battery hot can also result in problems. “At high temperatures battery active materials will react with the electrolyte to form passive surface films, consuming active lithium as well as causing high resistance,” said Wang. The formation of such films take time, he said. As a result, the team came up with the idea of keeping the battery at 60C for just long enough to charge it up. To do so, the team developed a battery that uses thin nickel foil to create an internal self-heating structure. By heating the battery to 60C, then cooling it to room temperature, they were able to charge the battery to 80% in 10 minutes but avoid damaging it, even when repeatedly charged in this way. A Tesla Model S currently takes 40 minutes to charge from a flat battery to 80% using a supercharger. While the team used single cells of smaller capacity, about 10 amp hours, in their study, they say the technology could be applied to develop a battery for an electric car. “We can charge batteries of different sizes with the same [charging] time as long as the charge current increases proportionally with the battery size,” said Wang. “For car battery of 150 amp hours, a fast charge station would have to provide a 900 amp current for 10 minutes.” That, he said, was already feasible with existing fast chargers. The future, Wang said, looks bright. “Our technology is simple but elegant … I guess that it will take two to three years of in-vehicle testing and evaluation before it is used in commercial vehicles.” Prof Clare Grey from the University of Cambridge, who was not involved in the study, welcomed the research. “The interesting point is that it suggests that the positive effects of heating – reduced lithium plating – outweigh the considerable degradation processes that kick in at higher temperatures,” she said. But, Grey added, there is a long way to go, saying that the approach now needs to be scaled up to larger battery packs while there could be other degradation mechanisms that need to be considered. “But,” she added, “it’s important to challenge conventional wisdom and come up with innovative approaches.”
29||'Sinister yet pathetic': how the UK was primed for nuclear warEven if you didn’t buy a copy of Protect and Survive in 1980, you may still be familiar with the UK government’s official guide to surviving nuclear war. The British public’s reaction, when they learned that their government had been making preparations for a nuclear conflict for almost three decades, was both immediate and very British: they made fun of it. ‘Make a “lean-to” with sloping doors taken from rooms above or strong boards rested against an inner wall,’ suggested Protect and Survive. The 32-page booklet, which contained instructions for civilians on how to best prepare their homes – the contents for a good “survival kit”, how to build a toilet from a chair and a bucket, and what to do with your loved ones when they died – was a unique combination of sinister and silly; societal collapse and radiation poisoning don’t really suit the bland language of bureaucrats. Previously only distributed to journalists and emergency planners, it had remained a badly kept secret until 1980, when The Times ran a campaign challenging Britain’s preparedness should the cold war turn hot. Finally, the government published it. The structure of the United Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation (UKMO), and its role in warning the nation, are outlined in this promotional booklet from 1974. In a 1982 Young Ones episode, the hapless housemates hide under tables after finding a bomb in their kitchen, with Neil announcing: “I’m going to consult the incredibly helpful Protect and Survive manual!” Jethro Tull wrote a song about it. (“They said protect and you’ll survive / But our postman didn’t call.”) It spawned countless parodies by the peace movement and inspired similar guides in everything from the BBC’s Threads (under the title Advising the Householder) to the video game Fallout 2. One illustration from it, of a family glumly looking at their shelter, became the cover art for Radiohead’s single Karma Police. But Protect and Survive was not the first guide produced by the UK government on surviving nuclear war. Taras Young, author of a new history titled Nuclear War in the UK, estimates he has collected 500 booklets, pamphlets and posters produced by national and local government, volunteers and businesses. “Until you see them all in one place, it’s hard to appreciate the scale of how much of this stuff was being produced,” he says. “There was so much more going on than Protect and Survive.” Despite describing them as “sinister yet pathetic”, Young, who works in marketing but is about to start a PhD on the guides, has loved them since discovering Atomic Warfare (1961) in his grandparents’ attic when he was 10 years old. “It hasn’t got a good cover, but finding that was quite exciting. They were essentially advertising campaigns. For me as a marketer, it’s like the ultimate form of marketing – can you convince people that they’re going to survive when they won’t?” The Hydrogen Bomb (1957). The first pamphlet distributed to the public was Civil Defence and the Atom Bomb, published in 1952. In 1955, the Strath report – a government-commissioned investigation into how Britain would cope after a nuclear war – found that the country would be left on the brink of collapse with millions dead. This made the next pamphlet, 1957’s The Hydrogen Bomb, hugely popular. Bomb booklets from 1983-84 By 1963, Advising the Householder on Protection Against Nuclear Attack had a print run of 500,000 copies. Meanwhile, councils across the UK were producing localised guides that imagined nuclear war decimating their high streets, with everywhere from Hull to Bristol getting their own dedicated pamphlets. There were so many that Young says there is now a steadily growing community of collectors in the UK. Some have personal connections to the country’s preparatory efforts, like former volunteers of the Royal Observer Corps, a civilian volunteer force who crewed around 1,500 tiny, three-person bunkers across the UK, many on farming land. Some volunteers have even gone on to buy the bunkers they once served in and turned them into museums. The Home Office produced a set of training posters in 1958 which depicted typical British street scenes before and after a nuclear attack. The dilemma for the government since the 1950s, Young says, was that they knew that their guides “weren’t necessarily particularly useful.” “But at the same time, they had to be seen to be producing something, as they couldn’t just admit that we’d all die,” he says. “If they produce the stuff, people will criticise it as being useless. If they don’t produce it, then they’ll be criticised for not doing anything.” The Home Office produced a set of training posters in 1958 that depicted typical British street scenes before and after a nuclear attack. The pamphlets were less about imparting knowledge and more about preventing negative public responses such as riots, Young says. While researching his book, he found a note by one of the civil servants preparing Protect and Survive: “It said something like, ‘We must make people believe that they can survive.’ Not that they could survive, but they needed to believe they could – that kind of sums up the whole thing. And even if you did survive, then what? You’ve survived into hell on Earth. Is there any point in living with envy of the dead?” After the humiliation of Protect and Survive, the government stopped distributing guides to the public, and quietly sent them only to emergency planners. In 1986, home secretary Douglas Hurd said: “If new material was issued now, everyone would throw it into the wastepaper basket or make fun of it as they did with Protect and Survive. I don’t think there’s a sensible purpose in it.” From The Hydrogen Bomb (1957) But the booklet spawned an unofficial spin-off: Protect and Survive Monthly, a magazine written by proto-preppers that ran 1981 to 1983. After a foreword in the first issue by Leon Brittan, the government distanced itself, with later issues reading more like conspiracy theory. “It became quite loopy and rightwing towards the end,” Young says. “The images are great, though – they mostly came from shelter companies who saw a chance to cash in.” Hurd’s prediction, that any pamphlet after Protect and Survive would be mocked or thrown away, wasn’t necessarily incorrect. In 2004, a 22-page government booklet called Preparing for Emergencies was sent out in the UK, in the aftermath of 9/11, the 2001 foot-and-mouth outbreak and the 2004 Madrid train bombings. “It was delivered to every household in the UK but no one seems to remember it. I think it went straight in the bin because it’s so bland,” Young says. “I think most people didn’t even read it. So the legacy of these cold war documents is quite interesting, because it’s just meant that the government no longer communicates with the public in that way any more. They are obviously trying to avoid any public reaction whatsoever.” • Nuclear War in the UK by Taras Young is published by Four Corners Books.
12||Grenfell Tower fire survivors call for top firefighter to resignSurvivors and bereaved of the Grenfell Tower fire have called for the commissioner of the London fire brigade (LFB) to resign following a damning public inquiry report into the disaster that found “systemic failings” in her organisation. They said it was “heartbreaking” to read that more of their loved ones could have been saved if the building was evacuated earlier and said Dany Cotton, the country’s most senior firefighter, should now quit. “Her position is untenable,” said Natasha Elcock, chair of Grenfell United (GU), the survivors and bereaved group. “She is the commissioner, she is in charge and she didn’t make sure her team were trained. This wasn’t unprecedented. We have had fires before, but they just weren’t ready.” Nazanin Aghlani, who lost two family members in the blaze, said leaders of the LFB should also be prosecuted. “I’m not saying individual firemen, they do a hard job … but the seniors at the top get good money to do a very serious job.” Cotton confirmed on Wednesday that senior LFB officers have been interviewed under caution by the police but said she would not resign. “We identified our own areas that we’ve been concerned about way before the inquiry,” she said. “It’s important for me that I continue to protect the people of London by putting those steps in place and developing LFB, and by resigning now that would not happen.” The long-delayed report into the blaze that claimed 72 lives was released on Wednesday morning by the inquiry chair, Sir Martin Moore-Bick, and was called “strong and fair” by GU, which represents hundreds of members of the community affected by the 14 June 2017 disaster. The group said the LFB’s failure to prepare and plan for a cladding fire and evacuation, described by Moore-Bick as “gravely inadequate”, was a breach of national guidance and the LFB’s leadership must “stop hiding behind the bravery of their frontline firefighters [and] … face consequences for these failings if there is to be change”. The survivors said rank and file firefighters, rather than being scapegoated in the report, were let down by their training, procedures, equipment and leadership. Moore-Bick’s conclusion that the refurbishment of the tower completed in 2016 with the fixture of combustible cladding broke building regulations, added to their “determination to see criminal charges brought against those responsible for turning our homes into a death trap”, they said. They also believe this finding will make it harder for the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, which owned the building, its tenants management organisation and the construction companies involved to avoid blame in the second phase of the inquiry, which starts in January. Over at least 18 months it will consider the design and construction of the £10m refurbishment between 2014 and 2016 and the government’s role in fire safety both by regulation and provision of effective fire and rescue services. “Justice means different things for all of us but the truth needs to be at the heart of our collective healing. We have been waiting a long time for this report,” GU said in a statement. “Today’s findings give us some confidence that our journey towards truth has finally begun. We now need to urgently see responsibility and action from this report, not excuses. One of the most worrying findings is Sir Martin Moore-Bick’s view that the LFB are currently an institution at risk of not learning the lessons from Grenfell.” Moore-Bick’s key demands include national guidelines for evacuations of high-rise flats, most of which currently operate a “stay put” policy. He wants tower owners to provide fire brigades with details of external wall materials and building plans, a new regime of regular inspections of high-rises and lifts and urgent inspections of fire doors across all multi-occupancy residential properties. In a message to the prime minister, Boris Johnson, he said he wanted to see his recommendations implemented “without delay”. Johnson told parliament he accepted in principle all of Moore-Bick’s recommendations for central government, pledging: “Where action is called for, action will follow.” But he dismissed questions from Labour about £100m cuts to the LFB during his time as London mayor and whether the removal of aerial appliances during his tenure may have affected the response time of the emergency services. “Sir Martin notes appliances were at the site within five minutes and he makes no findings, that I’m aware about, of lack of resources,” he said. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn meanwhile said the government’s response to Grenfell was “too slow and not strong enough … from re-housing survivors to dealing with Grenfell-style ACM cladding on hundreds of blocks across this country”. He added: “It was not firefighters that deregulated building safety standards, it wasn’t firefighters who ignored the concerns of tenants, it wasn’t firefighters who ignored the coroner’s report [after the 2009 Lakanal House fire] and failed to put sprinklers in high rise blocks. And it wasn’t firefighters who put flammable cladding on Grenfell Tower.” Moore-Bick also found: Behailu Kebede, the minicab driver in whose fourth floor flat the fire started, was not at fault. The principal reason the fire spread was the aluminium composite cladding filled with plastic used on the building exterior and manufactured by Arconic. Firefighters showed “courage and devotion to duty” and 999 call operators were “unstinting” in their efforts to help trapped residents. Incident commanders were not trained to cope with the fire and there was no contingency plan for evacuation. The LFB failed to lift the “stay put” advice when the stairs remained passable, which cost lives. Communications systems failed and there were serious deficiencies in command and control. Cotton said in a statement: “I want to express our deepest sorrow at not being able to save all those who died in the Grenfell Tower fire. The suffering of the bereaved, survivors and community will never be forgotten by any of us in the brigade.” The London fire chief said her colleagues faced “impossible conditions that residents and the emergency services must never be placed in again” and she was “disappointed at some of the criticism of individual staff members who were placed in completely unprecedented circumstances”. The LFB would carefully and fully consider Moore-Bick’s recommendations, she said. “We are lobbying for major building regulation change and urgent research into ‘buildings that fail’ on fire safety, which leaves the national ‘stay put’ strategy no longer viable,” she said. “We will never give up until all of the changes we are calling for to protect residents have been made.” Johnson paid tribute to the Grenfell community during a sombre debate in the House of Commons. He praised “residents who sacrificed their own lives to save their children or neighbours, the local community who rallied round in such an incredible fashion, holding the survivors in a tight embrace as the authorities failed to step up, and the people with us here today [in the public gallery], the bereaved and the survivors.” “To them I say that the truth will come out, justice will be done, and that Grenfell Tower, and the people who called it home, will never be forgotten,” he said.
30||Thunderdome: the Dutch rave with the world's fastest, hardest musicLast weekend, Thunderdome made history: 50,000 ravers massed at a convention centre in Utrecht for the biggest indoor hardcore dance event ever staged, breaking its own record set two years ago when it pulled off the mother of all comebacks, and reclaimed its crown as the world’s greatest living hardcore rave. The site is mapped out like a theme park, with six areas of music ranging from the slower early rave sound of the “Thundergods” to the 200+ beats per minute blasting from the Tunnel of Terror. Tonight we’re paying homage to the most significant youth culture movement in the Netherlands, gabber, which is why there’s also a gabber museum, displaying limited-edition Nikes and multicoloured Australian-brand jackets – the gabber uniform – plus a tattoo station inking diehards with Thunderdome’s iconic Wizard logo, and a gabber barber serving up undercuts. Hardcore is one of the most liberated and liberating genres in dance music, encompassing a vast range of speeds, styles, and emotions. It creates euphoria from the extremities and isn’t for everybody – which is why those that are in it, are in all the way. In the 1990s, Thunderdome brought this sound to the masses. It launched the careers of hundreds of DJs and soundtracked the youth of millions worldwide; it is one of the few living relics from the heyday of rave, charged with the difficult task of staying grounded in the present while simultaneously preserving the past. The first Thunderdome event was held in an ice-skating arena in October 1992. It featured four relatively unknown DJs on the bill (who would go on to become superstars) and a colossal octopus fairground ride the team feared might crash through the ice rink. The promoters were two plucky 20-year-old schoolfriends from a village outside Amsterdam, and this was only the second major event they had ever attempted. Their first, The Final Exam, ended with the pair of them, brooms in hand, sweeping up the venue themselves afterwards. “The party finished at seven in the morning and we were still busy at 11 that night,” recalls Irfan van Ewijk. Now both approaching 50, van Ewijk and Duncan Stutterheim are retired dance music moguls, and have walked away from the multinational events company they built together from Thunderdome – not that it was an easy journey. The story of ID&amp;T has been chronicled in a 700-page tome by the Dutch newspaper journalist Gert van Veen, and it reads like a soap opera. Within the first year the company locked horns with major label Arcade Records over the rights to the Thunderdome CD series. “When we had the meeting I was celebrating my birthday, so I came in with a cake as if the deal was already done, which pissed them off so hard,” says van Ewijk with a laugh. The CDs, which ID&amp;T ended up producing with Arcade, were instrumental in seeding the sound of Thunderdome to the world, and are still rolled out today. This year’s triple edition features 72 tracks of new music and edits, including the official Thunderdome 2019 anthem by Dither, who performs beneath an enormous neon Wizard on the main stage to a sea of 25,000 bodies and glinting phone screens. The scene’s current torchbearers, including Angerfist and Miss K8, play amid a spectacle of lasers and fire, ending in a sweaty closing set from “Grandpa” Drokz as pillars of flame shoot skywards from the front of the stage. Meanwhile, a more intimate experience plays out at the Thundergods area. Residents Dano, Buzz Fuzz and Gizmo – also known as the Dreamteam with fourth member the Prophet – DJ together with the wild charisma and selections that made them the most famous hardcore group in the 90s. The set is crammed with hits from their own vault, plus fun hardcore versions of pop songs such as Message In a Bottle by the Police and Steppenwolf’s Born to Be Wild. “I remember when I put on my first record, my hand was shaking like a little child,” says Dano, about playing to over 30,000 people at the very first ice-rink Thunderdome. This year he ends his set mounting the DJ booth, arms raised, to the sound of his own cult classic, 120-9000BPM, from one of the earliest CDs, exclusively produced by the Dreamteam. “What happened in Holland, the whole world wanted in a finger snap,” says Dano, who describes his launch to fame like a catapult. In the 90s, gabber exploded in the Netherlands until overexposure and commercial exploitation caused the scene to crash and go back underground. The media played its part in the demise. Press sensationalised the excesses of gabber culture with stories focused on drugs, football-related hooliganism, and incidents of racially motivated violence connected to the the rise of right-wing extremism in the Netherlands towards the end of the decade. The legacy of prolonged negative profiling from “outsiders” has left the hardcore scene scarred, although the work of contemporary scholars, researchers and visual artists about gabber history, alongside a wider interest in the music, is going some way to remove the stigma. The darker hardcore sound that emerged after the gabber crash and some of the artists that helped rekindle the scene – like DJ Promo, who programmed Thunderdome in the early 00s – are paid tribute to this year as the Heroes of Hardcore in the second largest area, with a capacity twice the size of Fabric in London. Thunderdome was wound up by ID&amp;T in 2012, but someone at the company was unwilling to let it die. Francois Maas, an employee since 1999, decided to keep the brand going “in secret”. After Thunderdome’s “final” party in December 2012, Maas organised a series of fan days and meetups over the following years with the help of a young intern, Nick Hoppezak, who joined the event’s radio team at the tender age of 11. Hoppezak, now in his 20s, opens one of the smaller areas with a hardcore-indebted techno set to a crowd of cheering friends and other artists – his Thunderdome family. Thunderdome’s return was announced by aerial stunt in the summer of 2016 when a plane was spotted in the sky with the message: “25 Years of Thunderdome – see you in 2017!” Maas says the event sold out in 30 minutes, and was only intended to be a one-off. But how could they not revive the most crucial and best-loved hardcore event in the world? Today the cult of Thunderdome is as strong as ever, thriving outside of the rave on fan sites and in the homes of super collectors who live among their treasured memorabilia. It is branded on the skin of thousands and burns in the hearts of many more, and it’s the diehard community behind the music that will keep it alive forever, whether there’s another event or not. “In the beginning it was one big happy family,” says van Ewijk, and in many respects Thunderdome still is – only bigger still. Five classic Thunderdome tracks, by the Dreamteam’s DJ Dano DJ Dano - Welcome to the Thunderdome I made this track not knowing it would become an anthem – I just made it because I thought the party was great. There was this crazy movie, Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome, with Mel Gibson and Tina Turner [who is sampled at the start of the track]. I was watching the film and said to myself, I have my track for the first Thunderdome. I’m happy that Al Pacino was never with a shotgun at my door because I sampled so much from him, too. DJ Hooligan ‎– B.O.T.T.R.O.P. Everybody was like, what the fuck is B.O.T.T.R.O.P.? It was his about his little town in Germany where he lived, called Bottrop. Diss Reaction - Jiiieehaaaa The track was already great, but when this “Jiiieehaaaa!” sample came in the whole Thunderdome went completely crazy. And they still do. It was one of the major tracks in the beginning. The Prophet - Alright Now Here We Go! A massive track. People still make remixes of this. But all the Dreamteam tracks were a huge success! 3 Steps Ahead – Drop It This became a cult hit, though unfortunately he [Peter-Paul Pigmans] died in 2003. All five of these tracks I still play a lot.
26||Armando Iannucci's David Copperfield leads Bifa nominationsThe Personal History of David Copperfield, the Dickens adaptation starring Dev Patel and directed by Armando Iannucci, has emerged as the front runner for the British independent film awards (Bifa) with 11 nominations, including best British independent film and best actor for Patel. Runners-up in the nominations count is the country and western musical Wild Rose, which stars Jessie Buckley as a young Glaswegian singer dreaming of success and scored 10 nods, and the retro-horror homage In Fabric, directed by Peter Strickland, which has nine. Another auteur piece, the Joanna Hogg-directed The Souvenir, also did well, with eight nominations, including best director. Although it has not yet been released in the UK, The Personal History of David Copperfield won wide praise after its premiere at the Toronto film festival and its subsequent opening slot at the London film festival. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw described it as a “terrifically likable, genial adaptation [that] taps into the author’s humanity and optimism” and “a bracing, entertaining, richly satisfying experience”. Surprisingly, though, despite receiving a nod for best screenplay, Iannucci has not been nominated for best director. Equally surprising is the absence of double Palme d’Or winner Ken Loach from the director list, with his latest film, the highly acclaimed gig-economy drama Sorry We Missed You securing only two nominations, for best actor (Kris Hitchen) and best screenplay (Paul Laverty). The winners will be announced at a ceremony in London on 1 December. Full list of nominees Best British independent film Bait For Sama The Personal History of David Copperfield The Souvenir Wild Rose Best director Waad Al-Kateab, Edward Watts, For Sama Oliver Hermanus, Moffie Joanna Hogg, The Souvenir Mark Jenkin, Bait Asif Kapadia, Diego Maradona Best screenplay Joanna Hogg, The Souvenir Armando Inannucci, Simon Blackwell, The Personal History of David Copperfield Paul Laverty, Sorry We Missed You Peter Strickland, In Fabric Nicole Taylor, Wild Rose Best actress Jessie Buckley, Wild Rose Holliday Grainger, Animals Sally Hawkins, Eternal Beauty Vicky Knight, Dirty God Renée Zellweger, Judy Best actor Sam Adewunmi, The Last Tree Tom Burke, The Souvenir Kris Hitchen, Sorry We Missed You Josh O’Connor, Only You Dev Patel, The Personal History of David Copperfield Best supporting actress Jessica Barden, Scarborough Ruthxjiah Bellenea, The Last Tree Elizabeth Debicki, Vita &amp; Virginia Tilda Swinton, The Personal History of David Copperfield Julie Walters, Wild Rose Best supporting actor Chiwetel Ejiofor, The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind Hugh Laurie, The Personal History of David Copperfield Edlison Manuel Olbera Núñez, Yuli: The Carlos Acosta Story Peter Mullan, The Vanishing Bluey Robinson, Dirty God The Douglas Hickox award for debut director Will Becher, Richard Phelan, A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon Fyzal Boulifa, Lynn + Lucy Ninian Doff, Boyz in the Wood Chiwetel Ejiofor, The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind Harry Wootliff, Only You Breakthrough producer Finn Bruce, Tucked Kate Byers, Linn Waite, Bait Joy Gharoro-Akpojotor, Blue Story [also produced by Damian Jones] Becky Read, Three Identical Strangers [also produced by Grace Hughes-Hallett] Jack Sidey, Moffie [also produced by Eric Abraham] Debut screenwriter Kieran Hurley, Beats Lisa Owens, Days of the Bagnold Summer Nicole Taylor, Wild Rose Emma Jane Unsworth, Animals Harry Wootliff, Only You Most promising newcomer Sam Adewunmi, The Last Tree Vicky Knight, Dirty God Lorn Macdonald, Beats Roxanne Scrimshaw, Lynn + Lucy Honor Swinton Byrne, The Souvenir Best documentary Coup 53 Diego Maradona For Sama Seahorse Tell Me Who I Am The Raindance discovery award A Bump Along the Way Children of the Snow Land Here for Life Muscle The Street Best British short film Anna Boiling Point The Devil’s Harmony Goldfish Serious Tingz Best international independent film Ash is Purest White Marriage Story Monos Parasite Portrait of a Lady on Fire Best casting In Fabric The Last Tree Only You The Personal History of David Copperfield Wild Rose Best cinematography Beats In Fabric Judy Moffie The Personal History of David Copperfield Best costume design Judy In Fabric The Personal History of David Copperfield The Souvenir Wild Rose Best editing Bait Diego Maradona For Sama The Personal History of David Copperfield The Souvenir Best effects The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind In Fabric A Shaun the Sheep Movie: Farmageddon Best makeup and hair design Dirty God In Fabric Judy The Personal History of David Copperfield Wild Rose Best music Beats Diego Maradona For Sama In Fabric Wild Rose Best production design In Fabric Judy The Personal History of David Copperfield The Souvenir The White Crow Best sound Beats Diego Maradona Gwen In Fabric Wild Rose
1||Bolsonaro attacks 'putrid' media over Marielle Franco murder claimsBrazil’s far-right president has launched a seething pre-dawn assault on the “putrid” and “immoral” media after a report by the country’s top broadcaster embroiled Jair Bolsonaro in investigations into the most notorious political assassination in its recent history. Bolsonaro appeared on social media shortly before 4am on Wednesday morning from a hotel room in Saudi Arabia, which he is visiting as part of a tour of Asia and the Middle East. “You rascals, you scumbags! This will not stick!” Bolsonaro fumed after the report on Marielle Franco’s 2018 murder. “I shouldn’t lose it. I’m the president of the Republic. But I confess I am at the end of my tether,” Bolsonaro, visibly incandescent, shouts at one point in his 23-minute live broadcast. Bolsonaro’s eruption came in response to a politically explosive investigative report by Jornal Nacional, Brazil’s answer to the Nine O’Clock News, on Tuesday night. The report alleged the suspected killers of Marielle Franco – the leftist politician who was gunned down in March 2018 – had met at Bolsonaro’s seaside compound in Rio de Janeiro in the hours before her murder. One of those men, Élcio Queiroz, reportedly gained entry to the compound at about 5.10pm by telling a security guard he was visiting Bolsonaro, the owner of house No 58. Bolsonaro was, in fact, hundreds of miles away in Brasília on that day. But an unidentified person at his house – who the security guard identified as “Jair” – reportedly authorized Queiroz’s entry. Instead of heading to Bolsonaro’s property, Queiroz reportedly went to another residence – No 66 – the home of Ronnie Lessa, a special forces police officer allegedly turned contract killer currently being held on suspicion of Franco’s murder. Citing anonymous sources, Jornal Nacional claimed that minutes after Queiroz’s arrival, he and Lessa left the compound in the latter’s car and then changed vehicles nearby, before, it is alleged, proceeding to central Rio where Franco was later killed. Bolsonaro reacted furiously to the story. “It’s villainy what you are doing … to run a story like this on primetime TV,” Brazil’s president said in his broadcast, on several occasions appearing close to tears. “For the love of God who do you think you are?” Bolsonaro continued, addressing journalists from the channel behind the report, TV Globo. “I know what you are: you’re scumbags! Rascals! You aren’t patriots. You don’t think about Brazil.” On Wednesday Bolsonaro allies went on the offensive. Gen Augusto Heleno, Bolsonaro’s hawkish institutional security chief, claimed the allegations were an attempt to destabilize Brazil “and stir violent protests like those taking place in other Latin American countries”. “The Brazilian people will not allow them to achieve their poisonous goals,” Heleno tweeted. Bolsonaro’s lawyer, Frederick Wassef, told Globo its report was “a lie, a fraud and a farce” designed to hurt the president. Bolsonaro’s son Eduardo branded the story “fake news” and the journalists behind it “bums”. Silas Malafaia, an ultra-conservative televangelist, urged Bolsonaro to remain calm. “God is a an expert in turning chaos into blessings. This mischief will only make your stronger,” he tweeted. But government opponents called for an urgent investigation and some political analysts foresaw choppy waters ahead for both Bolsonaro and Brazil. Former environment minister Marina Silva demanded an inquiry into what she called “very serious allegations … so that not the slightest suspicion hangs over the occupant of the highest office in the republic”. Jean-Paul Prates, a senator for the leftist Workers’ party (PT), said foreign investors would “shudder” as they watched Bolsonaro’s social media rant. “This could be a devastating blow for Bolsonaro,” said David Miranda, a leftist Rio congressman who was friends with Franco. Marcelo Freixo, another leftist politician, said that while Brazil’s president was “playing the victim” serious questions needed answering about why a suspected hitman had apparently claimed he was visiting Bolsonaro’s house. “It is not about accusing or investigating the president but about investigating whether someone who was in the president’s house was involved. It is an investigation not an accusation,” Freixo said. Tuesday night’s report is not the first time Bolsonaro has been linked to Franco’s suspected killers. In March, a photograph emerged showing a grinning Bolsonaro with his arm around Queiroz, who police believe was driving the car used to commit the crime. Earlier this month another photograph surfaced showing Bolsonaro with Josinaldo Lucas Freitas, a martial arts instructor suspected of throwing the guns used in Franco’s murder into the sea. Police have also confirmed that one of Bolsonaro’s sons had dated Lessa’s daughter. Brazilian reports have painted Bolsonaro’s neighbour as a ruthless killer who lost his leg in a 2009 bomb attack and made a fortune as a member of a group of contract killers called the Escritório do Crime (the Crime Bureau). Additional reporting by Dom Phillips in Rio de Janeiro
7||A children’s book about food banks is a grim sign of our failure as a societyI have just read a beautiful book about something truly obscene. Full of lovely pictures and occasional bits of text, it’s the kind you might read with your four-year-old. It shows a little girl and her mum as they visit a food bank. It’s a No-Money Day is narrated by the daughter who sees how her mother worries over every penny, while shielding her from the painful stuff. “There’s no more cereal, so I have the last piece of toast. Luckily Mum isn’t hungry,” the girl says; and you know the biggest thing Mum will have for breakfast is her own little white lie. When they reach the food bank, the child tucks into biscuits and squash while her mother sags like a balloon from which the air has escaped. Only just published, it is believed to be the UK’s first picture book about food banks. And, while the subject has been handled compassionately by the prize-winning author Kate Milner, I can’t help but see that landmark as a disgrace – for all of us. It is the watershed moment when Britain’s food banks go from newspaper headlines to a subject that teachers cover in classrooms; the moment at which mass destitution is no longer a badge of political failure but is instead accepted as part of British life. As recently as 10 years ago, child poverty was an evil that prime ministers Tony Blair and Gordon Brown both vowed to abolish; now it is something you shamefacedly explain to your child as he or she nestles in your lap. Picture books used to be small worlds where kids could dream about farmyard animals and cuddly monsters; today they teach about the vast number of people that their parents’ generation treat like dirt. In 2016 David Cameron casually dropped the legally binding targets to reduce child poverty – and those figures jumped. More than 4 million children live in poverty in the UK today – or nine kids in every classroom of 30. At the start of this decade, the Trussell Trust ran just 57 food banks, giving 14,000 food parcels a year to children. It operated 428 food banks last year, handing nearly 580,000 parcels to children. This is a charity that sees itself as temporary. Our failure as a society is making it permanent. In one of the richest societies in human history, such figures should mortify us, yet the Westminster classes take them as unremarkable. They hardly ever trouble TV bulletins or newspaper columns, while Conservative cabinet ministers such as Michael Gove sneer at the impoverished for not being able to “manage their finances”. As the UK staggers into a rage-filled general election, well-lunched gasbags will solemnly inform us that this is an election about “getting Brexit done” – while ignoring the cuts, the broken economy and the other causes that helped to drive the Brexit vote of 2016. Dealing with those causes would entail being winched out of the deep embrace of the TV studio sofas, tearing out the IV drip that feeds them the untreated bullshit of No 10 “sources”, and seeing more of the country than could ever be conveyed in a fleeting vox pop. If the experts did that, they would confront a society where levels of deprivation once considered shameful are now treated as normal; where what was scratched together just a few months ago is now relied on as part of the new, ad hoc welfare state. This week I went to Colchester, in Essex, to see something both brilliant and saddening: a Munch Club. In a small scout hut on the postwar Monkwick housing estate, 45 children and their parents were getting a free lunch to ease the expense of half-term holidays. Tiny kids were burrowing into mountains of chicken nuggets and chips before collecting chocolate cake in custard. There’ll be Munch Clubs across the town this week, run by volunteers and depending on donations. They’re the idea of Maureen Powell, a local pensioner with a sharp blond bob and a smoker’s laugh. She started here just a year ago, and by Christmas plans to run no fewer than six Munch Clubs. People keep asking her to lay on more, and she thinks she knows the number-one reason why. “Universal credit!” she shouts, putting the blame squarely on the policy spawned by that MP down the road in Chingford, Iain Duncan Smith. “You have to wait five weeks for any money to turn up; and they mess you about. They [the government] give you a [starting] loan, which they take out of your benefits. It’s just debt upon debt upon debt.” To keep the clubs going, Powell often raids her state pension while her small home is crammed with four freezers and three fridges to store supplies. As indicated by the crutch with which she hobbles, she has her own issues – arthritis, asthma and secondary multiple sclerosis. Let me speak plainly: Powell is a hero, yet nothing about this system feels like an adequate replacement for a proper welfare state. Except that’s not something the UK can say it really has any more – not when the state prefers literally to melt 50p pieces of hubris rather than keep citizens from starving. At one table sit Gary and Rebecca, surrounded by their five kids. She raises the children, while he stacks shelves at a supermarket. When his wages hit their bank account, the money is all gone on bills by that same afternoon. Their universal credit top-up is just not enough. If they weren’t at the Munch Club, “neither Gary nor me would eat anything till dinner, so as to leave more for the kids”, says Rebecca. How do they cope with the hunger? “You get used to it,” she shrugs. Their children get neither sweets nor treats, and their parents can’t afford to take them to Colchester zoo or the fireworks. I think about the classroom tradition of talking about what you did in your holidays and wonder what these kids say. I wonder how tough things get at home, and how much they overhear. Not far away is Bevan Close, a reminder of the Labour minister who built this estate. Nye Bevan wanted communities founded on fairness, where “the doctor, the grocer, the butcher and the farm labourer all live in the same street”. What has replaced his vision? When Cameron entered No 10, Colchester borough council received £11m a year from Whitehall. It’s a sum that has dropped and dropped: this year it is £275,000; next year, precisely zero. Common lawns on the estate used to get cut every month; now it’s only three times a year. Police officers used to patrol on foot; now, says councillor Dave Harris, “the only time a cop car turns up is when there’s really bad news”. The large NHS clinic, where parents took newborns to be weighed, is now shuttered up. We could talk about austerity or tough choices, but something far more profound has happened here – a poor area a couple of hours from Westminster has been systematically stripped of some of the rudiments of civilised life. This is the new normal for swaths of Britain: where a man can be declared fit for work shortly before dying; where headteachers have to beg parents for toilet roll; where children must rely on a sick pensioner to keep them fed out of term time. That’s what this election is really about: not Brexit, not Boris v Jezza, but how we define a civilised society. • Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnist
31||Gorpcore: why people who rarely go outside are wearing hiking gearLove wearing a fleece but hate the thought of being five minutes away from a Starbucks? Prefer to observe your scenic views from the comfort of your computer? Then you will be into Snow Peak - the hipster Japanese outdoors shop that is coming to the UK. However, the clothes it sells are styled less for a leisurely ramble over a muddy munro and more for wearing in an ironically captioned selfie, looking a bit weather-worn. “I wanted to create clothes that are functional, practical but also stylish,” designer Lisa Yamai told Vogue. “I wanted to make outdoor clothes that you wouldn’t just wear at the weekend; clothes you could wear seven days a week, that will make the outdoors feel more familiar.” Essentially, it is a very different look to the one you would pick up at your local branch of Blacks. Snow Peak is the natural destination for the urbanite who likes to wear a look that suggests they will be asking their nearest and dearest to sponsor a Himalayan hike very, very soon (but almost certainly not doing one). It sells elevated, high-fashion fishing vests, “outdoor kimonos” and, yes, lots of fleeces. Its aesthetic is very much where utility-wear is now – where luxury meets usefulness and functionality is the new decoration. As well as being big business (the UK’s outdoor clothing market is valued at £604m and has increased by 22% between 2013 and 2017), luxe shops such as Snow Peak are the bricks-and-mortar endpoint of “gorpcore”, the trend of wearing lots of Patagonia and North Face, alongside your normal jeans and New Balance. Although the term was coined by The Cut in 2017, it still feels significant in the era of Generation Greta. It is a style that semaphores a healthy and clear objective. “Clothing that fits a purpose and does what it says will always be relevant to men,” Nick Paget, the senior menswear editor at trend-forecasting agency WGSN, said at the time. But like the power gilet in Succession, the look is also a humble power brag, a sartorial, ever-so-slightly judgey bit of virtue signalling: about being your most Bear Grylls-ish self. Think of the Jesus Is King-era Kanye West posing in the wilds of his Wyoming farm or Richard Madden on the cover of Interview magazine looking like he is just having a tea break after a spot of drywalling. A recent New York Times headline about warcore, the gorier sequel to gorpcore, squealed: “If you can get killed doing it, fashion wants it”. Well, quite.
2||Tommy Doyle’s debut knits family tighter into Manchester City fabricEvery first team debut is an emotional moment for the player involved but Tommy Doyle’s bow proved an unusually evocative milestone. To Manchester City fans the 18-year-old midfielder was more than merely the latest teenager blooded in the League Cup as Pep Guardiola made a series of changes for Tuesday night’s home win against Southampton. Both Doyle’s grandfathers, Glyn Pardoe and the late Mike Doyle not only played for City but earned cult status at the club and supporters were overjoyed to see young Tommy reinforce an all-too-rare connection between past and present. The sense that history might just be poised to repeat itself with another Doyle possibly set to establish himself as part of the City fabric represents an enticing prospect, but one that comes cloaked in high expectations for the youngster himself. Guardiola, though, has reason to believe he can rise to them after an impressive performance in a 3-1 win which still seems a little surreal to the debutant. “It’s very hard to put it into words,” said Doyle. “I’ve been here a long time, and you dream of this day but it doesn’t seem real. The galaxy of global talent assembled by Guardiola at the Etihad does not make it easy for homegrown talent to make the leap from academy to first team so locally produced youngsters like Doyle and Phil Foden will always be particularly cherished by fans. The former’s pedigree only enhances the resultant excitement surrounding his emergence. Tommy is the child of Mike Doyle’s son Scott and Pardoe’s daughter Charlotte, who met as toddlers when their fathers were City teammates. Doyle senior, who died in 2011 aged 64, played 570 times in the Maine Road defence, winning the league title in the 1967-68 season and five England caps. Pardoe, meanwhile, made 380 City appearances as first a centre forward, then at full-back, infamously breaking a leg tackling George Best in 1970. Their grandson may have stayed largely under the radar – until now – but regular watchers of City youth games have persistently likened him to a young Steven Gerrard. Two-footed and blessed with near-perfect balance and an exemplary attitude, Doyle reads the game well, sees a pass before many teammates and has captained junior sides for both City and England. Before the Southampton game he sought counsel from Pardoe. “I spoke to my grandad Glyn,” said Doyle. “He said: ‘Just go out and do what you do.’ I went out and did the best I can. Hopefully Mike is watching down and is proud of me, I’ve done it for him as well.” During the game a banner in the stands in tribute to Mike caught his eye. “I’ve seen it before and it just makes me feel proud,” he said. “For me to continue the Doyle legacy in a different era is a massive thing. Since he died I’ve always wanted to make him proud so I’ll keep my head down, listen to all the information I can get and see how far I can go. “The [senior] players were all telling me to go and enjoy it and, on the pitch, everyone talks to you and that makes life a lot simpler. As I walked out of the tunnel I looked at my family in the stands and I was ready.” Even so he still has to pinch himself when he creates chances for Sergio Agüero, a striker he was recently cheering on from the popular seats. “I’m giving passes to Sergio and it doesn’t seem real. He gives you a lot of information but keeps it fun, keeps it happy. He’s always laughing and joking which helps calm you down, make you feel better. To be playing with him is amazing.” Foden, too, has offered invaluable help. “I had a chat with Phil a couple of days ago in training and he just told me to play my normal game. I need to keep listening to him.” Pardoe could not resist reminding his grandson that he made his debut at an even earlier age. “I FaceTimed him before the game, and told him I couldn’t wait,” said Doyle. “He reminded me he was only 15, just getting a little dig in! But he’s a legend at this club so I’m fortunate to get advice others might not have.” Not to mention inspiration. “My dad has videos and stuff, so I’ve seen my granddad Mike do a few crazy things, and Glyn be pretty normal! I have their shirts at home, some of them in my room, and sometimes I just look at them, to remember …”
10||Michelle Obama says white Americans 'still running' from black neighborsMichelle Obama has said that white Americans are “still running” from their non-white fellow citizens during a summit in which she detailed how her own experience of white flight unfolded during her upbringing on Chicago’s South Side. “We were doing everything we were supposed to do – and better,” the former first lady told attendees at the third annual Obama Foundation Summit, reported the Chicago Sun-Times as she talked about her childhood. “But when we moved in, white families moved out.” “I want to remind white folks that y’all were running from us. And you’re still running,” she also said, reportedly making a comparison between white flight and what immigrant families experience when they settle in US neighborhoods. At the meeting, Michelle Obama reportedly touted the benefits of building the Obama Presidential Center on 19.3 acres in historic Jackson Park on Chicago’s South Side. She said the project would feature a museum, library, gym, and forum. “Barack and I wouldn’t bring some crap up in our neighborhood,” she reportedly said. She pointed out that she hails from the area by birth and that her husband Barack comes from South Side by choice. During his speech at the forum, Barack Obama said: “We joke about it a little bit, like this is the mothership.” While they hope the center could anchor a potential economic revival in the area, there have been setbacks. Opponents of the project are pursuing a federal court appeal after losing a lawsuit. Federal authorities must also review the project, as Jackson Park is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In December, this review will have already spanned two years. It remains unclear when the review will end, according to the newspaper.
25||When the Crows Visit review – an uncomfortable watch devoid of hopeI want to shed my skin and scoop out my ears. Anupama Chandrasekhar’s bleak show about violence towards women in India is an uncomfortable watch entirely devoid of hope. For all its good intentions, When the Crows Visit is not a show I would recommend to anyone who has experienced sexual assault. On Richard Kent’s shadowy mansion-house set, a family demonstrates how money and privilege can protect reputation. There is an echo of Ibsen’s Ghosts, with a son, Akshay (Bally Gill), inheriting his father’s violence towards women, and a mother, Hema (Ayesha Dharker), desperate to protect her child no matter the cost. “I wanted you to be a good man,” she cries, when the police come knocking. The damage caused by bystander behaviour is gruesomely powerful, as money shifts blame, like feathers on the wind brushing past the guilty to coat the innocent. Indhu Rubasingham’s production takes a while to settle into itself, with the too-shouty start undoing any subtlety of the script and some tonally odd switches along the way. As a vile toxicity is injected into the family, slowly and then all at once, a blanket gloom stretches across the stage, while the women who show any form of resistance are brutally punished. The air is thick and no light can get in. Stories of assault need to be told, but how they are told matters. While there is never any doubt that Akshay is guilty, he is the one given a voice. He gets to be funny, interesting, attractive and kind to his grandma. The female victim is just a ghost; we know how her vagina was brutalised and cut with glass before we even know her name. Of course, this is the point: the world is suffocated by patriarchal violence, often cloaked in charm. But there are more responsible ways to tackle sexual assault; a desire to bear witness does not mean the audience – who have come to a show billed as a “dark thriller” – need to leave with a woman’s screams ricocheting inside their heads. When the Crows Visit should be admired for its intention to face systemic sexual assault in India head on, but it relies too heavily on shock and disgust, and the traumatic final scene is cruelly gratuitous. At the Kiln, London, until 30 November.
32||'Sober but very immoral': What Victorian-era 'poverty maps' tell us about London today“The parish is essentially sober but very immoral,” the Reverend H Bloomer told one of social reformer Charles Booth’s researchers at the end of the 19th century. He claimed to have been personally responsible for closing 20 brothels, though four to his knowledge remained. It’s not very shocking that my neighbourhood in Jeremy Corbyn’s North Islington constituency was a den of vice in late Victorian times. After all, Hornsey Road was formerly known as the Devil’s Lane and frequented by highwaymen. The superb Hornsey Road blog once attempted to exorcise my manor’s diabolical reputation with the ironic tag line “probably not over a hell mouth”. But maybe it is. Peter Ackroyd in London: The Biography argued that neighbourhoods retained their venerable spirits. “[T]here are areas of London where time seems to have come to an end,” he wrote, “or ceaselessly to repeat itself.” St Giles was a case in point: the impoverished district near Covent Garden inspired Hogarth’s Gin Lane, and 250 years later Ackroyd found striking similarities in the 21st-century rough sleepers in its churchyard. That suggestion of eternal recurrence would explain a lot about Hornsey Road – why present-day highwaymen on mopeds nicked the phone from my hands a few years ago; why a London knife crime map would require a lot of ink in that section; why the Hamlet Cafe, whose walls feature a reproduction of Delacroix’s graveyard scene, captures the manor’s gloomy vibe; and why police and councillors clamped down on Aqua Sauna in 2013, saying the feared Romanian women found working there would be be “harmed or exploited”. More likely my manor isn’t cursed, just historically struggling against poverty. That’s what Booth tried to capture between 1886 and 1903 by surveying the capital. He and his team of researchers walked every street in London, filling 450 notebooks with their finds and producing 60 maps, hand-coloured to indicate the level of poverty. Now those maps and edited highlights from their reports are being republished with input from researchers at the London School of Economics. The LSE has an online facility to compare then with the current situation, with modern underlay maps beneath Booth’s poverty maps. “Surely this is the right moment,” argues Iain Sinclair in the book’s foreword, “when divisions between the visibly wretched and the invisibly rich in corporate, de-localised London are becoming critical, to publish a handsome, reconfigured presentation of Charles Booth’s inspirational reckoning?” Poverty is no longer quite so prevalent as in Booth’s day: Booth concluded that 35% of Londoners lived in poverty at the end of the 19th century, and the Trust for London’s latest figures indicate that 27% do so today. But compare that with a national average of 21% and it’s clear there is a problem. Some things have not changed hugely in London. The map indicates a huge workhouse on Cornwallis Road; like so many other smithies and factories, it’s long gone, and the site is now an adventure playground and park. But in November 1897, one of Booth’s researchers, George H Duckworth – who was not only an Etonian, a Cambridge cricket blue but also Virginia Woolf’s half-brother – strolled up Hornsey Road with Insp William Dyball, describing it as “a road of small shops that depend for their existence on local knowledge: they give credit which the large houses on Holloway Rd and 7 Sisters Rd will not do”. That sounds about right: even today, chain stores are rare and buying products “on tick” is possible, as long as the proprietors know you. On Booth’s poverty map, terraces running perpendicular to Hornsey Road are coloured brown, which means: “Mixed. Some comfortable, others poor.” My cul de sac, running parallel to Hornsey Road, still fits that description. We’ve got all sorts down here – Poles, Afghans, Pakistanis, City traders, tube train drivers, Nigerians, Cypriots, Muslims worshipping at the mosque round the corner, non-Muslims worshipping at the William Hill next door, council tenants, a declining number of people of Irish descent, Hooray Henry private tenants. Not to mention people like me who bought cheaply these modest late Victorian ex-council houses after Margaret Thatcher’s right-to-buy legislation and are now sitting on nest eggs that scramble the property market so as to exclude younger people. Beyond my garden fence, there was once a street of grander houses coloured red for “Middle class, well to do”. The Luftwaffe did for them as they did for many of the homes in Booth’s map. Today Tollington Place’s bomb site is Wray Crescent Open Space, with cricket pitch, playground, and community-maintained raised beds. Let’s not overstate the bucolic makeover, however: the leafy corners have long proved handy for drug deals. Not far away from Tollington Place on Booth’s map is a street that sticks out like a sore thumb, since it is coloured black, signifying as Booth put it: “Lower class. Vicious, semi-criminal”. That was Campbell Road, aka the Bunk, which from the 1860s until it was cleared as a slum in the 1950s was known as the worst street in London. Nearby, next to Hornsey Road Baths are two streets coloured light blue, defined as: “Poor. 18s to 21s a week for a moderate family.” On the other side of Hornsey Road are two streets coloured dark blue, defined as: “Very poor, casual. Chronic want.” These mean streets have been disappeared, but the neighbourhood still retains some of its earlier character. Those light blue streets, Marcellus Road and Orpingley Road, were both demolished in 1972 to make way for the Andover Estate, where Ann Widdecombe once made an exploitation doc about her battle with “the hoodies”, to which the local youth responded with their own YouTube documentary Beyond the Hoodie. The dark blue streets, Denmark Terrace and Ellenborough Road have also gone, replaced by the jewel in my neighbourhood’s social housing crown: Sussex Place, described in Pevsner as “an eight-storey crescent in red brick with lower blocks enclosing a garden: an ambitious post-war Islington scheme of 1950 by Monson, spaciously laid out, in startling contrast to the tight street of low stuccoed houses which then existed all around.” It’s as though the council was trying to lift the historic curse. In other parts of the city, however, the change to London has been dramatic. I look at Booth’s map of King’s Cross: the black-coloured streets are gone as gentrification sweeps across the formerly desolate railway land behind the station; the then functioning gasometers, Booth would have been astounded to discover, have been repurposed as luxury flats – £810,000 for a studio and rising into the many millions for a penthouse, but handy for workers at Google’s London HQ nearby. Similarly, Booth’s researchers found Shoreditch to be “a very poor and overcrowded district … the Jewish quarters particularly poor”. But today Shoreditch is a byword for artist-catalysed gentrification and buy-to-let speculation. Typical of the latter is the Atlas Building, a 302-unit newbuild project that completed in June and where 70% of sales have been investment purchases. One of Booth’s volunteers asked a police constable to describe Clerkenwell, just up the road from Shoreditch. He responded that it was a “melting pot” of London. Which sounds like a lovely meeting point for migrant communities, prefiguring the cosmopolitan London of the 21st century. Not really: what he meant was that Clerkenwell was “where all the stolen silver or jewels come to be melted or disassembled”. It’s less Dickensian and more genteel than that today. I wander off Seven Sisters Road to find out what happened to the Bunk. Today it is called Whadcoat Street, an anonymous dead end that became briefly notorious a couple of years ago when a terrorist drove into a crowd of Muslim worshippers nearby, killing a man. What’s striking about the site of the Bunk today is that it’s caught in a gentrification pincer movement. On one side is a new housing development of 22 private one- and two-bedroom flats called the Cottonworks, claiming to be “close to Upper Street, one of London’s trendiest neighbourhood” [sic]. (Upper Street isn’t close, not really.) On the other is City North, a vast new development around and above Finsbury Park tube, where flats of up to £850,000 are being advertised overseas, as if the better to attract the speculative investors who have already put much of London’s property beyond its citizens, thus adding to the inequality and poverty in the capital identified by Trust for London. What Booth’s poverty maps ultimately show is a London where rich and poor lived right next door to each other: in that sense, at least, today’s London is no different. While only 47 of City North’s 308 apartments are classed as “affordable” homes under the absurd definition of 80% of market rate, just yards away there has been a rise in rough sleepers under the railway bridge on Stroud Green Road. The Bunk may have gone, but poverty in my neighbourhood – and London – certainly hasn’t. • Charles Booth’s London Poverty Maps is published on 31 October by Thames and Hudson Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter
21||Care home leader jailed for not giving evidence at teenager's inquestA consultant at a heavily criticised London care home where a vulnerable teenager killed herself has been jailed for four months for failing to give evidence at her inquest. Duncan Lawrence, of Sydenham in south-east London, had repeatedly refused to answer questions about the new regime he ushered in at Lancaster Lodge in Richmond, south-west London, after the death of 19-year-old Sophie Bennett in May 2016. Lawrence, 60, who had a non-medical doctorate which might have been bought from a “degree mill” university in Denmark, was said at the inquest to have introduced “a dictatorship – with 19th-century governance”. An assistant coroner, John Taylor, fined Lawrence £650 in May for failing to attend the inquest. The coroner also referred the matter to the police and the Crown Prosecution Service, which charged him. In what is believed to be the first such prosecution, Lawrence pleaded guilty in August to the offence of “withholding evidence/documentation in relation to a coroner’s inquest”. Sentencing him at Wimbledon magistrates court on Wednesday, the district judge Andrew Sweet told him: “There is a good reason why people should attend or provide documents to a coroner when carrying out such an inquest, and that is expected to be done with full cooperation and without delay. You frustrated that process.” Lawrence, who was unrepresented at court, apologised to Bennett’s family, but said the charge was “nothing to do” with him and was “all down to a big misunderstanding”. Bennett’s father, Ben, had said after Lawrence had pleaded guilty: “The extent of his disrespect to us by not taking part in the process is extraordinary. There was evidence we wanted to be included. The whole inquest process was meant to be when you find out the truth of what happened.” Earlier this year a coroner’s jury found that neglect at the Lancaster Lodge care home in Richmond, south-west London, had descended into “chaos” amid cost-cutting that had contributed to Bennett’s death. The teenager, a former county-level swimmer who was described by her family as “bright, loving and caring”, died in May 2016. Her death came after upheaval instigated by the operating charity, Richmond Psychosocial Foundation International, which was advised by the internationally renowned mental health worker Elly Jansen. Cancelled therapy sessions, the removal of key staff who were replaced by unqualified people, and the introduction of the “boot camp” regime had all contributed to Bennett’s death, the jury at the west London coroner’s court found in February. In the UK Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org
0||Karolina Pliskova wins as Bianca Andreescu retires: WTA Finals – as it happenedFour days into the WTA Finals, the tournament’s two big young stars, Naomi Osaka and Bianca Andreescu, have both been forced to retire with injury. On one hand it’s a reflection of how difficult this long tennis season is, but it’s particularly worrying news for Andreescu who has already had a startling amount of injuries at 19 years old. She just can’t stay fit and it seems like she is going to have to manage her body for a long time. Well, with Andreescu out, here are the simple scenarios. American Sofia Kenin will take her place in the final match against Elina Svitolina if Andreescu can’t play. There it is. Pliskova puts together another solid service game, but Andreescu is still struggling to move. She lets the final Pliskova serve go and retires from the match. Brutal. First set: Karolina Pliskova *5-3 Bianca Andreescu: Pliskova has decided to simply play her game and control the rallies. It is working. After a slew of winners including a peach of a drop shot, she breaks with a brilliant angled backhand return winner. Surely this won’t last more than a set? First set: Karolina Pliskova 4-3* Bianca Andreescu: Andreescu is still crushing groundstrokes, but plenty are flying out. Some solid serving from Pliskova and she holds for 15. First set: Karolina Pliskova *3-3 Bianca Andreescu: “If this was Simona…” said Andreescu during her discussion with her coach. She wouldn’t be able to last in the long rallies against a defensive player like Halep, but the rallies today are short and staccato and she thinks it’s worth a try. Andreescu is just teeing off on her groundstrokes now and some are landing in. After saving three break points with booming groundstrokes, she moves to game point and bellows “Come on!” down the court. She is fighting. That was a tough on-court coaching break for Andreescu. A tearful Andreescu said that she twisted her knee, heard it crack and the trainer told her that she had hurt her meniscus. She can’t bend her knee at all and she is hearing cracks as she moves around. Andreescu’s coach, Sylvain Bruneau, told her not to push it. “I don’t want to stop,” she responded, wiping tears from her eyes. On she goes... First set: Karolina Pliskova 3-2* Bianca Andreescu: Pliskova holds, but also spare a thought for her. She had to save three break points, hit two consecutive double faults and a couple of howlers off easy short balls. Facing an injured player is never easy. First set: Karolina Pliskova *2-2 Bianca Andreescu: This is a struggle. Pliskova is mostly just putting the ball down the middle of the court, but even moving around the ball is proving too much for Andreescu at the moment who has already made a slew of errors since returning to court. Pliskova snaps a great backhand down the line to break back. First set: Karolina Pliskova 1-2* Bianca Andreescu: Andreescu skips through two points and Pliskova gets on the board after a netted backhand from the Canadian. The crowd is deathly silent. The trainer is back on the court and deep in discussion with Andreescu. It seems like she took some painkillers. Medical timeout over. Andreescu is back on the court with a heavily strapped knee. We’ll see if she can move. Andreescu is officially taking a medical timeout. The trainer is wrapping up her left knee and she looks extremely frustrated. First set: Karolina Pliskova *0-2 Bianca Andreescu: Well, forget my last comment! Andreescu lunges for a forehand and now she is struggling to walk. She limps to the bench. This does not look good. This doesn’t seem to have too much to do with her back problems yesterday though. The trainer is taking a look at Andreescu’s left knee. First set: Karolina Pliskova *0-2 Bianca Andreescu: Andreescu consolidates the break with ease and with plenty of help from some loose errors by Pliskova. Physically, Andreescu looks fine so far. First set: Karolina Pliskova 0-1* Bianca Andreescu: Andreescu strikes in the opening game but that was some strange play from Pliskova. Pliskova led 40-0, then missed a couple of first serves and dumped a forehand drive volley into the net. She had five game points in total, but Andreescu took her very first break point. What’s already clear that Pliskova’s second serve is going to be under attack today. The round robin scenarios. Wherever you are in the world, please stop what you are doing and watch this absolutely insane forehand from Svitolina today. Hello! Welcome to our coverage of day 4 of the WTA Finals in Shenzhen. A few moments ago, Elina Svitolina defeated Simona Halep 7-5 6-3 a tough, physical match to qualify for the semi-finals, leaving only one spot in the Purple Group. Halep attempted every single shot in her arsenal but she simply couldn’t consistently pierce the Svitolina defence. Do not expect Bianca Andreescu and Karolina Pliskova to have the same amount of patience today. US Open champion Andreescu comes in with plenty of question marks after she ended her brilliant, gripping three setter with Simona Halep looking physically compromised. The trainer tended to her back multiple times during the third set and she struggled with her movement by the end. However, we know that Andreescu’s body is brittle yet she has only lost 6 times this year and her level against Halep was otherwise great. Hopefully the day off provided her enough time to recover. Across the net, Pliskova’s presence will ensure a far less physical match today with shorter exchanges. The self-styled ‘Ace Queen’ has served a monstrous 474 aces this year, leading the tour as she so often has over the past four seasons, and she is also fourth for service games won at 79%. She will be tough to break as usual. Although Pliskova has had some great results on slow surfaces this year, including a title on the clay courts of Rome, these courts are playing very slow in Shenzhen and it certainly won’t help her serve. Another factor that won’t help Pliskova’s serve is that she is facing one of the best returners in the world. Andreescu is 5th in the world for return games won this year and she will look to smother Pliskova’s second serve as frequently as possible. Despite the slow courts, both players will be looking to dominate with their weapons and take control of the exchanges. Andreescu holds the upper hand in the head to head after winning their only clash in three sets at the Rogers Cup in the summer. As usual, please feel free to email me at tumaini.carayol@theguardian.com or tweet me at @tumcarayol.
9||PMQs verdict: no clear winner as leaders test their election slogansKey points Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn started by paying tribute to John Bercow, who was chairing his last PMQs before stepping down as Speaker. Corbyn then said Johnson’s trade deal with Donald Trump would put more NHS money into private pockets, referencing the Channel 4 Dispatches investigation that showed the health service had been repeatedly discussed with US officials. Johnson denied the NHS was on the table and praised the way a cystic fibrosis drug had been made available. Corbyn said the US wanted full market access to the NHS and added that while ministers were meeting US corporations, waiting times for patients needing urgent treatment were three times longer than nine years ago. But Johnson said waiting times were improving. He added that the cystic fibrosis drug was made by a US company and asked Corbyn if the NHS should not talk to companies like that. Corbyn replied that medicines should be imported but it should be done openly, not in secret. He said patients were waiting longer for cancer treatment. Johnson retorted that Corbyn should be paying tribute to the hard work of NHS staff, not talking them down. He said the NHS was supported by a strong economy and that the NHS in Labour-run Wales routinely missed targets. Corbyn said he was surprised Johnson could keep a straight face when his government had cut so much from the Welsh budget. Johnson said there were 17,300 more doctors and 17,000 more nurses since 2010. He said it was time to differentiate between the politics of protest and the politics of leadership. It is about standing up for the police, the economy and wealth creators, he said. And it means getting Brexit done. Corbyn said Johnson should have tried to show some empathy. GPs are in short supply, he said. The NHS has suffered its longest spending squeeze ever. He said this election was a chance to end NHS underfunding and stop the government selling out the health service. Johnson replied that the choice was between economic catastrophe under Labour and two referendums, on Brexit and on Scotland. The UK would suffer “toxic torpor”. He said his government would invest in education and infrastructure. Snap verdict We’ve got six more weeks of this. Sometimes PMQs is used as an opportunity for a forensic analysis of a particular issue but on Wednesday, more than ever, it was dominated by Johnson and Corbyn rehearsing their election sloganising. And neither leader seemed to have an overwhelming advantage. Corbyn focused on the NHS in all his questions. Traditionally this has been Labour’s strongest electoral territory and Corbyn had Johnson on the defensive throughout. His arguments about NHS underfunding and increasing waiting lists were more persuasive than Johnson’s “all is fine” bravado, and Johnson was confounded when Corbyn started talking about an individual case, because Corbyn sounded more empathetic than the PM. Corbyn also made it clear that he was going to spend much of the time claiming that a Johnson Brexit would open the door to the further marketisation and privatisation of the NHS. Whether this is wholly true is contestable, but it is a fear that registers with people, and may work well on the doorstep. Johnson was weak on the actual details of how the NHS works. But his attack lines against Corbyn – accusing him of sweeping anti-Americanism, and wholesale hostility to the involvement of private firms in the NHS (even though many NHS services are privately provided anyway) – were much more powerful than anything Theresa May threw at Corbyn, and delivered with relish. At the end of the exchanges Corbyn and Johnson both segued into wider themes. Corbyn’s line about the election providing a once in a lifetime opportunity for change resonated. But it was not as catchy as Johnson’s argument about Labour offering two referendums, which was just about true enough to register and stick as a key election message. (Labour is certainly promising a second Brexit referendum, which would fill some of the electorate with dread. Corbyn does not favour a second Scottish independence referendum, but he has not 100% ruled one out, and a minority Labour government dependent on Scottish National party support would probably end up agreeing to one.) Johnson’s most lively attack lines were probably the ones he delivered against the SNP. It is widely assumed that the Tories will lose most of their seats in Scotland, and Ian Blackford, the SNP’s leader in Westminster, had a good line when he said Johnson would be welcome in the country because he boosted SNP support. But even if this is true, Johnson seemed to enjoy the chance to bang on about “borders at Berwick”. Memorable lines The most memorable line came from Labour’s Jess Phillips, who managed to pay tribute to Bercow while also getting in a dig at Johnson: I have never known this place without you here and I think it will be different. It’s a delight to see your children here watching today. Because I know that while you have a responsibility to parliament you take your responsibilities as a parent incredibly seriously also. And now to the prime minister.
4||Facebook to fact-check ads of politician challenging fact-check policyFacebook will continue to fact-check adverts posted by a California gubernatorial candidate despite a policy exempting political candidates from its rules on misinformation in advertising. The company said that because Adriel Hampton, the head of the Really Online Lefty League political action committee (Pac), “has made clear he registered as a candidate to get around our policies … his content, including ads, will continue to be eligible for third-party fact-checking.” Facebook has previously removed deliberately false adverts run by Hampton’s Pac that claimed the Republican senator Lindsey Graham supported a green new deal. Facebook’s policies exempt candidates and parties from fact-checking but not other political actors such as Pacs. On Monday, Hampton tweeted a request for political candidates who would be interested in testing the rules. “Don’t make me run for governor or something,” he said. “My wife will not be thrilled.” Two hours later, he announced he would be running as an independent candidate in the 2022 California gubernatorial race on a platform of social media regulation. Hampton has been clear about his intention to run adverts, tweeting a call for volunteers to “ignore Facebook’s fact-checking rules and just do viral ad-driven dunks all day”. He has run for office once before, in California’s 10th congressional district, and he said observers should not count him out of the race in three years’ time. Facebook had previously told reporters, including Buzzfeed’s Ryan Broderick, that the only reason it would block a candidate from running false ads would be if the person had already been banned from the platform when they registered. Mark Zuckerberg has defended his company’s decision to exempt politicians from fact-checking, saying it is not the place of technology companies to become arbiters of truth. “I don’t think most people want to live in a world where you can only post things that tech companies judge to be 100% true,” Zuckerberg said this month.
5||It's time for the Game of Thrones universe to dieThese are testing times for Game of Thrones. After the series ended on an unmistakably damp note, with even its director admitting it was “rushed”, last week the showrunners put the boot in even more, alienating the core fanbase at a film festival panel. Now comes even worse news: Bloodmoon, the long-awaited Game of Thrones prequel, has been killed, with another spin-off being put to series ahead of it. It’s a big, embarrassing about-face for HBO, who have been pouring millions into wringing more cash out of the Game of Thrones universe. Bloodmoon’s development was in the advanced stages – it had a cast including Naomi Watts, a set, an in-the-can pilot, an audience of eager fans who you suspect would gobble up anything with the Game of Thrones stamp … but it wasn’t enough. The most optimistic explanation for its cancellation was that its scope was too big for a single series. Spread across 100 Westerosi kingdoms thousands of years in the past, HBO explained that the series would chronicle “the world’s descent from the Golden Age of Heroes into its darkest hour … from the horrifying secrets of Westeros’s history to the true origin of the White Walkers”. Which sounds like a big old chunk of history to roll the dice on, not to mention too many opportunities for Starbucks cups to go astray. But there are other – as yet unsubstantiated – rumours surrounding its downfall. One tweeter seemed to suggest that the show depicted the Children of the Forest as black humans who were struck by a curse and turned into monsters, while their caucasian colonisers got to remain human, which isn’t a terrific look. Then there’s the the less exciting explanation; that Bloodmoon just wasn’t as good as anyone wanted it to be. Right now, the truth is anyone’s guess. Still, it isn’t as if this leaves HBO in the lurch. Last January, programming president Casey Bloys teased that he had “anywhere from zero to five” potential prequels on the boil, which explains why Bloodmoon was so swiftly ditched for the newly announced House of the Dragon. And, at least on paper, House of the Dragon seems a safer bet. It’s about the Targaryens so it has a more tangible connection to Game of Thrones. It’s only set hundreds of years before its predecessor, rather than thousands, so it has a more tangible connection to Game of Thrones. It’s based on last year’s book Fire and Blood, so … you get the idea. Plus – it shares a name with a Glasgow Chinese takeaway, making it more appealing than Bloodmoon, which sounded more like a sustainable menstrual startup than a hit TV series. But a safer bet isn’t always a better bet, and just because House of the Dragon is a more meat-and-potatoes prequel, there’s still no guarantee that it be worth the effort. Television is littered with the corpses of unnecessary spinoffs, from Caprica to AfterMASH, Baywatch Nights to Joey. Even successful spinoffs, like Better Call Saul, quiver under the shadow of their parent shows. At this point, with a tainted brand, an irritated fanbase and a pilot that’s proved a colossal waste of effort,perhaps the sensible thing would be for HBO to ditch Game of Thrones altogether.
29||Mary Beard left in 'scrappy undies' at Heathrow securityHeathrow has apologised to the classicist Mary Beard after she was asked to remove clothing at airport security, leaving her in just her “scrappy undies”. The TV presenter said that fellow passengers were able to see her in just “my little black vest (and) no bra” after she was told to take off her tunic. Beard wrote on Twitter: Following the tweet, the airport apologised to Beard, who is a professor of classics at Cambridge University, saying: “We are very sorry to hear this and apologise for the experience you have had.” Beard responded that she did not want staff to get into trouble but some “general consciousness-raising” would be good. “I am tough, and I have no desire to see the staff concerned told off (so I am carefully not telling you which terminal),” she said. “But maybe some general consciousness-raising on this one would be a jolly good idea!” Beard wrote: “To be honest, I’m not very easily humiliated, but it was a surprise! Staff polite but insistent (following instructions, I guess, don’t want to get them into trouble).” A spokesman for Heathrow said: “Our colleagues work incredibly hard to keep Britain’s skies safe and any passenger is able to be searched in private. We apologise that this did not happen in this instance.”
17||Personal insolvency levels approaching highest in a decadeThe number of people facing insolvency is on course to reach the highest level for almost a decade in 2019 after an annual increase of more than 22% in September. Revealing the devastating toll of mounting debts on British households, official figures showed the number of personal insolvencies climbed to 30,879 in the three months to the end of September, up from 25,169 in the same period last year. A dramatic increase in bankruptcies across the construction industry sector also pushed the underlying trend for corporate insolvencies to a high not seen since the eurozone crisis was at its height in 2013. Duncan Swift, president of the insolvency and restructuring trade body R3, said the figures provided “a worrying insight into the state of personal finances” and “further evidence that the economic and political turbulence of the last 12 months has taken its toll on businesses”. Swift said persistently low wage rises had left consumer finances vulnerable to small shocks. He said: “Although real wages have hit a recent high, they are still lower than they were before the financial crisis. Unemployment may be low but it’s not necessarily secure for everyone.” The Insolvency Service said the total number of personal insolvencies over the first nine months of the year has reached 93,042 after hitting 115,319 for the whole of last year. Another quarter this year in excess of 30,000 would push the total to the highest since 2010, when the total reached 135,045. Company insolvencies increased for the third consecutive quarter to 4,355 in the three months to the end of September 2019, up 1.6% compared to the same quarter last year to reach “the highest underlying level of company insolvencies in any quarter since the first quarter of 2014”, the Insolvency Service said. Officials said the underlying trend was distorted by so-called bulk insolvencies that occurred in several quarters over the last three years after clampdowns by HMRC on the tax paid by personal corporations. The tax changes have forced many one-person companies out of businesses, increasing the number of insolvencies in a single quarter, they said. The number of company administrations, which provide firms with a mechanism to restructure their debts, increased by 20% from the previous quarter, reaching the highest level since the first quarter of 2014. Swift said Brexit uncertainty was a major factor pushing firms into the hands of their creditors. “Uncertainty and stop-start stockpiling are among the factors hitting recruitment, investment, and wider business health, and we’re seeing more businesses worrying about their cashflow levels and their order books over the next quarter and the next year,” he said. Alec Pillmoor, a personal insolvency partner at the accountants RSM, said it was concerning that “despite already seeing near decade-long highs over the last 18 months, personal insolvency numbers continue to rise and have exceeded 30,000 for the fourth successive quarter for the first time since 2011, and recorded the highest quarter three total since 2010”. He said: “Longer term we would anticipate that this will increase further as following a recent YouGov poll conducted on behalf of the Stepchange debt charity, 29% of Brits expect their finances to actually get worse in the next year.”
11||Number of women on boards of Australia's top companies fallsProgress in getting women on to the boards of Australia’s top companies has stalled and numbers are in danger of tumbling, new research by the Institute of Company Directors shows. The proportion of women on boards of companies listed in the benchmark ASX 200 index as of the end of last month was 29.5%, down slightly from 29.7% in December last year. Over the same time period the rate at which women are appointed has plummeted from 45% of available seats to just 31.7%. New stockmarket floats have also been reluctant to appoint women, with just 16.6% of board positions filled by women among IPOs last year. And seven top 200 companies, including telco and takeover target TPG, still have no women at all on the board. “I’m disappointed by the loss of momentum – by the end of 2018, we really thought we had good momentum, I’m surprised by this outcome,” the AICD chief executive, Angus Armour, said. He said the AICD’s regular survey of company director sentiment showed the worst picture since 2015. “It’s quite a significant drop from where we were a year ago, a year and a half ago,” he said. “And I suppose people in that environment start becoming more conservative, they pull back into the network that they know, they try to pull together people they feel are going to have the benefit of experience. “They’re hiring former CEOs, which at this point are mostly men. But they also need to ask themselves whether some of these challenges might be better met by having a more diverse set of opinions around the board table.” He said the seven ASX200 companies with no women on the board – TPG, Pro Medicus, Polynovo, NRW Holdings, Silver Lake Resources, HUB24 and Speedcast International – “stand out in a really negative way”. “I’m surprised that they’re not interested in the message,” he said. “If they hold themselves up relative to the ASX50 or the ASX20, any of these seven companies look up and say, ‘Wow, are we performing as well as the best companies in the index?’ they’d have to say no.” He said research showing companies with at least one woman on the board performed better was “robust”. “Having diversity in any decision making unit … increases the likelihood of better outcomes,” he said. “Groupthink is not a new term. It is decades old.”
26||Campo review – salute to a beekeeping band of brothersTiago Hespanha’s Campo is an elegant, ironic pastoral, a documentary depicting aspects in the daily life of an enormous military base in Portugal – and yet humorously or subversively homing in on those things that are unexpectedly bucolic. There is off-duty birdwatching going on there, also beekeeping, stargazing and even lambing. Hespanha’s camera will discover green fields, dreamy skies, striking cloud formations, and also concentrates on the civilian existence of the soldiers’ families. A teenage boy is shown playing a composition of his own on the piano called Battle in the Stars with some concentration. But then again, straightforward military manoeuvres are also shown, with some soldiers getting yelled at by their sergeant. One soldier is accidentally injured and howls that his father will shoot himself with shame when he finds out. This is a well-made film, an adroit debunking of militarism, perhaps. But I worried that there is something essentially a little arch and whimsical – and even obtuse – about a film that somehow runs against the grain of what the place is actually all about. It could be that there is something startling or amusing in finding a bucolic identity in a military camp. But then a real, shooting war might well take place in these peaceful bucolic fields. The mythology of the first world war is founded on precisely such images as these. • Campo is released in the UK on 1 November.
6||Scottish Power blames weather and price cap for 80% drop in profitsScottish Power’s profits have slumped by almost 80% after the big six energy supplier lost about 165,000 customers in the past year. The supplier, owned by the Spanish utility company Iberdrola, blamed mild winter weather and the government’s energy price cap for the sharp drop in profits. Scottish Power reported profits of £37.4m for the first nine months of the year, down from £170m in the same period last year when freezing weather, brought by the “beast from the east” storm, increased the amount of gas and electricity used in homes. Scottish Power said it had sold 10% less electricity and 8% less gas this year, in part because the weather had been milder but also due to a fall in customer numbers from 4.78 million this time last year to 4.62 million. The legacy big six energy companies have lost their stranglehold on the energy market in recent years due to a surge in new cut-price energy suppliers entering the market. Scottish Power reported far healthier profits in its renewable energy and energy networks business units, which are continuing to grow in line with the appetite for clean energy and “smart” energy grids. SP Energy Networks, which is regulated by Ofgem, reported profits of £626m for the first nine months of the year, up by 6% from last year. At Scottish Power Renewables, which owns a stable of onshore and offshore wind farms, profits grew by 13% to £302m. Keith Anderson, the chief executive of Scottish Power, said the company had ploughed a record £2bn of investment into its renewable energy business to start up its East Anglia One offshore windfarm off the Norfolk coast. “As the UK’s only integrated, 100% green energy company, our ongoing investment in smarter grids, digital systems and renewable generation will be critical to the country meeting 2050 net zero targets,” he said. Scottish Power sold off its last remaining fossil fuel power plants early last year in a £700m deal with Drax, to focus its investments on windfarms and power grids. Iberdrola invested a total of €4.7bn (£4bn) this year, mainly in renewable energy and energy networks, and reaped profits of €2.5bn for the first nine months of the year, up by a fifth from last year. Iberdrola’s chairman and chief executive, Ignacio Galán, said: “These achievements provide us additional room for new investments, creating a virtuous circle of growth and financial strength.”
7||Vietnamese migrants are not ‘lured’ by traffickers. They just want a better futureThirty-nine bodies found in the back of a refrigerated lorry in an Essex industrial park. Apart from shock and rage, this tragic news feels like deja vu. Almost two decades ago, in 2000, 58 Chinese people were found suffocated to death in Dover, in similar horrific circumstances. Those men and women banged on doors and screamed for their lives, the only two survivors revealed. The tragic deaths left families behind and communities back in Fujian province devastated. Today, many of the 39 people, eight women and 31 men, are believed to have come from Vietnam, as families there desperately look for their missing loved ones. I also felt deja vu listening to the response from British politicians and media. “Stop evil human traffickers”; “Stop international criminal networks”. I heard such phrases two decades ago from the home secretary, Jack Straw, and today his successor, Priti Patel, repeats the sentiment. While formal identification of the victims continues, Vietnamese people have mostly been portrayed as “unaware” trafficking victims sent to fill the nail bars and cannabis factories – as having no agency of their own and no control over their migratory decisions. In reality, the Vietnamese young men and women who choose to travel on these dangerous routes only do so when they cannot come to Britain in formal ways. Having no alternatives, they contact “snakeheads” (smugglers), who are often perceived as “migration brokers” rather than criminals, who organise their transportation to Britain. It appears that many of the 39 people may have come from the Nghe An and Ha Tinh provinces of Vietnam, which have been hit by economic reforms. Three decades ago, in 1986, the Vietnamese government launched the Doi Moi economic reforms, which aimed to facilitate a transition from a centralised planning to a “socialist-oriented” market economy. From the 1990s onwards, the government boasted of Vietnam’s rise in GDP – what was not said was that the growth was built upon the low-cost labour of millions of Vietnamese, toiling in processing factories and assembling products for overseas companies. The inflow of foreign investment has been a big part of Vietnam’s economic liberalisation. In recent years, it has brought cash to the high-tech processing, manufacturing, agriculture, education and healthcare sectors. Since the start of this year, Vietnam has attracted foreign direct investment of more than $1.1bn (£850m), China alone bringing in $222m. Many of these changes have not been popular: large waves of anti-China protests happened in May 2014, in Ha Tinh and other places. And in 2018 there was popular opposition to legislation enabling special economic zones to grant land leases to foreign businesses for up to 99 years. In 2016 Ha Tinh was also the site of the country’s worst environmental disaster, caused by a chemical spill from a steel factory, owned by a Taiwanese company, Formosa Plastics, that poisoned up to 125 miles of the northern coastline and ruined the fishing industry. Formosa Plastics was fined $500m by the Vietnamese government, but much of the compensation did not reach the affected fishermen. The low labour cost in these provinces is the main attraction for Chinese and other foreign investors. For instance, a factory worker here earns around two-thirds of what a similar worker earns in China, and half the local population are under the age of 30. Rather than wealth, foreign investment has brought mainly dead-end, low-paid jobs with few long-term prospects for young locals. The average wage in Vietnam is around $150 a month; in these provinces many don’t even earn that. Besides, unemployment is severe. Last year, GDP per capita in both Nhge An ($1,600) and Ha Tinh ($2,200) fell below the national average of $2,500. This is the context compelling tens of thousands of Vietnamese from these impoverished provinces to choose to migrate, to seek livelihoods for themselves and their families. Families often depend on sons and daughters to find their way into advanced capitalist countries in the west, to work and be the breadwinners. Remittances from abroad also help sustain communities – Nghe An, for instance, brought in $225m a year, according to official estimates. The 39 people were not “unthinking migrants” lured by traffickers, as the media has suggested. They were fighting for a future for their families, and lost their precious lives as Britain firmly kept its doors locked shut. If the tragic deaths of these men and women truly sadden you, the best thing to do is oppose Britain’s anti-migrant policies. We need to dismantle the false categories of “economic migrants” and “genuine refugees”. Let our fellow human beings have the opportunity to live and work in the open – that is the only way forward. • Hsiao-Hung Pai is a journalist and author of Chinese Whispers: The Story Behind Britain’s Hidden Army of Labour
9||Richard Braine quits as Ukip leader after less than three monthsThe Ukip leader, Richard Braine, has resigned after less than three months in the post after a clash with the party’s national executive, leaving Ukip seeking its seventh permanent leader since 2016. A party spokesman confirmed that Braine had said he would step down. It comes just over a week after Braine said the national executive had tried to suspend him amid a struggle for control of the party. One source said Ukip appeared to be on its last legs as a party, and might potentially field no candidates in the general election in December. In a resignation letter seen by the Kipper Central website, Braine said his efforts to lead the party had been “met with pre-emptive opposition” from senior figures including the Ukip chair, Kirstan Herriot, including a block on appointments. “I did not join Ukip in order to waste time on internal conflict, but I have found myself powerless to prevent a purge of good members from the party,” Braine wrote. “I had believed that Ukip was a highly democratic party, but I have not been able to stop political interference in Ukip ballots. I cannot therefore stand publicly for Ukip with a clear conscience.” The row has formed part of a wider tussle over the future of the party following Braine’s election in August to replace Gerard Batten as leader. Herriot and some other national executive members had hoped the election would mean an end to the focus on anti-Islam policies seen under Batten, who appointed the far-right activist Tommy Robinson as an adviser. However, Braine has endorsed Batten’s views, using his first press conference as leader to reiterate views about what he claims is a expansionist, violent culture within Islam. The national executive responded by seeking to bar Batten-associated members from standing in just-completed elections to the body, as part of an effort to seize control. Amid the infighting, Braine’s tenure has been marked by a slump in membership and spats such as the leader declining to attend Ukip’s annual conference because of poor ticket sales. Herriot said the decision was “a complete insult to the membership”. At its peak under Nigel Farage’s leadership, Ukip won almost 4m votes in the 2015 general election, coming third by vote share but only securing one MP, due to the voting system. But since Farage stepped down in 2016 Ukip has been buffeted by crises, and a series of short-lived leaders. It is now polling at less than 1%, having been largely supplanted by Farage’s new Brexit party.
8||Lost Rambos: behind the scenes of the tribal fighting documentaryOur latest Guardian documentary is filmed in the remote highlands of Papua New Guinea. Tribal fighting has long been part of life in the region but the wide circulation of bootleg copies of the 1980s action film Rambo have been used as a crude tutorial on the use of automatic weapons, turning local disputes into lethal exchanges and reshaping highlands culture forever. In this film we meet fighters and peacekeepers trying to navigate a path between tradition and modernity. Click above to watch the film and read more below about how director Chris Phillips made the film. Describe your creative approach to the story The film attempts to explore the complexities of a culture which is often misunderstood rather than offer perfect solutions to deadly tribal fighting. We touch on many themes: how difficult it is to maintain peace in a society out of the reach of state run law and order; how the influx of semi-automatic weapons has intensified tribal conflict; how gender inequality and toxic masculinity impact warfare; how cultural systems and ceremonies can prolong war and peace in small scale communities; and how difficult the journey can be for peace advocates even when the community acknowledges the suffering that fighting causes. It was important to me that we capture multiple perspectives on the fighting to explore the motivation from various points of view. We also chose to use cinematic re-enactments as a storytelling device to give an insight into the young warrior’s perspective, which is often intoxicated with the grandeur of fighting. I reached out to the International Committee of the Red Cross who sponsor a local acting group for help. I was also surprised by the overwhelming enthusiasm of tribes in Kompiam to perform fighting demonstrations and ceremonies. Your film celebrates the landscape as well as the culture of the highlands of Papua New Guinea. How did you become interested in the region? My obsession with the remote highlands started in 2008 when one of my closest friends was working at the field hospital in Kompiam as part of his medical degree. After completing a clinic in a town called Yangis, he spent several days accommodated generously by the locals and much of the time was spent in deep conversation with the community, who talked about the experience of living in a town ripped apart by tribal fighting. I began accompanying him back to the town each year to visit the communities on both sides of the conflict and worked with a local NGO. The visits were facilitated by Joseph Lakai who would arrange the logistics for our local travel which was always complicated due to persistent instability in Yangis. Joseph and I kept in contact via email in the following years. So your friendship with Joseph was in some ways the key to this film? Yes, years after first meeting Joseph, we got the terrible news that his own village of Kompiam had rapidly fallen into a huge tribal fight. The army had been called in, large numbers killed, and most of the town evacuated. For Joseph this was the worst-case scenario, his own tribe was central to the conflict and his efforts to call for peace had fallen on deaf ears. Joseph could open up the story of the Tinalapin tribe to you, but what about the story of the opposing faction, the Sambe tribe? The only story that Joseph could not facilitate was the refugees displaced by the conflict. We were looking for a family from the opposing tribe and felt we really needed a strong female voice. Given the Sambe were scattered in exile in the surrounding hills, this was always going to be the hardest story to access. However, in many ways it was the most important. The family we eventually filmed with were extremely keen to tell their story but it was a tricky process. We sat in a small hut with the five women in front of the camera, and off camera to the side were three men sitting in on the interview. They were senior members of the village housing the refugees, and it soon became obvious that they were becoming irritated by the process. The men couldn’t understand why we had chosen to talk to women about conflict. In their minds, conflict was a man’s game so they continued to interrupt the women’s answers and correct them. They were also disgruntled that we were focusing on a female perspective rather than the impact their displacement had on the surrounding tribes. I often think of this family of refugees and every time I contact people in Kompiam I ask if the Sambe have returned to their land. They have not. With no phones or addresses, I imagine even the simplest logistics can become extremely difficult. What was it was like filming there? The remote highlands make for a compelling backdrop, but it’s not without difficulty. Obviously, there’s the logistical difficulties of being in a remote location, electrical power for just a handful of hours each day, lugging camera gear up mountains and into villages with no cars, communication difficulties, daily thunderstorms, and the confusion a drone can cause! As well as the logistics, it must have been a challenge to navigate the cultural complexities It was absolutely crucial that everyone in the community understood our vision and motivations for the film, and had a chance to register any concerns or questions, so I had always planned to reach all key tribal leaders instantly upon arrival. When we finally arrived however, some of the most important elders were a few days walk away harvesting sweet potatoes, so it was suggested that it might be better if I made an attempt to reach the whole community together. With some local encouragement it was decided I should march straight down to the public marketplace, and make a speech to give the community a chance to ask any questions directly. The crowd circled quickly and the nervy speech and Q&amp;A took around 20 minutes. Eventually an older man came forward and announced that, as the senior member in attendance, he gave the project his blessing. We’d be free to move through their land – a major obstacle had been cleared. Tell us a little bit about the film-making team I feel incredibly lucky for the talented team we had making this film. Michaela Perske and Kiki Dillon are fabulous producers who navigated lots of complexity and are always upbeat. Cinematographer Michael Latham actually grew up in Papua New Guinea, spending the first 12 years of his life in Mount Hagen, and we passed his primary school on one of our first days in the shoot. Editor Dan Lee spent many late nights in the edit and the film certainly wouldn’t have reached the clarity it did without him. This type of post-production is full of complexities including working with translated dialogue. Composer Aaron Cupples has an amazing ability to interpret the emotion of the footage and strike a delicate balance between subtle accompaniment and high impact moments. He researched instruments from Enga and ended up building his own “bamboo” flute from plastic hardware pipes. Sound designer AJ Bradford made the jungle come alive sonically. It was a great thrill to launch the film in my hometown at the Melbourne international film festival and really feel the impact of his work in quality cinemas. And we were lucky enough to win the Best Short Documentary award at the festival! Coming up: Nowt But a Fleeting Thing An intimate film about a young farmer’s connection to the land, his animals and a rapidly changing world. Balancing knowledge passed down by his father Raymond, and his own experience in environmental conservation, Adam Crowe works hard to establish a life in farming that is sustainable for his family while supporting the fragile ecosystems of South Lakeland. Out November 2019
5||Bake Off is broken – here's how to fix itIf Bake Off was ever supposed to sour, it wasn’t supposed to happen in 2019. It was meant to happen when it controversially moved to Channel 4 three years ago, not when we were all collectively distracted by Henry’s snazzy ties or Helena’s obsession with the undead. But this year has seen the cake contest become decidedly overbaked, and it’s not just one thing that’s gone wrong: it’s everything. Search for #GBBO on Twitter and you’ll be faced with thousands of tweets of irritation rather than admiration. While we haven’t gone off Bake Off entirely, the show seems to have forgotten what made it so compelling in the first place, fuelled by stress, tears and some near-impossible challenges. Bake Off 2019 has, frankly, forgotten how to be Bake Off. So, if you’re reading Channel 4, here’s how to fix it. Number one: get more older bakers in the mix. There was nothing wrong with this year’s contestants, but what usually sets Bake Off apart are the people you never normally see on reality TV: the Vals, the Flos, the Terrys. I didn’t think it mattered at first, but in hindsight it shifted the entire atmosphere in the tent, and left older viewers without a representative, unless you count Henry and his prematurely-aged ways. Next, make the technical challenges vaguely recognisable. Two years ago, contestants were making mini rolls and molten chocolate puddings. This year: Maids of Honour, Sicilian cassatelles and Gâteau Saint Honorés. Paul Hollywood and Prue Leith’s reasoning is that standards have risen, but we have all witnessed the weekly montages of bewildered faces and total confusion. At times, it has felt like we were one week away from Prue demanding they whip up something she thought of in a dream. Third? Turn down the heat. The allure of Bake Off has always been the illusion that it is a quaint little show, when actually it is an anxiety-driven thrill ride watching people lose it while trying to add a marzipan layer to their Battenburg. This series, however, bakers have been reduced to tears four times during a technical, including in the final, where Steph and Alice both buckled under the pressure. Noel’s whispers of reassurance and Sandi’s hugs have gone from rarities to weekly occurrences. In other reality shows this kind of thing would be normal. Here, it is crushing. But Bake Off’s biggest issue, and the one that really takes the biscuit, is the judging. The cruelty hasn’t ramped up over time; it came out of nowhere this year. Prue slated everyone’s vertical pie showstoppers in one fell swoop: Sandi called the pies a “visual feast” and Prue replied “unfortunately that’s where it stopped.” Then she attacked beloved goth Helena with the barb: “If you shut your eyes, it’s a nice sponge cake.” And of course there was Paul “jokingly” storming out of the tent because he thought the technicals were awful, and going to town on Priya repeatedly, accusing her of “boiling” her custard and calling her meringue “horrible”. He also reeled off a non-stop list of failures to an already deflated Michael over his cheesecake surprise – “It droops, half of it is missing, it’s cracked down the middle, the icing looks terrible.” All of this harshness, plus Paul’s propensity to stand silently, aggressively beside bakers not answering their questions, no matter how many times they ask for help, makes the atmosphere in the tent all the more uncomfortable. It seems Bake Off is losing the very things that made it so special in the first place – its gentleness, and the sense that nothing could ever go too wrong. Now, not even Henry’s incredible tie collection could make everything OK.
25||Birmingham Royal Ballet review – noirish style and tragic loveIn an unusually benevolent move, Birmingham Royal Ballet shares this triple bill with another company, Ballet Black. It may be an audience-building exercise for the companies, but it’s win-win for us, as the guest dancers’ contribution, Cathy Marston’s The Suit, is easily the highlight. Based on Can Themba’s 1963 short story of marital infidelity, it premiered to much acclaim last year. Marston’s talent for melding movement, character and action, trimmed of excess, is brilliantly distilled here: the story unfolds without you having to think about it; Marston makes the dancing of daily tasks (washing your face, going to work) naturalistic and uncliched; and her chorus of dancers around the central couple create texture to the choreography that is unobtrusive but essential. Then there is the way she – and the excellent leads Cira Robinson and José Alves – pull your sympathy in two directions. It’s a rich, tragic and masterful work. If Marston’s choreography is all at the service of the plot, new piece A Brief Nostalgia, by 25-year-old Australian Jack Lister, is full of drama yet unanchored by narrative. Everything is atmospherically cinematic: the huge looming walls of the set, the dancers’ shadows cast noirishly across them; Tom Harrold’s fraught and ominous music, which could be scoring a Hitchcock thriller; and the emotional swings from desire and longing to helplessness, urgency and distress. Yet somehow, Lister only shows us what those emotions might look like, not how they feel. They’re facsimiles, filleted of meaningful motivation. Lister intended the work to capture the weight of a person’s memories. But the elegant wrangling of bodies is very stylish, and it’s a supremely confident work for a choreographer so young. At the other end of the experience scale is American legend Twyla Tharp. Nine Sinatra Songs, from 1982, is one of her most popular but least interesting works. Ballroom couples glide across the floor and, Tyrone Singleton and Delia Mathews’ feisty duet aside, it’s rarely more than smiling show dance. There are hints of humour, satire and swooning romance to be found, but it all too easily turns to muzak.
19||How to cook the perfect scouse – recipeScouse is a dish so close to the Liverpudlian heart that they’ve adopted it as a nickname – though lobscouse, or lapskaus, lapskojs or skipperlabskovs, depending where you are, is a popular dish throughout northern Europe, thought to have its origins in the simple cooking of Hanseatic sailors, and with even more variants than names. In Germany, for example, labskaus is more like corned beef hash, while in Norway, lapskaus is a chunky stew much like our own. Unsurprisingly, given the geography of the area, Liverpool’s scouse isn’t dissimilar to Irish stew or Lancashire hotpot, either, and, like those noble dishes, is eminently practical, easy to make in a small kitchen, or indeed a galley, and to adapt to current circumstances – there’s even a vegetarian variant, blind scouse, for when you can’t, or won’t, run to meat. But while Scousers are united on its virtues, as with all such beloved local specialities, passions run high when it comes to the finer details. Beef or lamb, mince or meat, carrots or swede … wish me luck, I’m going in. The meat The first problem I have is what kind of meat to use: lamb is apparently the classic choice, and as Andrew Webb notes in his book Food Britannia, there’s “a strong geographical argument for lamb being more authentic”, given that both Irish stew and Lancashire hotpot use it, too, but, “if born-in-the-shadow-of-the-Liver-Building scousers prefer to use beef, who am I to argue?” Indeed, I hear talk of scouses made with corned beef, attributed, by Wikipedia at least, to St Helens, where it is apparently known as “lobbies.” Beef is probably as authentic as any, because sailors would presumably have used salted meat in the original version. I, however, confine myself to the fresh kind, in this instance: chuck steak for the “world’s best scouse” (their words, not mine) as served in Liverpool FC’s cafe; minced beef as used by Maggie May’s, a place that get quite a lot of love from scouse aficionados online, and in a family recipe posted online; lamb shoulder and kidney in Simon Rimmer’s version; and lamb neck on the bone for Paul Hollywood’s scouse pie. Perhaps unsurprisingly, they all give very different results: mince is handy if time is of the essence, but proves less satisfying to eat than larger chunks of meat, not least because it disappears into the gravy after an hour or so on the hob. Chuck or shoulder are both excellent choices, depending on which meat you prefer (personally, I think lamb has a more interesting flavour), but bones will always improve any gravy – indeed, the final recipe I try, from Thomas Webster’s 1845 Encyclopaedia of Domestic Economy, starts with bones from a roast, boiled up with potatoes and onions. Only latterly are pieces of leftover meat stirred in, and very fine the results are, too. Presuming you don’t have enough to make a whole stew, however, I think Hollywood’s lamb neck, or scrag end, is the best choice; you can always strip the meat off the bones before serving, if you like. Offal fans might like to add a few kidneys, too, for extra richness. I’ve also chosen to brown the meat in dripping, because it feels right here; failing that, a neutral oil, or a mixture of oil and butter, as Rimmer suggests, will do fine. Hollywood’s olive oil, however, tastes a bit weird. The veggie version You don’t, of course, have to use any meat at all: when you couldn’t quite run to any, you’d make the aforementioned “blind scouse” instead – often with bones, but you could use vegetable stock, or try the Quorn and sweet potato version in the Merseysider magazine. Vegetables Either way, this is a dish that’s packed full of vegetables: onion is a must, and everyone but Webster’s Encyclopaedia adds carrot, too. Hollywood also sticks in swede, which divides opinion; I happen to think that the sweetness works well with lamb, but if you’re not a fan, feel free to use more carrot in its place. Most important, however, are the spuds. You can go fancy, as Rimmer does, and use them to line the dish, finishing with a crisp potato top reminiscent of a Lancashire hotpot, but we decide it’s far more comforting to cook them until they break down to thicken the gravy, as in Webster’s version. That said, a few fluffy chunks are also welcome to help soak up the sauce, so I’m going to add spuds in two stages: the first peeled and cut small to facilitate their dissolution, the second with the skins left on to help keep the cubes together. The liquid and aromatics Either make the stock yourself, as in Webster’s recipe, or use ready-made; beef stock seems to be the name of the game, with Oxo cubes and gravy salts mentioned specifically by several correspondents. Liverpool FC starts its gravy with bitter ale, reduced by half, giving the scouse a robustly fruity, hoppy flavour; delicious, but if it ain’t broke … though I will allow for a dash of Worcestershire sauce, because lots of people tell me their mum uses it, so it must be OK. The cooking As with most stews, the longer the cooking, the better – I prefer to do mine in a moderate oven, to keep the temperature fairly constant, though the hob works just fine, if you prefer. Once the meat is falling off the bone, you can cool it and skim the fat off the top, if you like, or do as Hollywood suggests and cover it in puff pastry and turn your scouse into a pie. Personally, I prefer to eat it straight away, with a generous helping of pickled cabbage on the side (beetroot is also acceptable, and I reckon it would also be nice with steamed greens, but I need to check that with a scouser before I try). Perfect scouse Prep 25 min Cook 2 hr Serves 4 800g scrag end/lamb neck, on the bone, in thick slices, or 600g boneless lamb shoulder 2 tbsp beef dripping or neutral oil 500g floury potatoes, cleaned 2 onions 600ml beef stock 2 sprigs fresh thyme 1 bay leaf 2 carrots 250g swede (optional) Salt and pepper Worcestershire sauce, to taste Heat the oven to 160C (140C fan)/320F/gas 3; alternatively, cook this on the hob. Heat the fat in a large, lidded saucepan or ovenproof pan over a medium-high heat, then sear the meat in batches, until properly browned. Lift out and set aside. Meanwhile, peel half the potatoes and cut into small cubes, setting the rest aside for the time being, and peel and thinly slice the onions. Turn down the heat, add the onions and fry, stirring regularly, until soft. Now add the cubed potatoes, fry for five minutes more, then stir in the stock, scraping the bits off the bottom of the pan as you do so, and return the meat to the pot along with the herbs. Bring to a simmer, then cover and put in the oven (or leave on a low heat) for 60 minutes, until the potatoes have begun to dissolve into the sauce. Mash a few of them against the sides of the pot to help them along. Meanwhile, peel and cube the carrots and swede, if using, and dice the remaining potatoes – there’s no need to peel them. After the scouse has been cooking for 60 minutes, add the vegetables to the pot and return to the oven (or hob) for another hour, or until the vegetables are tender. Season to taste with salt, pepper and a dash of Worcestershire sauce, and serve hot with pickled cabbage or beetroot. • Scouse or lobbies, beef or lamb – or neither? How do you make yours, what do you eat it with – and can anyone shed more light on its origins?
19||Kim-Joy’s recipe for ghost and pumpkin Halloween meringuesTo make these vegan, just replace the egg whites with aquafaba (the liquid from tinned chickpeas). Vegan meringues are better baked until completely dry in the centre. They are prone to getting sticky on the outside when exposed to humidity. You can always dry them out again in a low oven. Makes: one tray of meringues For the meringue: 120g egg whites (or aquafaba) Pinch of cream of tartar (optional) 180g caster sugar Plus: Orange, green, red and black gel food dyes (or use your favourite colours) Edible glue (or a paste made of icing sugar and water) Edible eyes and sprinkles Add the egg white or aquafaba to a stand mixer bowl (you could use an electric whisk, but you will be whisking for a long time). Mix on high speed until you have soft peaks, whisk in the cream of tartar, then add the sugar a tablespoon at a time, whisking for about 30 seconds to a minute after each addition. It is important to add the sugar very slowly so that it all dissolves. When all the sugar has incorporated (the mixture should feel smooth between your fingers), divide the meringue between different bowls depending on how many colours you want to make. Stir the gel food dye into each bowl until evenly distributed. For the pumpkins, slip a piping nozzle with lots of open teeth into your piping bag before spooning in orange-coloured meringue. When you pipe, it will look like the ridges on a pumpkin. Pipe a small amount of green meringue for the stalk (just snip the end of a piping bag for this). For the ghosts, fill a piping bag with white meringue (you can use other colours, too), cut a medium tip and pipe meringue kisses. You can also use your fingers to pinch the sides to create little arms, or pipe on little arms. For the tall ghosts with a rippled effect, alternate between squeezing and stopping squeezing your piping bag while working your way upwards. Play about with other shapes and effects. Bake for 45-60min at 120C (100C fan)/250F/gas mark ½ for meringues that are gooey in the centre. For completely crisp and dry meringues, bake for 1hr 30min and then switch off the oven and leave the oven door closed for a few hours. To decorate, use red gel food dye for blood (you can thin this with a little water) and black gel food dye for other details. Use edible glue to stick on edible eyes and sprinkles (eg bones).
29||Top 10 books about graveyardsCemeteries are curious places, especially when you’re young. Scary and thrilling, of course; they’re filled with dead people! But also oases of calm, respectful silence, often deserted, except on Sunday mornings. It’s little surprise that they have fascinated writers and provided settings for a multitude of books. I grew up in a town bordered by three large municipal cemeteries and took bits of all of them for the graveyard that is the main setting for my novel Things Can Only Get Better. It’s set in 1996, when Arthur, who is in his 70s, is so grief-stricken by the death of his wife Molly that he refuses to leave her graveside, eventually moving into and fixing up a derelict chapel and becoming a sort of unofficial caretaker. Like the necropolises of my youth, Arthur’s graveyard is a magnet for local children, specifically a group of girls with no hope or ambition, and nothing expected of them other than to leave school and get pregnant. Especially when the cemeteries are surrounded by closely packed housing estates and edged with busy roads, stepping through their gates is like entering a borderland between worlds, neither this life nor the next. Here are some of my favourite books exploring this liminal territory. 1. The Graveyard Book by Neil Gaiman It stands to reason, for those of a certain bent, that cemeteries, being the resting places of the dead, will be home to ghosts. The spirits who haunt Neil Gaiman’s 2008 children’s book are benign, taking in and looking after Nobody “Bod” Owens, the only survivor of his family’s massacre at the hands of a serial killer called Jack. There are supernatural menaces to be overcome, but ultimately the real evil is done by the living. 2. Pet Sematary by Stephen King Graveyards are fertile ground for horror, usually through their desecration or disrespectful treatment. King’s 1983 take on the undead genre sees a family buying a remote house with its own pet burial ground that does a nicely creepy line in bringing family pets – and people – back to life, but horribly changed. Which, presumably, they never mentioned at Purple Bricks. 3. A Fine and Private Place by Peter S Beagle More haunting than haunted, Beagle’s moving 1960 fantasy novel follows Jonathan Rebeck, a former pharmacist who has dropped out of ordinary life and lives, penniless and homeless, in the fictional Yorkchester cemetery, where a friendly raven supplies him with food stolen from picnic baskets. Able to speak with the dead, Rebeck plays matchmaker between the ghosts of a young teacher and a bookshop worker, then has to fight to keep their spirits together when the threat arises that one of their bodies will be moved. 4. Lincoln in the Bardo by George Saunders Here the spirits of the dead inhabit the “bardo” of the title, a sort of halfway house between death and resurrection based on the Tibetan notion of rebirth, which is tethered to Oak Hill Cemetery. This houses the crypt of Willie, son of Abraham Lincoln who has died aged 11. The US president’s grief threatens to keep his son in the limbo of the cemetery for ever. Unlike the first three books, which are resoundingly “genre”, Saunders’ novel won the 2017 Booker prize so is devoutly “literary”. However, it’s so good we won’t hold that against it. 5. Death: A Graveside Companion by Joanna Ebenstein A wonderful rough guide to death, to help us navigate that awfully big adventure. Through a series of essays by different writers, the cultural attitudes to death across the world are examined, and there are a wealth of illustrations of artefacts from prehistoric to modern times. 6. The Shadow of the Wind by Carlos Ruiz Zafón It isn’t only people that go to cemeteries to moulder and eventually be forgotten. It’s books, too, as suggested in Ruiz Zafón’s bestseller. In the aftermath of the Spanish civil war, a young boy is inducted into the secrets of the Cemetery of Forgotten Books, where the memories of abandoned, lost narratives are carefully curated. A cemetery in abstract terms, perhaps, but with some correlation with traditional graveyards, where the etched words on gravestones prevent the names of the dead from slipping from the world entirely. 7. Falling Angels by Tracy Chevalier The follow-up to Chevalier’s breakout novel, Girl With a Pearl Earring, Falling Angels immerses itself in the Victorian obsession with death and taste for grand necropolises. It follows the fortunes of two families bound together by the friendship between the daughters of the houses. The girls have their own obsession with the local graveyard that houses the two families’ adjacent plots. As the Victorian era gives way to the Edwardian, and a new world in a new century, sexual mores are challenged and the certainties of life and death, as reflected in the grand London graveyard, are upended. 8. 199 Cemeteries to See Before You Die by Loren Rhoads Whereas the Ebenstein book is a meditation on death, this is more a road map to some of the best graveyards around the world. From the southern gothic of Savannah’s Bonaventure cemetery to the celebrity-stuffed Père Lachaise in Paris, Rhoads takes you on a world tour of final resting places, introduces you to their most famous residents, and offers a wealth of enticing history and sharp details, such as the brightly coloured, hand-carved wooden gravestones in Romania’s surely somewhat misnomered Merry cemetery. 9. Fun Home by Alison Bechdel Between us shuffling off this mortal coil and being buried, cremated or otherwise laid to rest, there is the business of preparation and funerals, brilliantly depicted in Bechdel’s bestselling 2006 graphic novel. The story details her own upbringing with her rather tyrannical father, a third-generation funeral director. The non-linear narrative entwines the business of death with both Bechdel and her father’s personal journeys with their sexualities, and the aftermath of his death. 10. Her Fearful Symmetry by Audrey Niffenegger As part of her research for this 2009 novel, Niffenegger, author of The Time Traveler’s Wife, took a job as a tour guide at London’s Highgate cemetery. That’s the job she gives to Robert, who is the lover of first Elspeth, who dies of leukaemia, and Valentina, who is the daughter of Elspeth’s twin sister and who is herself half of a set of identical twins, with Julia. Like the more remote corners of your favourite graveyard, it’s a tangled plot, but a beautiful one. • Things Can Only Get Better by David M Barnett is published by Trapeze Books (£8.99) on 14 November.
21||NatWest to offer help to gambling addicts in high-street branchesThe high-street lender NatWest is to offer counselling sessions for gambling addicts inside branches as part of a groundbreaking pilot scheme that could be rolled out across the country. People who think they have a gambling problem will be able to make appointments to see experts from the charity GamCare in 13 branches of NatWest, even if they are not customers of the bank. NatWest, part of state-owned Royal Bank of Scotland, said the trial would begin in London and the south-east, the Midlands and east of England, and the service could be introduced in more of its 700 branches. It is also joining other lenders such as Monzo, Barclays and Starling by allowing customers to block gambling transactions on their bank accounts or credit cards through its mobile app. There are about 340,000 adult problem gamblers in Britain, 0.7% of the population, according to industry regulator the Gambling Commission, with a further 550,000 people suffering moderate harm as a result of gambling. Studies have shown that the addiction costs the UK economy hundreds of millions of pounds and is associated with an elevated risk of suicide. But a national self-exclusion scheme designed to help addicts bar themselves from betting has suffered from teething problems, while campaigners have complained that addiction services are underfunded and not widely available. NatWest said it wanted to help tackle the problem by using floorspace in branches to offer advice in a discreet environment. “Some customers might be uncomfortable going to an addiction centre,” said NatWest’s head of lending, Phil Sheehy. “This is an accessible and neutral environment.” “We want to look at what we can do to help people who may be struggling with a gambling addiction, which can have a significant effect financially.” Nicky Morgan, the secretary of state for digital, culture media and sport, urged more banks to consider launching partnerships with gambling charities to help customers cope with addiction problems. “The government has been clear to all businesses that have connections to gambling, including bookmakers, major high-street banks and social media platforms, that they must be socially responsible and use the power of technology and data to help people manage their spending and protect them from gambling related harm,” said Morgan. “I will closely monitor NatWest’s progress and I urge others in the banking sector to follow suit for the good of their customers.” Banks typically already ask customers about their spending habits if they identify erratic or dangerous patterns such as heavy losses with bookmakers or online casinos. Mike Kenward, the development director of GamCare, said the charity would also help to train NatWest staff to support customers who want help to stop betting. The bank is also offering separate specialist vulnerability training to 600 staff. “The relationship between problem gambling and financial problems is well established, although not enough is known about it,” said Kenward. “Banks are in a phenomenal position to support people affected by problem gambling. What people need when they’re trying to make a big change in their life is the tools to help them when their motivation is at its lowest. It gives an additional layer of protection.” He said the offer from NatWest of space in its branches would increase the charity’s ability to reach vulnerable people, with the number of counselling locations increasing from four to 10 in London alone as a result of the pilot scheme. GamCare listed nine locations where its services would be available: Camden, Stratford, Lewisham, Ealing, Wood Green, Twickenham and Ilford in London, Margate in Kent and Haywards Heath in West Sussex. A further four are still to be confirmed. GamCare operates the National Gambling HelpLine on freephone 0808-8020 133 or via web chat at www.gamcare.org.uk
1||The fall of the Berlin Wall  - archive, November 1989Communists open Berlin Wall: East Germans sweep aside Iron Curtain – all border crossing points declared legal by Anna Tomforde in East Berlin 10 November 1989 East Germany’s ruling Communist Party last night took the momentous step of allowing all citizens direct passage to the West in a step that renders obsolete the Berlin Wall and puts into question the border between the two Germanies. The extraordinary announcement represents the single most dramatic transformation of the political map of post-war Europe. It follows a tumultuous week during which the Communist authorities have vainly sought to stem a tide of popular opposition. Within hours, East Germans on foot and in cars began arriving in West Germany and West Berlin. West German television said a couple crossed the Bornholmer Strasse checkpoint in West Berlin at 9.15 pm (8.15 GMT) with identity cards stamped with the new-style visas. The decision was announced by Mr Güenter Schabowski, a politburo member, after the second day of a central committee meeting in East Berlin. He said it would come into effect immediately, and would last until new travel regulations were passed into law. Soon afterwards, the official ADN news agency said tens of thousands of people, many probably unaware of the new travel rules, took to the streets in several cities demanding free elections and liberalised travel. When East German television carried the announcement, the station’s switchboard was jammed almost instantly as thousands of callers tried to elicit more information. East Germans will be able to obtain exit visas without delay, allowing them to cross into the West through all border points within Berlin and along the border with West Germany. Tourists who want to return to East Germany can also obtain immediate permission. Because of the exceptional nature of the decision, passports will not be needed. ‘We have decided today that all East Germans who want to leave permanently can do so without delay.’ Continue reading. Revellers rush on hated gates by Anna Tomforde 10 November 1989 Hundreds of youths last night clambered up to dance atop the Berlin Wall near the most potent symbol of the divided Germanies, the Brandenburg Gate. West Germans, carrying hammers to chip away at the surface, rushed forward to greet them. East German border guards at times sprayed the crowd with water cannon but otherwise let the crowd revel on unchecked. “Open the gate! Open the gate!” the East Berliners shouted as the gathering grew with the news that the borders would be opened. All along the wall, West Berliners trampled over the white demarcation line dividing the city, in effect crossing into the East. Continue reading. Editorial: All to hail, and all to play for 11 November 1989 They crossed the border with incredible joy, amazement, tears and good humour. They sang and sparkled, above, below and beside the Berlin Wall. It was one of those very rare, absolutely electrifying, moments when the ordinary lay people take over and all the professionals – from prognosticators to border guards – get quietly out of the way. From the sidelines we should now be thinking big, electric thoughts about a future where so much, as yet barely definable, is possible. Germany is a country on the verge of reunification in spirit – never mind too much yet about the jurisdictional details. Something will take shape, probably closer to confederation than a total merging of frontiers and institutions. The process under way simply sweeps aside the natural hesitations of history (from Mr Gennadi Gerasimov yesterday in Moscow to the ex-army paper-seller up the road) about seeing one Germany once again. It also sweeps aside, with only a touch-wood percentage of remaining doubt, any real chance of tanks or troops or anyone else standing in the way. The victims of Beijing died so that everyone else would realise that this is now the unacceptable and dead-end alternative. The crumbling of the Berlin Wall also signifies definitively, beyond the powers of any assemblage of international strategists to deny, the end of the superpowers’ cold war in Europe. Those flickering black and white images of the Berlin airlift can go back to the film archive room. Europe has emerged from the post-war transition which was no less transitional for lasting over four decades. The long-obvious truth is now openly revealed. Politics, internal and external, not weapons, kept Europe divided. Counting missiles and armoured personnel carriers was never a more mature exercise than collecting train numbers. There is no denying that the centre of European gravity is going to shift as a result of the German earthquake. No-one can be quite sure that some new fault line will not appear. It is very important not to encourage, in appearance or reality, a situation where East Germany simply joins ‘the Western camp.’ That would be to create a fresh imbalance – another reason why the dissolution of one monolith must be accompanied by that of the other. It would be the surest way of providing Mr Gorbachev’s critics – apparently at the moment disarmed like everyone else by the speed of events – with destructive ammunition. The Soviet Union (unlike, we should note, the US) has always insisted that it is a European power, and will be rightly alarmed if a new Germany merely enlarges the other Europe. It is preferable to see (and we can hardly prevent) the re-emergence of a Germany linked to the rest of Europe, but essentially its own arbiter. Since that was the sovereign role we deliberately created for West Germany, we can hardly deny it now to the East as well. There are shadows in many minds; of course there are shadows. But West Germany, over forty years, has developed the most prudent of democratic credentials, the most wise and cautious of voting patterns. Germany with its entirely new human face is the formidable economic power on the European – and world – scene. If reunification is a challenge, it can only be met by more and wider European cooperation. As the horizons enlarge, even 1992 begins to appear a somewhat limited concept which will move sharply down the agenda in Strasbourg next month. Looking even further ahead (but if ever there was a stimulus to vision it is now) we begin to understand the potential behind the idea of Mr Gorbachev’s common European home. A Europe where national rivalries are subsumed by economic cooperation, where military budgets are cut to ceremonial levels, where the wealth is at last available not only to tackle long-neglected evils at home but to pay for a genuine fight against poverty, injustices and ecological disaster in the rest of the world … This is an edited extract. Read the article in full. Transport of delight sounds anthem of unity by Ed Vulliamy in Berlin 13 November 1989 The anthem of the reunification of Berlin established itself in the west of the city over the weekend, and it was neither a political speech nor a verse from Deutschland Uber Alles. It was the amicable, scooter-like chugging of thousands upon thousands of little Trabant cars, brimful with families map-reading their way through the biggest weekend party of the 20th century. The cars formed convoys along the cobblestones and boulevards, or parked – illegally but unpunished – on the pavements. Two million East Germans invaded West Berlin, making history with a good day out. The cork-popping on the Berlin Wall at the end of last week had been portrayed to the world as the symbolic theatre of reunification. That drama was played by a few thousand. The millions that followed them came for a first, awestruck inspection of the lavish shop windows and the capacious bars of the ‘Modell Deutschland’. All over the city, seven-hour queues crammed the pavement, waiting for each visitor’s DM 100 gift from the government. In the banks, they collected a white slip of paper, walked over to the Kasse and exchanged it for either a blue note or two brown ones. A girl dressed in brushed denim, which is the uniform of the reunification, burst into tears when she was given hers. It was more than money - it was a certificate of freedom. ‘We waited more than seven hours,’ boasted Kerstin Haneis, a teacher from Karl Marx Stadt. ‘We came at 8.30 this morning to see my cousin and now we will go round the shops - this is a lot of money for us.’ But she said she would not leave her family and her home. Not so Karl Lochner, a telephone engineer. He planned to spend half his money on an unforgettable night out, then collect his bags from the station and begin a new life .. he wasn’t quite sure where or how. The multitudes gathered in even the souvenir kiosk at subway stations: fluffy animals, chocolates, souvenirs and trinkets were second only to electronic gadgets in the order of preferences. But the biggest congestions were around the marvels which even the DM 100 windfall could not secure. A young couple at the front of a five-deep huddle stared at a Mercedes 500 on its rotating platform as though beholding some divine miracle; a windowful of watches, televisions and CD players similarly enraptured an elderly man in a beret – he wore a badge reading Ich Bin Frei – I am free. They took photographs of domestic equipment or bicycle shops; a man and his son discussed the different sorts of ratchet on display in a hardware store. A child pealed with glee on using his father’s new Walkman. Many toured on the subway system, studying their maps carefully. They travelled for the first time on the Western subway underneath their own city, for the trains criss-crossed the Wall, yet the stations in the Eastern zone are sealed and closed. But the usually guarded Passcontrolle between the underground western S-Bahn and the ground-level eastern streets was open and jammed full of people either returning home from or setting off for the wonderland over the Wall. Thousands returned east through the autumn dusk and the Invalidenstrasse checkpoint on foot or in cars, tempers fraying a little, their babies starting to cry – but visibly glowing with quiet joy nevertheless. Mr Gunter Moll’s chugging Trabant had broken down and needed a push complete with Frau Moll, Frau Moll senior, two children, a new electric toaster and two pink fluffy toy monkeys. ‘I think it is the battery, but no matter; it is the best day of our lives.’ Continue reading.
24||'It's in complete crisis' – architects form trade union amid fury and despair over exploitationUnpaid overtime, precarious contracts, working hours so antisocial your only friends are people who do the same job … after a minimum of seven years’ education and professional training, the reality of working as an architect can be a bleak prospect. It’s not hard to see why so many of them wear black, as if in permanent mourning for the lives they once had. “Spending almost 10 years at uni to be paid £20,000 doesn’t seem right,” says Joseph, a qualified architect who recently left the award-winning practice he had worked at for five years, to become a (better-paid) technical consultant. “I was getting really fed up with the dysfunctional nature of the profession. It’s in complete crisis. Practices are undercutting each other, competing on fees in a race to the bottom, and it’s the workers who bear the brunt.” His experience prompted him to get involved with the formation of a new union for architectural workers, remarkably the first time an attempt has been made to unionise the whole sector. The illustrious Royal Institute of British Architects, founded in 1834, mainly exists to promote the profession, while the Architects Registration Board has more of a policing role, regulating conduct. Because of its long history as an exclusive “gentleman’s profession”, architecture has few safeguards to ensure that workers aren’t being exploited in practice. There is still a deeply ingrained culture of architects thinking of their work as a “vocation”, and an artistic labour of love, so the long hours and poor remuneration have become an inevitable part of the package. But a new generation, saddled with more debt than ever, has had enough, and thinks the time is ripe for change. “It all started with grumpy chats in the pub after work,” says Aska, one of the group who began formulating ideas for the union two years ago. “We realised that the issues of overwork, underpay and instability of employment were so endemic that something had to be done.” Together, the group of friends and colleagues launched an 18-month Workers’ Inquiry to assess the lie of the land, organising a series of workshops, surveys and meetings to build a picture of labour conditions in architectural practices in the UK. “Some of the feedback was shocking,” says fellow member Jake. “Someone told us they joined a very well-known practice and had to work 60 hours’ overtime a week for the first three weeks. Someone else worked every single weekend for four months, then burnt out and left architecture altogether.” Such horror stories are rife. When I worked as an intern for a high-profile firm in Rotterdam, my regular hours were 10am to 2am, seven days a week. As competition deadlines drew nearer, we were discouraged from leaving the office, dusk fading to dawn in a delirious blur of styrofoam models and AutoCAD grids. I left and became a critic. While architectural internships have been mostly outlawed in the UK, exploitative practices persist. One of the most common findings of the group’s inquiry was people being encouraged to opt out of the EU working time directive as part of their employment agreements. The directive, first introduced in 1998 and extended in 2003, provides for a right to work no more than 48 hours per week, with four weeks’ paid holiday a year and restrictions on night work. But it is possible to opt out of the directive by signing a declaration – which, the group found, is frequently being included as an extra page in many practice’s employment contracts. Many were told they would not get the job unless they signed the clause. Extensive hours of unpaid overtime were also found to be common, with some salaries equating to less than the minimum wage when overtime was factored in. Extended probationary periods were allegedly being used to threaten people into working longer hours, too; some were simply dismissed for leaving on time. “These are structural problems with the industry,” says union member Esma. “It begins at university, with the masochistic studio culture of staying late and courses designed to breed individual competition rather than collaborative working. We’re taught to believe architecture is like a religion. We’re trying to make it heard that we’re actually workers and our rights matter.” There have been previous attempts to unionise architects, most notably in the 1970s, when the radical New Architecture Movement encouraged people to join the technical, administrative and supervisory section of the AUEW engineers’ union, but the enthusiasm was short-lived. Marking a departure from previous efforts, the current group’s ambitions go beyond just architects alone. “We’re open to everyone involved in the production of architecture,” says Jake, “from the model-maker to the office cleaner and admin staff, everyone should be united under the same umbrella.” They have formalised their union as a section of the United Voices of the World (UVW), one of the new breed of grassroots trade unions, supporting policies such as bringing outsourced workers in-house, for groups previously considered “un-unionisable”, including cleaners, security staff and sex workers. The legal sector is the latest to join UVW, with paralegals, personal assistants and administrative staff alongside solicitors and barristers, while a branch of culture and design workers was also recently formed. UVW will support the Section of Architectural Workers (UVW-SAW), as the new union is named, with free in-house legal advice, employment law and organiser training, skill-sharing, workplace representation and negotiation, as well as cross-sector experience and campaigns. Membership is between £6 and £10 per month, depending on income. Officially launched this month, with around 50 members so far, the union has a list of demands focused on regulated working hours, transparent pay structures, stable employment contracts, accountable employers and ethical practice. The organisers are at pains to stress that the union is for the benefit of the architectural profession at large, not just junior low-paid workers. “We’re not trying to screw over the bosses,” says Joseph. “It’s about creating a more sustainable profession that might be able to last another 50 years.” As Jake puts it: “Employers will say that they can only afford to pay low wages because of the low fees they’re getting. But the reason they can take on that work at such a low rate is because they’re exploiting their workforce. If the workforce was unionised, then it would raise the value of architectural labour overall.” The initiative deserves to gather momentum. For too long, architects have accepted their fate as inevitable; the low pay, long hours and lack of agency seen as part and parcel of their calling. Rather than perpetuating the vicious cycle, by continually undercutting each other and trampling on their employees’ rights, it’s about time architects came together and recognised the collective value of their labour. • UVW-SAW is now open for membership. The next open meeting is on Monday 4 November in Elizabeth House, Waterloo, London, at 6.30pm.
2||Telling Gareth Bale that Johnson is PM took away banterpocalypse’s sole survivorWhy did they do it? What honestly possessed the newspaper journalist who discovered that Gareth Bale didn’t know the identity of the UK prime minister to tell him who it was? If you missed this, affable Real Madrid malcontent Gareth Bale gave an interview to the Daily Telegraph this week, in which he revealed: “I don’t even know who the prime minister is any more. I haven’t got a clue.” It was at this point that the interviewer informed him that it was Boris Johnson. BUT WHY, THOUGH? Why was Gareth Bale’s immaculateness taken from him? We had found him – the last pure Briton. He currently lives in Spain, but these are minor details. Gareth Bale was arguably the last of his kind, our Kung Fu Panda, the sole unknowing survivor of the banterpocalypse that wiped out the innocence of the rest of UK civilisation when Boris Johnson took office. A lot like Last of the Mohicans, only with man-buns. And unlike comparable historical figures – King Kong, Wall-E, various Jedi, Vin Diesel in the Chronicles of Riddick – Gareth didn’t even have survivor guilt or a loathing of his solitude. He simply didn’t know or care why he walked alone. As he told the Telegraph: “I follow the golf, that’s about it. I can tell you who’s No 1 in the world?’” Thank you. Perhaps later. We already knew that Gareth had been nicknamed “the Martian” by some of his Real Madrid teammates, in reference to his remoteness. For Team UK, Bale was the final adult entity to be untainted by the knowledge of what we have become, by the knowledge of the creature that leads us, by the memory of what got us to that previously unthinkable state of affairs, and by the immeasurable psychic burden of all of the above. And yet the Telegraph just went and offered him the fruit of knowledge like it was a touchline water bottle. Naturally, Gareth was never going to be able to distil the latter scale of lapsarian horror into his reply, so when he got told who the prime minister was, he went with: “Well, there we go. I didn’t know that. I thought he was the mayor?” Clearly, the interviewer is guilty of something vastly bigger than a mere spoiler. For now, the discovery that Gareth was so hermetically sealed prompts me to wonder whether it could have been deliberate – as if he had been chosen for some existentially vital experiment by power unknown. Was this the point of the serial aloofness that has in some ways marked his career? “I look in terms of stuff financially,” he expands of the news, “because [Brexit] affects me in a certain way for investments or money, because things change. But I don’t read most of the nonsense.” Understood. Indeed, some investment firms employ people like Gareth Bale. Well, not exactly like him – but technical analysts, who deliberately seclude themselves from contact with the outside world for long stretches, where they can be safe from exposure to fundamentals (that is, real events). Their sole job is to crunch data and see patterns in numbers, and knowing too much about the fundamentals is an impediment to that. The theory runs that the more you let in the noise and emotion of daily news, the more the purity of your analysis is disturbed and compromised. This, but with Gareth Bale and UK politics. The sense of a ruined experiment was on Tuesday compounded by the news that there will now be a general election in a just a few short (though also extremely long) weeks. If it all goes tits-up for the government’s gamble, Gareth Bale might never have known of the Johnson supremacy. Despite polls suggesting otherwise, the political situation is so exceptionally volatile that an awful lot of things could happen, right down to them staying exactly the same, bar Johnson himself losing his Uxbridge seat. The point is: it is more than theoretically conceivable that Johnson could be the shortest-serving prime minister in 100 years, and thus conceivable that Gareth Bale could have remained ignorant of his tenure in its entirety. Before there were smartphones and so on, big news events that happened while you were on holiday felt like they hadn’t truly happened. Clearly they HAD happened, in some philosophical sense or other, but because you hadn’t experienced them unfolding live on the nightly news, they never felt properly real. By way of an example, I will simply never believe the Soviet coup attempt in August 1991 meaningfully occurred, because I was on holiday at the time. I have seen the archive news footage of the tanks on YouTube, but … no. I am unconvinced. Ultimately, the decision to break the vacuum seal of Gareth Bale has potentially grave implications for our prospects of national healing. We could have done something with his innocence. Anyone with any ambition would have realised the incredibly precious and pure commodity that was an adult mind untainted by the knowledge of Boris Johnson’s prime ministership, and – presumably – of what led us to it. We, as nation rebuilders, could have rolled out the model. A whole army of Gareth Bales could have been cloned with this hideous bit of race memory missing, and a new, more safely unemotional British people could have begun to be assembled. In a strictly scientific sense, we had the chance to put all the tiles back in the bag and pick some new ones – and we blew it. You have to think we deserve everything we don’t get.
14||Ugandan doctor under investigation over claims he assaulted LGBT patientA doctor in Uganda faces charges of professional misconduct over allegations he assaulted a lesbian patient. The country’s minister of health, Jane Aceng, referred Ben Kiwanuka Mukwaya to the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council (UMDPC) over allegations he assaulted the patient at his private health facility in a suburb of the capital, Kampala, on 19 October. He also faces police charges of assault. It is understood to be the first time a doctor has been referred to the medical council for attacking a member of the LGBT community. The rights of LGBT+ people in Uganda have come under renewed attack recently. Earlier this month, James Nsaba Buturo said he and other parliamentarians wanted to retable a bill that would make homosexual sex punishable by death. Previous attempts have been ruled unconstitutional. Last week, 16 LGBT+ activists were arrested on suspicion of gay sex. “It is the policy of ministry of health that all patients should be able to seek medical treatment without fear of discrimination, violence, personal vengeance or retaliation,” said Aceng. Mukwaya is a licensed member of the UMDPC and sits on the board. “We appeal to all healthcare providers and stakeholders to accord equal and appropriate treatment to all patients who present at the health facilities irrespective of their race, tribe and gender.” Aceng added: “We also strongly condemn assault and violence against any individual and appeal to the public to report any such incidents to the relevant authorities. “In particular, we request the public to report any medical related abuse to the ministry of health.” An inquiry into the incident is expected to last two weeks. If found guilty, Mukwaya faces suspension from practice and the removal of his name from the register, or he could be asked to pay a fine. Luke Owoyesigire, deputy police spokesperson for Kampala Metropolitan, said Mukwaya faces assault charges after the victim filed a case with police. Mukwaya has accused the woman of trespassing, which is being investigated by police. Members of the LGBT community say they risk physical attacks in their daily life and routinely encounter harassment, as well as facing prejudice over work, housing and healthcare. The 16 men arrested last week worked for the charity Let’s Walk Uganda. They were initially taken into “protective custody” after a crowd surrounded their office, shouting abuse, rights groups said. The men were released on bail until 5 November.
33||How to identify and develop your personal style as a photographerBook now Led by Guardian photographers Kevin Rushby and Andy Earl, this full-day masterclass is ideal for enthusiastic photographers looking to develop their skills. Whether you want to document a trip, capture a special occasion or complete a photojournalism assignment, our tutors will help you find your style as a photographer. You’ll be able to master the manual settings of your camera and create images that express your personality. Over the course of the day, you’ll also receive advice on post-production as well as expert tips on selling, publishing and exhibiting your work. Content What makes a good picture? How to identify and refine your personal style as a photographer Technical training to help you master the manual functions of your digital SLR camera Practical workshops with feedback on images taken during the class, giving advice on how you can progress as a photographer Post-production: a live demonstration of how photographs can be edited, and prepared for publication or display Plenty of opportunities for Q&amp;A in a supportive group environment Talk to Andy and Kevin individually about career development or selling your photographic work Please note this course is not designed for novice photographers – all attendees should have their own digital SLR camera and be comfortable using it. What to bring You should bring along your own fully charged digital SLR camera and charger. Tutor profiles Andy Earl is a professional photographer whose work includes a portrait session with Prince Charles, an award-winning video for the Rolling Stones, two stamps and three published books. He’s also created album sleeves for Pink Floyd, Madonna, Robbie Williams and Johnny Cash, among others. Andy is a visiting professor of photography at Norwich University and has been a leading professional for many years. Kevin Rushby is Guardian Travel’s “Explorer” and a contributor to the Saturday Review. He’s the author of four acclaimed travel books, including Hunting Pirate Heaven, an investigation of 17th century pirate utopias in the Indian Ocean. His most recent book is Paradise, a historical account of humans searching for perfection over the centuries. Find his work for the Guardian here. Details Book now Date: Sunday 1 March 2020 Times: Full-day course, 10am-4pm Location: The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU Price: £249 plus £7.80 booking fee Event capacity: 18 Complimentary lunch and refreshments included. You may also be interested in… Create engaging video: A masterclass with video journalist Rob Glass How to use your digital camera: A course with Guardian photographer David Levene Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.
10||US briefing: impeachment latest, WhatsApp hack and Greta ThunbergSubscribe now to receive the morning briefing by email. Good morning, I’m Tim Walker with today’s essential stories. Vindman’s testimony ‘extremely disturbing’, say Democrats Alexander Vindman, a decorated US army officer and the national security council’s top Ukraine expert, told the impeachment inquiry on Tuesday that a White House transcript of the now-infamous call between Donald Trump and the Ukrainian president had omitted key phrases, and that the call had left him “concerned”. Democrats described his testimony as “very credible” and “extremely disturbing”, as they laid out the next steps for the inquiry. Rudy in Ukraine. Rudy Giuliani first travelled to Ukraine in 2003, to visit a memorial to the victims of 9/11. And it was on that trip that he began to develop the deep ties which now put him at the heart of the impeachment inquiry, as Andrew Roth reports from Kyiv. WhatsApp sues Israeli cyber firm over hacking of activists WhatsApp has launched a lawsuit in California against an Israeli cyber surveillance firm it says was responsible for a series of highly sophisticated hacking attacks on leading human rights campaigners, lawyers, journalists and others earlier this year. The social media firm, which is owned by Facebook, says NSO Group sold technology that was employed to target more than 1,400 of its users, in 20 different countries, over just two weeks in April and May. Brazil election. The Guardian has analysed the spread of misinformation during last year’s Brazilian presidential election and concluded the vast majority of “fake news” shared on WhatsApp favoured the far-right candidate and eventual winner, Jair Bolsonaro. Facebook ads. A San Francisco man plans to run in California’s gubernatorial race solely so he can run false commercials on Facebook, in protest at the company’s current policy on political advertising. Greta Thunberg declines Nordic Council’s environmental prize The teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg has turned down an environmental prize awarded annually by the Nordic Council and worth approximately $52,000. “The climate movement does not need any more awards,” Thunberg, 16, wrote in an Instagram post explaining her decision. “What we need is for our politicians and the people in power start to listen to the current, best available science.” Sea levels. Land that is home to 300 million people will flood at least once every year by 2050 if the climate crisis continues unabated – more than three times the previous estimate – according to a new study published in Nature Communications. Boeing chief accused of operating ‘flying coffins’ Boeing’s chief executive, Dennis Muilenburg, was accused of supplying “flying coffins” at a congressional hearing on Tuesday, attended by many of the family members of the 346 people killed in two “entirely avoidable” 737 Max jet crashes in Indonesia and Ethiopia. Muilenburg was forced to step down as the company’s chairman earlier this month, following the emergence of emails suggesting test pilots had known about defects in the jet’s anti-stall system, but that Boeing failed to alert regulators. Profit over safety? Accused of rushing the profitable 737 Max into service despite safety concerns, Muilenburg said Boeing was “truly and deeply sorry”. The Senate commerce committee said it would change the system that allowed Boeing, not regulators, to sign off on aspects of the jet. Cheat sheet Southern California’s Santa Ana winds are projected to be at their strongest levels of the season through Wednesday, exacerbating the wildfires in LA, while millions in the north of the state continue to suffer preventive power outages. British MPs have voted to break their deadlock on Brexit by holding a general election on 12 December, in hopes that a new parliament can come to a final decision on leaving the EU. Thousands of viewers tuned in to watch a video stream of a brain surgery operation as it was broadcast on Facebook Live from a hospital in Dallas, Texas, on Tuesday. HBO has ditched a planned Game of Thrones spin-off starring Naomi Watts and instead greenlit another prequel series, House of the Dragon, based on George R.R. Martin’s book Fire &amp; Blood and set 300 years before the events of the original hit show. Must-reads Why I confronted Harvey Weinstein with comedy The comedian Kelly Bachman made waves when she mocked Harvey Weinstein onstage in New York last week. As the creator of a show called Rape Jokes by Survivors, she was perfectly placed to do so. “There is something healing to the process of making a funny joke about your own rape,” she says. Triggered: Donald Trump Jr’s 294-page rant The Guardian has obtained a copy of Donald Trump Jr’s forthcoming book Triggered: How the Left Thrives on Hate and Wants to Silence US. According to Ed Pilkington and Martin Pengelly, it reveals its author to be every bit as devoted to partisan trolling, childish insults and grudge-holding as his father. Why GM’s strike could inspire more collective action A recently-ended strike by General Motors workers was remarkably successful, say labour analysts, resulting in better pay and healthcare protections. Amid a national wave of walkouts, the GM outcome seems likely to inspire further worker militancy, as Steven Greenhouse reports. How a 19-year-old director wowed Hollywood Filmmaker Phillip Youmans’s debut feature, Burning Cane, was the toast of this year’s Tribeca film festival, where it won the best US narrative feature award and a distribution deal from Ava DuVernay’s company. All this, and Youmans is still just 19. “I had to make this happen,” he tells Charles Bramesco. Opinion The ageing Democratic establishment remains desperate to nominate a traditionally centrist 2020 candidate, says Hamilton Nolan. But decades of growing inequality have left most Americans impatient with the status quo. The core concern of those who consider themselves ‘moderate Democrats’ is not really that Trump might win – it is that Warren or Sanders might win. This is a political faction that finds itself caught between its aesthetic distaste for Trump’s social policies and its distaste for wealth taxes, public healthcare, and other policies contrary to their ambition to afford that lake house. Sport The Washington Nationals have levelled the World Series at three games apiece with a 7-2 win in Houston on Tuesday night, setting up a winner-takes-all Game 7 to decide the first ever Fall Classic in which the visiting team won the first six. A group of scientists has been studying the mechanics of NBA flopping, in an attempt to identify when a player is acting – and to thus expose once and for all basketball’s dark, daffy art of fooling referees into calling fouls that aren’t. Patrick Hruby reports. Sign up The US morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now.
9||'Dirty tricks expected': How Europe's media reacted to calling of UK electionEurope’s media and commentators couldn’t quite believe it: after months of indecision and immobility in London, some actual Brexit action. But, they warned, the coming election would be brutal – and may end up not resolving anything. “Hurrah! Something has moved within the walls of the palace of Westminster,” cheered France’s Libération. “The British parliament has finally agreed on … no, not Brexit, that would be too easy. But on snap elections, to be held on 12 December.” The paper noted that after another day of “barely comprehensible developments”, parliament would now be dissolved on 5 November, “the day the skies light up with bonfires and fireworks in memory of an earlier attempt to blow it up”. Johnson’s plan was to return to Westminster “with a comfortable majority, which will allow him to get his Brexit deal through parliament and therefore Britain to leave the EU on 31 January”, the paper said. “But it is a big bet.” Make no mistake, it added, these elections “will be won or lost on the question of Brexit. But will the British make a clear choice? Nothing is less sure. The risk of a new hung parliament is very real. In which case, all options remain open.” Le Monde said Johnson’s election bid “worked at the fourth try”. The prime minister had “risked complete and utter paralysis, without a parliamentary majority and with a freshly negotiated deal meeting more and more resistance from MPs”, it said. “But will the elections help Johnson regain the Conservatives’ lost majority? And above all: will they help the country out of its Brexit impasse?” If the Tories win, Britain could be out of the EU even before 31 January, Le Monde said. “But Labour has promised to renegotiate the deal and put it to a second referendum, and the Lib Dems to cancel Brexit entirely … In a country so deeply divided and fed up with Brexit, nothing is certain. The nightmare would be another hung parliament.” Germany’s Die Zeit rejoiced that at long last, “the House of Commons has reached a decision for something, rather than against”. But, the paper said, “as welcome as it is, the coming elections may solve nothing. The campaign will be hard and relentless, and rarely has it been so difficult to predict the outcome.” Stuck with his broken promise that Britain would leave the EU on 31 October “do or die”, Johnson will not be able to seek consensus, the paper predicted, noting that “the ability to compromise has been lost in Britain because of Brexit”. Instead, the prime minister will lead “a highly populist election campaign pitting the people, who finally want to see Brexit implemented and are represented by Johnson, against the elitist parliament that keeps stopping him … The 2016 referendum showed how dirty such campaigns can become.” Die Welt also predicted an ugly election. “All the polls put the Tories ahead,” the paper noted. “And Johnson can say he has a deal in his pocket, while Jeremy Corbyn only offers lingering uncertainty. The prime minister will be confrontational and a brutal campaign of dirty tricks can be expected.” But, the paper said, it is a high stakes gamble. “Brexit is the defining question of the election. So it is the Brexit “extremists” who could prove dangerous for Johnson: the Liberal Democrats, who want to reverse Brexit, and Nigel Farage and his Brexit party who want a no deal. They could cost Johnson a majority.” In the Netherlands, De Volkskrant agreed the campaign was likely to prove “the hardest, dirtiest, and most polarised in modern British history … In Dominic Cummings, the Tories have a strategist who will not shy away from underhand tactics. Among the Corbynistas, there is deep-rooted hatred of Johnson’s party.” Spain’s El País said none of the parties could be sure how they would do, “but the general conviction that there is no other way to escape the country’s Brexit’s paralysis ended up outweighing any doubts”. All knew, however, that the vote “will surely be a de facto second referendum on the UK’s exit from the EU”. In Sweden, Svenska Dagbladet said Johnson was “risking everything in a historic winter vote”. On the day the prime minister “looked certain to get his parliamentary election”, the paper noted, “the Tories were leading in the polls, just as they did before the 2017 vote. Then, they lost big.” The Irish Times said elections were not usually fought on single issues, their results tending to emerge “from the nation’s prevailing mood; the aggregation of attack and counterattack lines; and the holistic policy platform of each party”. So one thing was certain: “Britain’s Brexit election will be like no other before it.”
0||Australia beat Sri Lanka by nine wickets in second Twenty20 international – as it happenedThat’s all from the Gabba. We’ll be back with the OBO for a double-header on Friday: New Zealand v England in their first T20 followed a couple of hours later by Australia v Sri Lanka in Melbourne. Between now and then, I will spend 24 hours on a flight before joining you for both of those fixtures at the MCG. Until then - bye! Steve Smith speaks: “We played well tonight. The bowlers did a terrific job early on and bowled excellent areas. They restricted them to 117, which wasn’t enough on that wicket. It’s good to be back in this team ahead of the T20 World Cup next year. It’s nice batting up the other end from Davey, it makes it easy. He’s a strong little lad. I’ll bat where I’m told in Melbourne on Friday.” Australia 118-1 (Warner 60, Smith 53) Target 118 Hasaranga denies Warner the chance to hit the winning run, sending a wide down the legside. That just about sums up the game and the series so far, Sri Lanka hammered once again. They have chased this down with seven overs to spare, barely breaking a sweat. In Smith’s first hit back in national colours in Australia, he was excellent, as was Warner. 13th over: Australia 117-1 (Warner 60, Smith 53) Target 118 Sandakan nearly gives us a bit of trivia to end the night, pulling the stump out the way Cummins did in the first innings after Smith’s bails were broken. But he failed to touch the stump with the ball - NOT OUT, says the TV umpire. Two in a match would surely have been a first in T20s. Warner levels the scores with a single to finish the set, after a four down the ground before the run out that wasn’t. 12th over: Australia 111-1 (Warner 55, Smith 52) Target 118 Pradeep goes up for leg before with a very unlikely shout as it has pitched a mile outside Warner’s leg stump but he sends it upstairs anyway. Four from it. Nearly done. Far more interesting is the commentary. Warne won’t be at the MCG game on Friday, he explains, because he has “an exciting meeting” in LA about a film. 11th over: Australia 107-1 (Warner 55, Smith 50) Target 118 A Warner boundary pushes Australia beyond 100, crunching a Sandakan half-tracker past point. There’s a bit of confusion later in the over, which would have removed the left-hander had the throw been accurate, but nae bother: Smith steers another four next ball, past point with no trouble at all. He then moves to 50 with one to mid-off, in 32 balls. As Adam Gilchrist notes on TV, it is his first hit in a T20I since the 2016 World T20 but that matters little. Start the car. 10th over: Australia 97-1 (Warner 50, Smith 45) Target 118 Warner raises his half-century with a pulled single, his 14th fifth in T20Is to go with the ton he made on Sunday. It has taken him 30 deliveries to get there, seven boundaries collected along the way. Easy peasy. Smith has enough time to raise his bat himself, clipping Malinga - now coming around the wicket - into the gap for four more. He gets another couple past point to move into the 40s before finishing the set with another lavish boundary, timing the pants off an off-drive. What a shot. He’s 45 from 29 balls. 12 off the over. 9th over: Australia 85-1 (Warner 49, Smith 35) Target 118 Going through the motions? Just about. Warner spices it up a bit with a perfect reverse sweep, the rest of the runs taken with ease. Australia now need 33 runs in 66 balls, for what it’s worth. 8th over: Australia 75-1 (Warner 40, Smith 33) Target 118 Oh, easy as you like from Warner who helps a misdirected Udana short ball on its way over the man inside the fielding ring on the 45. More good running ensures they finish with ten runs from the over. “They have such an understanding,” notes Isa Guha on the telly. 7th over: Australia 65-1 (Warner 34, Smith 29) Target 118 Sandakan with his left-arm wrist spin now the power play is complete, as is the custom. He starts well, giving just enough air with sufficient accuracy to deny either Australian the chance to free their arms. They manage to jag two runs from the final ball, which Malinga dives to stop at cover. They’re so quick between the wickets. 6th over: Australia 58-1 (Warner 30, Smith 26) Target 118 Udana, one of the best death bowlers in the ODI World Cup earlier this year, will need to draw on some of that despite the fact that this is only the sixth over of Australia’s chase. He doesn’t do a bad job either, using about five slower balls in the over, giving up just the six runs. 5th over: Australia 52-1 (Warner 29, Smith 22) Target 118 “I’m about to have a shower,” Victor Onions on twitter informs us. “If I call you will you read the OBO out to me like you are commentating?” Well, speaking of early showers... this is what they are getting tonight. Hasaranga is no match for Warner with his leg spin, crushing him for four boundaries in the over - sweeping, cutting, pulling, driving. 4th over: Australia 35-1 (Warner 13, Smith 21) Target 118 Australia’s former leadership axis are now scoring off every ball, galloping between the wickets as they accumulate. Then Warner, yet to hit a boundary, finishes the over with some real stand-and-deliver stuff, hammering Pradeep straight down the ground. Have that. Have a look at Smith’s drive from the previous over. 3rd over: Australia 25-1 (Warner 8, Smith 17) Target 118 Malinga to Smith, the latter off strike first up with one to square leg, Warner then pulling a short ball for two more. Later, with one ball to face in the set, Smith leaps on a full ball, stroking it past the boots of the bowler for four more. He’s already 17 off 10 balls. 2nd over: Australia 15-1 (Warner 5, Smith 10) Target 118 Nice punch from Warner off Pradeep’s first ball, grabbing three from it. Smith later in the over plays a perfect square drive that goes all the way for four. They cut to him on the television from a pre-game interview where the former captain says there are some nights during a Test Match when he doesn’t sleep at all, most of the time getting two or three hours. Goodness me. He makes it two fours on the trot with a clip through the air that Hasaranga can’t quite keep him before his roof hits the rope. Yup, he’s away. 1st over: Australia 1-1 (Warner 1, Smith 1) Target 118 Another first in the Smith comeback: his first innings in Australia since the sandpaper farrago. He defends that initial delivery back down the track before ducks an accurate short one, then can’t beat midwicket with a flick. Never write off Lasith Malinga. Whoa, Finch bags a golden duck! Not much of a delivery from Malinga, comfortably down the legside, but he’s tickled it into the gloves of Dickwella. The players are back on the field. Some more news from Cricket Australia to report as Warner and Finch make their way: Andrew McDonald has been appointed as Australia’s new senior assistant coach. He will be allowed to continue his his IPL and Hundred gigs at the same time to help afford him. Clever or conflicted? We’ll see. “Evening Adam.” Hello, Jake Santa Maria. “With two Dutch cricketers living with me I must shout out to Netherlands for qualifying for the WC next year but would love to know your thoughts on PNG getting there especially being their first ever tournament relatively close to home.” Fantastic, isn’t it? Some want to present this as emerging teams getting worse (take Ireland’s troubles in this competition), but the more compelling argument is that more nations than ever are seriously competitive in these qualification tournaments. Yet, sadly, the ODI World Cup remains at ten teams. We shouldn’t forget this. Sharp work from Cummins to finish his spell and the Sri Lankan innings. Sandakan did well enough throughout the over to add seven, Pradeep smashing the final ball back dead straight, hitting the stumps at the non-strikers’ end. The big quick reacted quickly to the deflection, realising Sandakan was well down the track, managing to pull the stump out of the ground to execute the run out. You don’t see that happen too often. Australia require 118 to win the series. 18th over: Sri Lanka 110-9 (Sandakan 5, Pradeep 1) My guy Pradeep gets off the mark with a biiig top edge, which Zampa tries to snaffle running back with the flight at extra cover but his dive doesn’t quick stick. His four overs are now done, claiming 2/20. Lovely bowling. Zampa’s slower leggie strikes again, in very similar circumstanes to how he picked up his earlier wicket. This time, he draws Malinga down the track, Carey taking the bails. The ball before the Sri Lankan skipper was given out lbw but had it turned around on review, bouncing over the top - but the spinner has his measure. 17th over: Sri Lanka 107-8 (Sandakan 3, Malinga 9) Malinga knows the drill trying to rehabilitate a sketchy innings, making room to twice pop Richardson above the ring at cover for a couple of timely boundaries to start the over. That gets the band singing. Sandakan’s turn but he can’t make the same sort of contact. Still, it moves the visitors beyond 100 and within striking distance of, say, 130? 16th over: Sri Lanka 97-8 (Sandakan 2, Malinga 0) Sandakan wants nothing to do with the faster shorter one but is able to slice over backward point for a couple to finish yet another successful over for the home side. Once again it is just four runs and a wicket. This is grim for Sri Lanka, but take nothing away from the classy Australian bowlers. Cummins nails his shorter, slower off-cutter, prompting a hack across the line from Udana landing in the hands of Richardson on the deep backward square rope. 15th over: Sri Lanka 93-7 (Udana 8, Sandakan 0) Sandakan is happy enough keeping Zampa’s wrong’un out rather than trying to score from it. Just four runs and the wicket from the spinners’ over. Breaking news: England’s women have a new coach. Classic leg-spinners’ wicket, bringing the right-hander forward with a bit of extra flight, beating the edge and leaving him stranded. Carey does the rest. All of Australia’s bowlers have been tip-top tonight. 14th over: Sri Lanka 89-6 (Hasaranga 9, Udana 5) Agar finishes with 2/27, getting through another without a boundary. Indeed, that makes two T20Is in a row where he’s achieved that. Thrilled to see he’s back in national colours and ticking over nicely. Lovely fella. 13th over: Sri Lanka 82-6 (Hasaranga 5, Udana 2) The life has been sucked out of the Sri Lankan innings through these middle overs, especially since Perera fell. Just five singles from Zampa here. 12th over: Sri Lanka 77-6 (Hasaranga 1, Udana 1) Stanlake’s four overs have netted him 2/23. He was a big part of Australia’s success in the format in 2018 - twice coming within a fration of a point of overtaking Pakistan as the No1 ranked team. Stanlake bounces Shanaka out on the hook! The deflection is so slight that Carey barely appeals when the ball lands in his gloves, but the decision goes the way of the bowler. No review - that’s out. Perera chops the straight one on. They’re in big strife now. 11th over: Sri Lanka 75-5 (Hasaranga 0, Shanaka 1) Shane Warne is trying to get Maxwell to talk about the nicknames of Agar and Cummins. Thankfully, he realises this isn’t a good idea. 10th over: Sri Lanka 65-4 (Perera 18) Perera unfurls his second booming drive, this time giving Cummins the treatment through cover. We shouldn’t be surprised, according to those who have crunched the data, he did play one of the best Test innings of all-time just eight months ago. Dickwella’s turn, who scoops for four! Stanlake could have stopped it but didn’t get his hand down in time. But Dickwella doesn’t get properly in, sending a gentle leading edge to Turner at point to finish the over. Nice change of pace from Cummins to earn his entry to the book. Fine work from Agar, tempting Fernando with a slower one through the air, well wide of the off-stump. He takes the bait, top-edging high into the sky, taken nicely by Cummins running in from long-off. 9th over: Sri Lanka 54-3 (Perera 12, Dickwella 0) 8th over: Sri Lanka 49-2 (Avishka 15, Perera 9) Zampa now, with his wrist spin. His wrong’un is spot on from the outset, winning Avishka’s inside edge then beating Fernando on the outside of his bat. Avishka gets more of it next time he’s up, timing a forceful drive into the gap at extra cover for a boundary. They needed that. 7th over: Sri Lanka 41-2 (Avishka 9, Perera 7) It’s spin with Agar for the first time tonight. He had a good game on Sunday, conceding just 13 runs. Not his best over here but ge gets out of it with five singles. 6th over: Sri Lanka 36-2 (Avishka 7, Perera 4) Shoooot. Kusal Perera strokes a gorgeous off-drive to the rope first ball - on the up, thanks for coming. Shane Warne says Shane Warne things on TV in response, champing Billy Stanlake in the process. Fernando has a dash later in the over, lifting high out to midwicket, but Richardson does well with an athletic stop on the rope. Power play done. Gunathilaka makes room but misses an attempted slap, Stanlake’s delivery clipping the very top of off-stump. That’ll do it. 5th over: Sri Lanka 28-1 (Gunathilaka 21, Avishka 4) Cummins is on and with his first ball he’s immediately on that nagging hip length to Avishka. Gunathilaka’s turn, who nails a cut shot but Maxwell is there at point, diving with one hand to stop a certain boundary. Superb. Warner is also into the act, racing around to stop more runs at mid-off. Nobody can stop four from the final ball though, a thick edge racing away to the rope; the left-hander into the 20s. 4th over: Sri Lanka 21-1 (Gunathilaka 16, Avishka 2) Gunathilaka backs out of a reverse something-or-another as Stanlake’s first ball arrives, deciding at the last minute to dab to third man. His execution improves dramatically as the over goes on, picking up a boundary over midwicket then scooping a SIX over the head of the ‘keeper. As you do when the quick is 6’10” and bowling 145kph. 3rd over: Sri Lanka 9-1 (Gunathilaka 4, Avishka 2) Another high-quality over from Richardson, beating Gunathilaka’s outside edge to begin, giving him very little thereafter. Avishka is off the mark from the final ball but he was lucky his hoick didn’t end up in the hands of the man at deep midwicket. “Winning the toss and batting first was the only way Sri Lanka could make a comeback in this series today,” insists Abhijato Sensarma. “With no scoreboard pressure, presence of decent batsmen for flat pitches such as today’s, and an opportunity to cash in on the Starc-less death overs, it’s do or die for the islanders. It’s unbelievable Rajapaksa has been dropped after a great series versus Pakistan, but that’s just the way it is now. Hope they put aside the pessimism to revive their talent for unexpected heroics and make this series exciting again!” Yes, he sent this before the innings started. 2nd over: Sri Lanka 6-1 (Gunathilaka 3, Avishka 0) Gunathilaka is beaten by the final ball of the excellent Stanlake over. Earlier, he already sorted him out twice with sharp deliveries outside the off-stump. Between times, a spinkler came on at mid-off. Eventful. Ugly cricket. Gunathilaka took off after pushing to point and Mendis was coming, but he was sent back far too late. Agar deflected cleverly at the bowlers’ end upon receiving the throw. 1st over: Sri Lanka 4-0 (Gunathilaka 2, Mendis 1) As Gunathilaka gets off the mark first all to third man, Shane Warne rolls out the favoured stat of most TV commentators: if you lose three wickets in a T20 power play, you lose three times in four. Richardson is right on the money to the right-handed Mendis, beating him with good’un. Warne is now talking about lasagne because it helped Stanlake, who will we will shortly, put on six kilograms. Smith drops Mendis to finish the first over, diving to his right at backward point with the right hand. It is a tough chance by normal-people standards, but they are the type that the former skipper makes a habit of snaffling. Gunathilaka and Mendis are opening the batting. Richardson, of the Kane variety, has the new ball in his hand. PLAY! The crowd numbers will be a talking point tonight. Men’s international cricket in Australia doesn’t come much more Off-Broadway than this. October, mid-week, pay TV coverage only - not a great combination. Anyway, the players are on the field so positive vibes only, as they say on the internet. At the toss. Sri Lankan skipper Malinga said he wants them to “show character” today and believes batting first will take a bit of pressure off to begin. Finch was “a bit undecided” due to the dew, leaning towards batting. “But we’re not too disappointed bowling first.” Three changes for Sri Lanka. Kasun Rajitha, Oshada Fernando and Bhanuka Rajapaska are out. Coming in: Avishka Fernando (HOW WAS HE OUT TO BEGIN WITH?), Niroshan Dickwella and Isuru Udana. For Australia, just Stanlake for Starc. Australia: Aaron Finch (c), David Warner, Steven Smith, Glenn Maxwell, Ashton Turner, Alex Carey (wk), Ashton Agar, Pat Cummins, Kane Richardson, Adam Zampa, Billy Stanlake. Sri Lanka: Danushka Gunathilaka, Avishka Fernando, Kusal Mendis, Kusal Perera, Niroshan Dickwella (wk), Dasun Shanaka, Wanindu Hasaranga, Isuru Udana, Lakshan Sandakan, Lasith Malinga (c), Nuwan Pradeep. While we wait for those teamsheets. I mentioned Mitch Starc’s brother. I really should have identified him as Commonwealth Games gold medallist, Brandon Starc. Handy family. They are batting. Teams shortly. To the Gabba we go for the second men’s international of this marathon Australian summer. It’s it there that the Sri Lankans will try and recover form the 134-run mauling they copped in the city of churches on Sunday at the hands of Warner and Maxwell and co. It’d be daft to completely rule them out in this three-game T20 series on the basis of that first performance, though. Look at what they did in the World Cup when they looked a broken and divided rabble - they beat England, who went on to win the whole thing. Or that absurd Test win in Durban. Or sweeping Pakistan last month. Maybe that’s too optimistic this time around, though. Poor old Kasun Rajitha’s analysis of 0/75 - the worst in T20I history - summed it up as Australia’s openers put on 122 before Warner and Maxwell added another 109 in about 25 minutes then the quicks went to work. The hosts are determined to up their game in this format with a home T20 World Cup ahead of them exactly a year from now. Ahead of the toss, we already know Mitch Starc hasn’t made the trip, instead attending his brother’s wedding. Fair play. Big Queenslander Billy Stanlake comes into the XI. As for Sri Lanka, expect bulk changes with Dickwella and Udana the most likely inclusions.
26||'I did the first nude in Vogue': Marisa Berenson on being a blazing star of the 70s and beyondMost people, says Marisa Berenson, “tend to live in my past. Which is fine.” She smiles, well aware of the fascination. “But I tend to live in the present and in the future.” A 2001 profile of the model/actor in the New York Times described her as a “Zelig of the zeitgeist … popping up in the right place at the right time”. And there is certainly something magical about her life and the people who have passed through it. As a child (she is now 72) she was taught to dance by Gene Kelly. Greta Garbo came to her parents’ parties; Salvador Dalí – a friend of her grandmother, the designer Elsa Schiaparelli – wanted to paint her. The legendary Vogue editor Diana Vreeland pushed her to become a model – Yves Saint Laurent would describe her as “the face of the 70s” – and she was photographed by giants such as David Bailey, Irving Penn and Richard Avedon. Andy Warhol photographed her wedding. She discovered meditation in India alongside George Harrison and Ringo Starr, was at Bianca Jagger’s Studio 54 birthday party – the fabled night of the white horse – and attended Truman Capote’s famed Black and White ball. Although she continues to work in film, she hasn’t made a huge number of movies – but the biggest, early in her career, were Luchino Visconti’s Death in Venice, Bob Fosse’s Cabaret and Stanley Kubrick’s Barry Lyndon. Berenson lives in a villa down an unprepossessing road on the outskirts of Marrakech. Even this place seems suitably magical – “my paradise”, she says – an oasis of bright colours and patterns, and lush greenery amid the scrub. We sit on her terrace, overlooking the garden and pool. Tiny birds flit in and out. Berenson, beautiful and glamorous, is wearing a long, patterned kaftan, her slight but athletic frame untroubled by the weight of her heavy jade earrings and matching tangled vine of necklaces. Her sunglasses stay on throughout – I never once see her eyes. A housekeeper brings green juice made with vegetables from her organic garden. She is thinking, she says, of writing a lifestyle book, filled with healthy recipes, and interiors and gardening advice. There is something both timeless and very current about Berenson. She was well ahead of the “wellness” trend, and stands at something like high priestess level now – she doesn’t eat sugar or gluten, she does yoga, pilates and meditation – and has taken to Instagram. Berenson is one of a generation of supremely cultured, well-connected Euro-aristocrats (she speaks five languages), born to socialite Gogo Schiaparelli, daughter of Elsa, and Robert Berenson, a director of Aristotle Onassis’s shipping company who became a US diplomat. As a child she wanted to be in the movies, her bedroom plastered with pictures of Audrey Hepburn, Rita Hayworth and Marlene Dietrich. She grew up moving around Europe, then was sent to boarding school in Berkshire, where she concluded she was “hopeless” at acting. “They had plays they put on and we were obliged to get up on stage and do things. And I remember running off the stage crying, because I was so terrified. So you can imagine I never thought it would ever happen.” When she was 16, her father took her to a ball in New York where Vreeland spotted her and decided she must start modelling. Vreeland, she remembers, “said, ‘We have to photograph Marisa.’ That was it. That’s how it started.” Berenson had already been turned down by one model agent, the influential Eileen Ford, but with Vreeland’s backing, she became one of the most sought-after faces of the 60s and 70s. Elsa Schiaparelli wasn’t too pleased. “I think she was afraid for me,” says Berenson. “I was so young, and living in New York alone.” Also, she adds with a smile, “I was a little bit outrageous too. I did the first nude in Vogue, and things like that, and she was horrified.” In her spare time she was hanging out at parties with artists and rock stars, and in relationships with actors and rich heirs. She remembers doing a shoot for Vogue in Iran. “In those days, everything was accessible.” She makes it sound so glamorous and bohemian. Was she a wild hippy? “Not at all,” she says with a laugh. “I was a combination of very well-brought-up, and an old-fashioned romantic way of looking at life.” She was on, she says, a “spiritual quest”. Being into health and meditation probably saved her. “Unfortunately, a lot of people didn’t survive. I went through that whole period on orange juice and meditation.” Drugs, she says, were “terrifying to me. I couldn’t imagine losing it like that. And then sexually I was kind of romantic, so I never did the whole crazy thing that way.” It was on a Vogue shoot in India when she was about 18, in the late 60s, that she learned about Maharishi Mahesh Yogi’s ashram, the birthplace of transcendental meditation. Two of the Beatles were there when she arrived. “And one of the Beach Boys,” she points out. “So I ended up staying there for a while, going through the initiation, becoming a vegetarian. The days went by and we would just meditate, sleeping in little huts.” Did she spend much time with George and Ringo? “When we’d finish the day, George would say, ‘Come into my room’ and we’d sit on the floor, and listen to them playing guitar.” At the time, she says, it didn’t feel like a big deal. “We were all on the same quest – there was a lot of peace and love in those days that we were all looking for.” Back in New York, Berenson took acting classes in the evenings. “And then I started doing very off-off-Broadway things, just to learn and to get past my insecurities and shyness.” She met Visconti though her then-boyfriend Helmut Berger – he had also been in a relationship with Visconti – and he virtually cast her on sight for Death in Venice. “The first day, I thought I was going to die of fright. But then I set foot on that stage, and I just had this incredible feeling that this is where I’m supposed to be.” She was doing Death in Venice when she got a call from a producer who said Bob Fosse wanted to see her for a film, which turned out to be Cabaret. On the set of that, she says she remembers trembling so badly that Fosse asked her why her hat was shaking. “It was terrible. It was only my second movie.” Then Kubrick saw Cabaret and decided he wanted her to play Lady Lyndon in his adaptation of the Thackeray novel Barry Lyndon. He called her when she was in bed with pneumonia and could hardly speak. “I was practically unconscious,” she says. “I just let him speak because I was speechless anyway. But he carried on for quite a while about every detail of what he’d liked about my performance in Cabaret.” She didn’t meet him until she was on the set. Berenson moved into the wing of a draughty castle in Ireland, where they were shooting. Every day Kubrick would tell her she might be needed on set, but she never was (her scenes were filmed once the production suddenly moved to England, reportedly following a threat from the IRA). “It was the most depressing place,” she says. “I had visions of going riding in the Irish countryside and all that, but in the end, it rained all the time and I was so lonely. I think Stanley liked the idea that I became very melancholic there.” She would cook spaghetti bolognese for the crew, just to have visitors. Kubrick was, she recalls, “totally kind and respectful, and very amusing. He never raised his voice, he was always very gentle, but he wanted what he wanted, so if he wanted a scene shot 50 times then it would be shot 50 times. Yes, he was a perfectionist and he wanted you to give the best of yourself, and he expected people to be available.” She understands that, she adds. “Every great person I’ve worked with, whether a director or photographer, they have this exceptional kind of rarity. You have to be demanding, you have to be a perfectionist, you have to know what you want, and you have to have the best of what you can have because otherwise you don’t do extraordinary things.” Her acting career had got off to an electrifying start, but Berenson walked away. “I got married shortly after that, so my career sort of …” She pauses, then says crisply, “I put everything on hold for a period of time, which was a choice.” Her marriage to rivet tycoon Jim Randall didn’t last. “And then I went through a series of very challenging things in my life, so I had to kind of move through all of that and come out the other side. I had a marriage, a divorce, a car crash” – she was injured, but the two people in the other car were killed – “and another marriage and another divorce.” She started working again, in theatre and European films, but none of her roles have had the same impact as her first three. Does she regret not pushing her career? “I can’t regret anything because I had a great, beautiful daughter,” she says. “And now I have a granddaughter, so I’m thrilled. With Hollywood, I don’t know what would have happened if I had stayed. It’s true that Barry Lyndon was such an amazing thing for me, that had I continued on that road, maybe, I don’t know … But one makes choices and I made that choice at the time so I can’t regret it.” There doesn’t seem much room in Berenson’s life for negativity. She takes her spiritual practice very seriously, and it has seen her through the toughest times, she says, among them the death of her sister Berry, a talented photographer who was a passenger on one of the planes that hit the World Trade Center on 9/11. Berenson was also in the air that day, flying to New York, when her plane was diverted to Newfoundland, where she was stuck for several days. “We were put into this big stadium place, and there were tables they had organised with fruit and a toothbrush and a piece of soap, and medical whatever, and then a whole line of telephones on another table.” She called her daughter, who had frantically been trying to track her down, and learned what had happened to Berry. She remembers accompanying a priest, a fellow passenger, to a tiny church on a hill where they said prayers and sang songs. It must be a particularly painful loss because those images are so vivid, and are still used in reports and documentaries all the time. She nods. “To see that tower constantly, it’s awful. It’s so huge and so beyond anything imaginable.” She has been able to deal with it, she says, because of her spirituality. “I try and look at things on a different level of consciousness, and I connect with my sister all the time. So that helps a lot.” She adds, very sincerely: “I believe that so strongly that I never feel alone and I always know that I’m accompanied by higher powers.” When she looks back, does she really have no regrets? “Sometimes I think maybe I wasted too much time on things. But in the end, I talk myself out of it – nothing is a waste of time, because everything is a growing process.” Berenson isn’t slacking. She spent much of last year in Paris doing a musical, realising her dream to sing and dance. Three years ago, she took on Shakespeare for the first time, performing in London’s West End in Kenneth Branagh’s production of Romeo and Juliet. “I don’t let age get in the way of my life. I continue to do the things I want to do and thank God I’m able to do it.” Nobody likes getting old, she says, “but it can also be glorious. I feel better about a lot of things now than I did when I was younger, and creatively I think I’m much better now. I’m more secure within myself.” By now it’s late afternoon, and a far-off call to prayer comes shimmering through the warm air. She likes this time of day – she’ll watch films, or read books. Perhaps have a swim. A time for contemplation, and planning. What does she want to achieve? “Lots of things. I’m not finished yet.”
7||Why it’s not easy being a young lefty in eastern Europe“A communist is someone who’s read Marx, an anti-communist is someone who’s understood it,” jokes one of the interviewees in Nobel prizewinner Svetlana Alexievich’s book Secondhand Time, which traces the impact of the breakup of the USSR on individual lives. The same thought has run through my childhood and adult life in the former Soviet republic of Moldova. My grandparents were victims of Stalinist repression – my grandpa lost his father and three siblings in the state-engineered famine of 1946-47. My grandma was fired from her job as a teacher because she had buried her dead four-month-old daughter with a Christian cross. My parents had just finished university when the Soviet archives were opened up to the public during perestroika. When they learned that labour camps were originally Lenin’s idea and not Stalin’s, as they had been taught, my parents felt that they had lived a lie. Now they had the evidence that Lenin, too, had written cynically about hanging kulaks – or “rich” peasants, who sometimes needed only to own a cow or a few sheep to qualify as “enemies of the people”. Some of this explains why my parents’ generation can get behind social democracy (although they would argue you also need oil and wealth to make it happen). But socialism? That’s a no-go for them, they’ve had enough of that. “We know how easily lefty ideals can get abused, and degenerate into totalitarianism,” a family friend told me. By contrast I am working on a historical novel about Soviet feminist idealists who cooperated with Stalin. And I’ve joined a Marx’s Capital reading club started off by leftwing friends and activists back home in Moldova. We’re all young enough not to have experienced Soviet communism first-hand. We associate leftism with Bernie Sanders rather than the gulags. We share lectures by the Marxist anthropologist David Harvey, and will happily post memes of Marx saying, “Oh shit, I forgot about human nature”, but are as opposed to authoritarianism and government corruption as our grandparents are. We are also more critical of western societies, and share concerns about working conditions, the power of big business, and access to social services and public spaces. The western-like left is growing among a small minority of young people in eastern Europe, via civic groups, art co-operatives, zines, independent publishers, online platforms, or tiny parties made up of academics. Their main criticism of contemporary eastern European societies is the rise of inequality. They have a point. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, despite the fact that eastern European states have became wealthier, the poor in these states have become poorer and the rich richer. In the 1980s, the total earnings of the poorer half of east Europeans was equivalent to 25-35% of national income. Since the end of communism, this figure has dropped to 17% in some countries. The most unequal country in the region is Russia, where the richest 1% now earns 27% of national income – a dramatic increase from 3.5% before the fall of the iron curtain. But if in the west the solutions to inequality proposed by the left are clearly viable, in eastern Europe it’s more complicated. I might vote Labour or Green in the UK, where I’ve lived for the past seven years, but in Moldova or Romania I’m a centrist. That’s because the greatest common enemy across the political spectrum in eastern Europe is government corruption. And while liberal centre-right pro-European parties lack answers on many things, on this they have just been more committed to the fight. Former Romanian president Traian Băsescu’s centre-right coalition set up a national anti-corruption directorate that, for all its flaws, managed to imprison some of the most influential corrupt political figures and is considered a successful model for the region. In Moldova, the prime minister, Maia Sandu’s party for Action and Solidarity is the first party to have been fully transparent about the sources of its funding. Outrageous levels of corruption combined with the communist inheritance mean politics in eastern Europe can’t easily be mapped on to the familiar left-to-right spectrum that explains voter behaviour in much of western Europe. It’s far messier than that. Leftist ideals and slogans carry the weight of totalitarianism but are also hijacked by populists to win elections by exploiting poor or elderly people. Nostalgic after their youth, voters on state pensions are often bought off with a pair of socks or a sack of flour, and a promise of more to come. One of the most perverse of the so-called left-leaning parties in the region is Romania’s Social Democratic party (PSD), which led the governing coalition until this month and has dominated domestic politics since 1989. It has often prioritised big business over local communities, most notably in 2013 when it allowed the opening of a gold mine using cyanide at the ancient settlement Rosia Montana, generating mass protests. PSD stands accused of shocking nepotism in filling state institutions and boards, of trying to water down anti-corruption legislation and remove judges. A leading party figure was jailed earlier this year for corruption. No wonder Romanians have come to distrust state institutions. It’s not just party politics that are messy. The social protection system itself is officially state-funded, but unofficially it’s semi-privatised. On paper, right across eastern Europe, we have preserved free (or almost free) healthcare, nursery, school and university education. But in reality, particularly in Ukraine, Moldova, Romania, Lithuania and Hungary, many people have to pay informally for these services. Patients are often expected to give a fat tip after a medical consultation, or, in the case of more expensive surgeries, to pay up front to have it performed in the first place, regardless of insurance cover. Parents, too, are widely expected to pay for extra classes, exams and “presents” for teachers. The creepiest communist heritage of them all, Big Brother – to many westerners just a historical blip – is still very much alive. Romania spends more money on its intelligence services, the SRI, than Germany, Turkey or Canada. In 2017, in Moldova (population 3.5 million), the number of recorded phone calls by the secret services was more than three times that of the UK. The police often seem to defend corrupt politicians rather than citizens – another police state hangover. In 2018, Romanian police used teargas on a peaceful crowd demanding that government revoke plans for a law that would have allowed corrupt politicians to escape prison. Moldovan police cracked down hard last year when the country was rocked by anti-government rallies, many protesters carrying EU flags and chanting, “Down with the mafia!” Justice has never been served for the arrests, beatings, rapes and deaths that followed mass protests against vote rigging by Moldova’s Communist party in April 2009. In many ways, the state is the problem in eastern Europe – large, corrupt, inefficient and oppressive – which explains why both centre-right reformists and the new, youth-led left groups emerging in civil society are looking for solutions outside it. • Paula Erizanu is a Moldovan writer currently based in the UK
7||Polls show voters aren’t sick of politics – they’re eager to have their sayIn politics, feelings are powerful. We are used to the idea that politicians can harness our anger, or our fear, to get us to believe certain things and behave in certain ways. But more and more, it is not our anger or fear that politicians appeal to, but our exhaustion. Exhaustion has become a rhetorical weapon for both sides of the Brexit divide: from some Brexiteers embracing the slogan “Bored of Brexit, Pass The Deal”, to the remainers claiming that only revoking article 50 will avoid years of wrangling over our new relationship with the EU. Equally, it is a political cudgel against MPs (remain or leave) who refuse to take an “easy” way out of Brexit, demanding more time for scrutiny of the deal, or a more careful, deliberative process for the public to have their say. This works because Westminster seems to believe it. For political journalists, “Brenda from Bristol” remains a symbol of the public mood – “I can’t stand this – there’s too much politics going on at the moment,” she said when Theresa May called a snap general election in 2017. Knocking on Brenda’s door has become a strange new ritual for political journalists whenever new elections are rumoured. But with yet another general election six weeks away, exhaustion does not capture how we really feel about politics. In fact, the era of “too much politics” – which began after the 2015 general election – has seen a heightened level of interest in politics, reversing a sharp decline in the early 2010s. According to the Hansard Society, Brexit and the recent wave of elections have acted as “electric shock therapy” for political engagement. Recent months have also revealed the public’s willingness to consume politics: viewing figures for BBC Parliament have spiked, especially during key moments in the Brexit process. The public, on balance, actually welcomes the snap election. Across a swath of polling data, the most direct questions indicate that opposition to an election is running at just 20-30%, while support is in the 40s. There are nuances to this: in other polls, people narrowly back a referendum over an election, while remainers tend to be most favourable to having any electoral event (an election or referendum) take place. However, none of the data supports the idea that we are a nation of Brendas. Indeed, even in 2017 Brenda was an outlier: after Theresa May called the election, voters said it was the right thing to do by a 3:1 margin. Why, then, is Westminster so willing to believe that Brenda speaks for Britain? The first reason is that in recent years politicians and journalists have treated “apathy” as a key challenge to the political system in Britain. That began with the 2001 election and its very low turnout, and continued in 2015 with Russell Brand’s call for mass abstention. This way of thinking has dominated most political journalists’ careers, and has likely informed their view of how the average Briton feels about politics. The second is Westminster’s growing anxieties about its isolation from a “real Britain” outside London. Because national politics is so centred on the capital, political journalists fear that Westminster seems alien to the large majority who live beyond the M25. Giving prominence to the Brendas among us, then, is intended to show that political obsessives can understand how people feel outside the bubble. But in doing so it overcorrects, exaggerating public disengagement. Of course, rising public interest in politics doesn’t guarantee that turnout will increase or even hold up. Indeed, there are valid concerns about what a bleak midwinter election could do to turnout. Britain so rarely has general elections in winter that it is hard to judge. Research has shown that at council by-elections, which do take place throughout the year, turnout is between three to nine percentage points lower in December than in any other month. Yet with the heightened stakes of a general election, voters might feel it is worth the effort to brave the cold and the dark. The public, then, is still engaged with politics, and ready for whatever an election may bring. If anything keeps people away from the polls this winter, it’s more likely to be snow than “Brexhaustion”. Of course, we may eventually reach a point where political exhaustion does set in – but it may be that passions and fears over Brexit prevent that moment from ever arriving. At a time when the Brexit outcome has become so important to our political identities, can there ever really be “too much politics”? • Lawrence McKay is a PhD candidate in politics at the University of Manchester
12||'Please hurry': Grenfell report recounts victims' last momentsJessica Ramirez The desperate efforts to rescue 12-year-old Jessica Urbano Ramirez from her home in Grenfell Tower became emblematic of the bravery but ultimate failure of the London fire brigade on that night. Ramirez lived with her family on the 20th floor of the building. A firefighter, David Badillo, met her sister leaving the building. She told him Jessica was still in their flat and he promised he would go and get her. Badillo took the fire lift intending to rescue the young girl but it stopped at the 15th floor and when the door opened, the stairwell was filled with black smoke. He was not wearing breathing apparatus and was forced to descend. A firefighting team equipped with breathing apparatus then tried to reach her. At 1.48am, firefighters including Badillo made it to flat 176 on the 20th floor where Jessica was thought to be. They searched the flat but found no one and left, assuming she had already escaped. In fact, she had fled to the top floor to escape the flames. Call records showed she rang the emergency fire control room at 1.29am. The conversation with the control room officer (CRO), Sarah Russell, ended at 2.24am. Jessica repeatedly asked Russell: “Please can you hurry up?” A transcript of the phone call, running to about 70 pages, shows that Russell told Jessica: “They are hurrying up. Is there another room you can go into?” Jessica replied: “No, can you hurry up please? I’m begging you.” Russell replied: “They are, they’re right below you. But you need to keep yourself safe.” Jessica was with a group of 10 people on the 23rd floor as the flames rose up the building. They ended up in in a single bedroom in flat 201. Throughout the call Jessica repeatedly said she was having trouble breathing. She told Russell there was smoke in the bedroom. She said others had tried to leave but there was too much smoke. “CRO Russell could hear the sound of breathing for some time after that and ended the call only when the line went silent. That was the last known contact with Jessica Ramirez,” the inquiry report says. Her body was eventually discovered in a flat on the 23rd floor. Choucair family The Choucair family lived in two flats on the 22nd floor of Grenfell Tower. Sirria Choucair, 60, who was born in Lebanon, lived in flat 191. Her daughter Nadia, 33, son-in-law Bassem Choukair, 40, and their three children, Mierna, 13, Fatima, 11, and Zainab, three, lived in flat 193. All six were trapped and died in flat 193. The last phone call from the flat was at 3.24am. Another resident, Hashim Kedir, rang the emergency services. The report says they were “repeatedly advised that their only chance of survival was to cover their faces with wet cloths and make for the stairs. The option of a helicopter was not possible.” Kedir told the emergency services they had tried to leave but had been unable to do so because of the smoke. “With the fire approaching, it was difficult to breathe or see anything. He said they could not reach the door, let alone the staircase,” the report says. “Towards the end of the call, [a] control room officer tried to persuade [Kedir] to leave and was again told it was impossible. The caller then called out ‘I love you’ to others in the room, probably his children.” The call ended at at 3.37am. That was the last known contact with the Choucair family and those who had taken refuge in their flat. Eleven bodies were later found there and identified. Biruk Haftom Biruk Haftom, 12, lived with his mother, Bertki, 29, in flat 155 on the 18th floor. As the flames penetrated higher into the building, they are believed to have fled upstairs. The report records that at 1.32am a control room officer answered a call from a child believed to be Biruk. He said he was on the top floor with others and that “my actual door number is 155 but I’m at someone else’s house”. By then he was in flat 201 on the 23rd floor with other desperate residents. “We can’t come out,” he told CRO Christine Howson. “There’s a lot of smoke in the flat and in the building.” Biruk explained that the fire was not in the flat but added: “I can see it and the window’s already burning up.” He then handed the phone to an adult who first said that the “fire is coming through” and then that “the smoke’s coming through the window”. Howson advised them to try to stop the smoke coming into the flat. Biruk’s body was found beside his mother’s and identified by dental records. A statement released later by their family said: “Biruk was a loving, pure-hearted boy, wise beyond his years and known for his politeness, kind heart and his love for his family and friends. Berkti and Biruk left an everlasting legacy full of lovely memories, and their contagious laughter and charisma will live in our hearts forever. “We are deeply hurt and heartbroken our angels were taken from us so cruelly, so young. We will not rest until justice is served.”
0||England’s vision coach Dr Sherylle Calder: ‘Jones is a rugby mastermind’Potentially the most successful coach in the history of rugby union is hiding in plain sight. Maybe it is because she is a woman and gives relatively few interviews. More likely it is because people do not see her on the touchline or in the coaching box each week. Whichever it is, her visionary work will be staring everyone in the face in the World Cup final. Should England win on Saturday she will also be entitled to a unique place in rugby history. Only a handful of oval-ball legends – Richie McCaw, Steve Hansen and Kieran Read, among others – have shared in two World Cup triumphs. No one, male or female, has achieved three. Step forward England’s unobtrusive secret weapon, Dr Sherylle Calder, now 80 minutes away from an unprecedented global hat-trick. Sixteen years ago, when many were dismissing the concept of a “vision specialist” as a gimmick, Calder was a valued member of Clive Woodward’s backroom staff during England’s lengthy climb to 2003 success. In 2007, in the green and gold tracksuit of her native South Africa, she helped the Springboks conquer the world. And now here she is again, back in the red-rose fold at the behest of Eddie Jones, who knows a winner when he sees one. Have you ever wondered exactly why, say, Jonny May looks a more rounded, confident player; why Henry Slade is snaffling more interceptions, or noted the increasingly deft handling of Maro Itoje and England’s other big forwards? A significant part of the explanation can be traced to the regular eye exercises Calder has conducted with Jones’s squad for almost three years. In her role with the Springboks she turned the wing Bryan Habana into world rugby’s greatest try poacher to the point where Habana was going through reflex-sharpening work with her just seconds before the 2007 final against England. As a former South Africa hockey international, Calder is that rarest of mentors: someone who both understands the psyche of top athletes and can provide specific tools to help them improve on a daily basis. Her EyeGym programmes have helped improve the performance of everyone from the golfer Ernie Els to the Mercedes F1 driver Valtteri Bottas but, having grown up in Bloemfontein, rugby has always been on her radar. “As a kid I used to watch South Africa in the early hours of the morning with my parents when they played the All Blacks. If you’d told me then I’d ever be involved in a World Cup I wouldn’t have believed you,” Calder says. “If you’d told me I’d be involved in three World Cups I’d have said: ‘You’re dreaming.’ If you told me I’d win even two World Cups I’d have said you were completely crazy.” Famously, Calder is on record as saying that spending too long on mobile devices, not least on match days, hinders athletic performance because it does not encourage peripheral vision, spatial awareness or increase eye movement. Her focus, instead, is on helping players to train their instincts and, as a result, make more effective decisions under pressure. “Handling is only one aspect. Your eyes will show you, for example, which running line to take or where not to go. Timing of tackles, timing of runs, judgment of kicks and passes … people forget that for the past three years the players have been training that.” So when Itoje scoops a ball improbably off his toes or Tom Curry emerges almost overnight as a top-class lineout option, it is not quite the happy accident it might appear. Habana, for one, felt Calder’s exercises made a massive difference to his game. “He used to say to me: ‘Thanks for making my eyes as fast as my feet.’ He felt that even though he was really quick that didn’t mean his timing of runs and tackles would be correct. Timing comes from what you see. High balls? I believe all players should be able to take them. When commentators say: ‘That’s a great catch,’ I think: ‘That’s what he should be doing.’” Calder is adamant her techniques can be applied “to every walk of life” and all ages. “We do a lot of work with kids. Parents started coming back to us saying: ‘Our kids’ academic results have improved.’ If you can read information quickly, comprehend it immediately and then use it effectively … that’s exactly what happens on a sports field as well. It’s about picking up information early and then being able to execute it.” The proof of her worth will be even more glaring if England can replicate their 2003 triumph. Calder still has fond memories of that era, having been convinced for a long while that Martin Johnson’s squad would rule the world. “They were definites to win, I always knew that, but they also did the right things, both as a management and as a player group. That’s what wins World Cups. I remember talking to Jonny Wilkinson on the field afterwards. ‘Wow, fantastic,’ I said. ‘Well done.’ He replied: ‘Thank you for what you’ve done for my game.’ For him, at that moment, to have the presence of mind to say that shows what a quality bunch they were. They were an amazing combination of people together.” Winning with the Boks in 2007 – and subsequently at the Suntory club in Japan – also cemented her professional respect for Jones. “I see him as a rugby mastermind. That’s my experience of him. He’s great at what he does.” She also knows the Springbok coach, Rassie Erasmus, but any split national loyalties will disappear out of the window should the Webb Ellis Cup once again find its way into England’s – and her own – hands. “It would be marvellous. Words probably couldn’t describe it but I’m not a person who counts their chickens before they’re hatched. I’m just blessed. I created the science, I love what I do and I know it makes a difference.” To say this England squad have their eyes on the prize is a serious understatement.
25||Light Falls review – Simon Stephens' guilt-ridden love letter to the northThis has the air of an event. It is the fifth play Simon Stephens has written for this space and it is Sarah Frankcom’s final production as the Royal Exchange’s artistic director. Both artists are happily on their best form: Stephens’s ability to celebrate human resilience in the face of adversity is matched by the characteristic clarity of Frankcom’s production. As so often, Stephens reveals his penchant for geographical restlessness. In Harper Regan (2008), he sent his eponymous heroine on an odyssey through the north of England. Light Falls begins with a monologue by middle-aged Christine (Rebecca Manley), who records the exact moment of her death in a Stockport supermarket in February 2017. We then see where the scattered members of her family were on the day in question. Her husband, Bernard, was looking for sex and company with two women in a Doncaster hotel. One daughter, Jess, was encountering a new lover in Blackpool while the other daughter, Ashe, was expelling her ex-partner from her home in Ulverston. Meanwhile Christine’s student son, Steven, was having a day out in Durham with his airline steward boyfriend. Clearly Stephens is doing several things at once in this play. In the words of a haunting Jarvis Cocker song that, in a cappella form threads its way through the action, he is writing a “hymn of the north.” This is a London-based writer’s guilt-ridden love-letter to his native soil suggesting that, even in a time of economic hardship, there is much kindness and charity to be found in the northern heartlands. But Stephens’s play is also an unfashionable testament to the power of family life. It reminds me of a peripatetic version of Thornton Wilder’s Our Town in showing that the ties of blood transcend individual woes and that, in the end, we are all mortal. I’d like to have heard something more specific about the north’s social problems and one or two characters, such as Ashe’s formerly drug-addicted partner, feel lightweight. But Stephens interweaves his separate stories without becoming soapily episodic and Frankcom’s production moves one by its hint that members of the family are all intuitively aware of each other even when separated by physical distance. Naomi Dawson’s design also cleverly subverts the circularity of the Royal Exchange by creating an end-stage out of a flight of steps that might have come from the movie A Matter of Life and Death; which is what this play is finally about. The performances are good without being self-consciously starry. Manley perfectly captures Christine’s tender concern for her dispersed brood and Lloyd Hutchinson precisely conveys the sadness behind her husband’s wanly erotic adventures. David Moorst as the anxiety-ridden Steven, Katie West as the once-suicidal Ashe and Witney White as the life-hungry Jess deliver accomplished performances. “Don’t forget your northern blood,” runs a line in the Jarvis Cocker song that underscores the action. Stephens heeds that advice while writing a play that does something relatively rare in modern theatre: it takes an optimistic view of humanity and suggests that the nuclear family is not going to explode any time soon. • At the Royal Exchange, Manchester, until 16 November.
7||The only reason we’re having an election is because of MPs’ cynicismBattle stations. The coming election is just the prelude. This month should have seen Britain’s formal withdrawal from the EU, on Boris Johnson’s deal, prior to serious trade talks with Brussels next year. The election should have taken place after, not before, formal withdrawal, to elect a parliament to conduct those negotiations – and with the outcome of those talks then validated by a referendum. That would have been dignified and sensible. In theory, that could still happen. The House of Lords could this week delay the election bill – which tears up a constitutional measure, the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, without even bothering to repeal it. If the Lords were not so bloated and gutless, it would delay the bill. In truth, the upper house is not fit for the job. Up to now, the anti-Johnson majority in the Commons had a golden opportunity to take command of Brexit. Jeremy Corbyn could have used his leverage to force through a soft Brexit. His ineptitude in dealing with the minority parties lost him that chance. He shot himself in the foot. Meanwhile the SNP and Liberal Democrats sensed they would win more votes with Corbyn still at Labour’s helm than if they waited until next spring – even at the risk of putting Johnson and his hard Brexit back in Downing Street. They put party before country. Never has there been a more cynical Commons than this one. Johnson has not even had to promise – for what that is worth – to “take no deal off the table”. He has merely returned Brexit to square one and concentrated on what he craves: a safe majority. The polls may be unreliable but, with a divided, demoralised opposition, the odds must be on Johnson winning. He will have his unamendable deal passed by January. That is not the end. Next year comes the real moment of truth: proper negotiations on a long-term trade deal with Brussels. Remember, Britain will still be in a transitional customs union, and it will start to be hit by a tornado of economic bad news. The National Institute of Economic and Social Research says Johnson’s hard Brexit will cost a staggering £70bn or 4% of GDP, the most savage self-inflicted wound since the hundred years war. Johnson has accepted the EU customs union for Northern Ireland. Perhaps he will eventually see that what’s good for Northern Ireland is good for the whole nation. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist
4||Facebook agrees to pay fine over Cambridge Analytica scandalFacebook has agreed to pay a £500,000 fine, the highest possible, to the Information Commissioner’s Office over the Cambridge Analytica scandal, ending more than a year of litigation between the regulator and social network. The ICO announced its intention to fine Facebook in July 2018. Unusually, the office went public with its intention before giving Facebook a chance to respond, and ultimately issued the official penalty notice three months later, in October. Facebook appealed against the fine, and in June 2019 the tribunal issued an interim decision “holding that procedural fairness and allegations of bias on the part of the ICO should be considered as part of the appeal, and that the ICO should be required to disclose materials relating to its decision-making process”. Under the terms of the settlement, Facebook has made no admission of liability. The company has also been allowed to retain the documents disclosed by the ICO, in part because they may help it in its own investigation into the issues around Cambridge Analytica. That investigation had been paused at the ICO’s request. Since Cambridge Analytica’s data protection violations occurred in 2015, before the implementation of the EU’s general data protection regulation in 2018, the maximum possible fine the ICO could levy was £500,000. If the offences had occurred after May 2018, the potential fine could have been much higher – up to 4% of Facebook’s annual turnover. James Dipple-Johnstone, the ICO’s deputy commissioner, said: “The ICO welcomes the agreement reached with Facebook for the withdrawal of their appeal against our monetary penalty notice and agreement to pay the fine. The ICO’s main concern was that UK citizen data was exposed to a serious risk of harm. “Protection of personal information and personal privacy is of fundamental importance, not only for the rights of individuals, but also as we now know, for the preservation of a strong democracy. We are pleased to hear that Facebook has taken, and will continue to take, significant steps to comply with the fundamental principles of data protection. With this strong commitment to protecting people’s personal information and privacy, we expect that Facebook will be able to move forward and learn from the events of this case.” Harry Kinmonth, a lawyer representing Facebook, said: “We are pleased to have reached a settlement with the ICO. As we have said before, we wish we had done more to investigate claims about Cambridge Analytica in 2015. We made major changes to our platform back then, significantly restricting the information which app developers could access. Protecting people’s information and privacy is a top priority for Facebook, and we are continuing to build new controls to help people protect and manage their information. “The ICO has stated that it has not discovered evidence that the data of Facebook users in the EU was transferred to Cambridge Analytica by Dr [Aleksandr] Kogan. However, we look forward to continuing to cooperate with the ICO’s wider and ongoing investigation into the use of data analytics for political purposes.”
23||UK's first black female history professor to research Bristol's slavery linksThe University of Bristol has appointed a black history professor to explore the city’s involvement in the transatlantic slave trade. Olivette Otele will take up her role as professor of the history of slavery in January 2020. She will be based at the university’s history department and the Centre for Black Humanities, where she will work with staff, students and communities. Otele became the UK’s first female black history professor after being awarded a professorship and a chair in history by Bath Spa University in 2018. Her research, conducted over almost two decades, examines the legacies of colonial pasts as well as a reluctance to address such issues. As part of her new role, Otele will undertake a two-year research project on the involvement of the University of Bristol and the wider city in the transatlantic slave trade. The city’s official participation in the transatlantic slave trade started in 1698, though experts say Bristolian ships illegally traded in slaves well before then. Bristol merchants financed more than 2,000 slaving voyages between 1698 and 1807, with ships carrying more than 500,000 people from Africa to slave labour in the Americas. Speaking about her new appointment, Otele said: “I hope to bring together Bristolians from all communities, and scholars, artists and educators who are willing to contribute to a stronger and fairer society. “I want students to see me as a facilitator of a dialogue that needs to take place and that is about the role of the University of Bristol in the transatlantic slave trade. I want to produce a rigorous and an extensive piece of research that will be relevant to the university, to the city and that will be a landmark in the way Britain examines, acknowledges and teaches the history of enslavement.” Otele holds a PhD in history from Sorbonne University in France and researches transnational history , in particular the link between history, collective memory and geopolitics in relation to British and French colonial pasts. Prof Judith Squires, the provost and deputy vice-chancellor of the university, said: “We are proud to be appointing someone of Prof Otele’s experience and standing to lead on this important issue for us. “As an institution founded in 1909, we are not a direct beneficiary of the slave trade, but we fully acknowledge that we financially benefited indirectly via philanthropic support from families who had made money from businesses involved in the transatlantic slave trade. “This new role provides us with a unique and important opportunity to interrogate our history, working with staff, students and local communities to explore the university’s historical links to slavery and to debate how we should best respond to our past in order to shape our future as an inclusive university community.”
34||How Fairphone's social mission created gender balance... without really tryingEva Gouwens had heard that the tech industry was male-dominated, but it wasn’t until she attended the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona for the first time that the extent of the gender imbalance really hit her. “I hadn’t really noticed it as an issue until I saw the line for the toilets,” says Gouwens, chief executive of the ethical phone manufacturer Fairphone, which creates phones with no “conflict minerals” (ie from areas of the world with violence and human rights abuses), manufactured in a factory where workers are fairly paid. “It’s the first event I’ve been to where the queue was longer for the men than for the women.” Her initial lack of awareness has its reasons. For one, Gouwens is relatively new to the sector. A veteran of the food industry, the 44-year-old business development expert only switched to tech two years ago – first as managing director of Amsterdam-based Fairphone and then, since last October, as its chief executive. Second, she stepped in at the helm of what was already a fairly egalitarian ship. The gender split of Fairphone’s 75-person workforce is almost straight down the middle (52% male, 48% female). On the firm’s executive management team, meanwhile, six of the eight members are women (including the commercial and operations directors). Such atypical parity partly owes to the Dutch way of doing things, according to Gouwens. Rules on shared parental leave, childcare and other types of care provision are “quite progressive”, she says. That said, the Netherlands only ranks 19th on the Women in Work Index (six places behind the UK). The report also points out that females make up a mere 14% of ICT specialists in the Netherlands. So, is Fairphone doing something especially different? Not really, Gouwens admits sheepishly. Sure, the firm is gender-blind with respect to pay and promotion, but it doesn’t go the extra mile to accommodate childcare needs, say, or to extend maternity pay. More influential in creating a balanced workforce, she conjectures, is the phone manufacturer’s mission and backstory. The firm’s origins date back to the hackers’ movement and a long-running activist campaign around human rights abuses in the supply chains of large mobile phone manufacturers. In 2013, the organisation switched focus, she explains: “At the beginning, our focus was on disclosing the influence of mobile phones on society and on your life, but we realised that, while we were raising awareness, we weren’t offering solutions, which is why we decided to make our own ethical phone.” It is this singular purpose (“dare to care” is how Gouwens phrases it) that resonates so powerfully with Fairphone’s female workforce, she argues: “I think adding this angle to tech might well attract more women to Fairphone than to other tech companies.” The testimonials of Fairphone’s website give credence to the claim. Finance manager Mariana da Costa credits her job to her sense that “positive changes are possible”, while supply chain expert (and ex-human rights worker) Laura Gerritsen is cited as saying that the firm’s ethical ambitions make her “happy to work crazy hours”. Evidence of the positive effects that an overt social mission can have on gender balance extends beyond just Fairphone. According to research by the British Council, women make up 66% of the workforce in UK social enterprises and 65% in US ones, while making only 46% of the working population as a whole in both nations. When it comes to women and tech, Gouwens’ chief challenge focuses less on her workforce and more on consumers. At present, about two-thirds (65%) of Fairphone’s retail customers are men – a disparity that bucks the trend for the firm’s target market of “conscious consumers”, which, according to Gouwens, is “quite balanced”. It’s not entirely clear what the sticking point is here. One reason could be price. Women on average spend 10% less on consumer electronics than men and so might feasibly be more averse to paying an ethical “premium” for a Fairphone device (its newest device, the Fairphone 3, costs £420, which is £200 more than a similar, non-ethical, smartphone). Gouwens is quick on the defence here. The overall cost of ownership of a Fairphone, she maintains, is “cheaper than many comparable phones”. How so? It’s all to do with the “modular” nature of the phone’s design, apparently. Unlike standard mobile phones, Fairphones are easy to dismantle and update as new technology comes in. Fairphone also offers three years of software support and repairs – for free. Welcome as it is to fix your phone rather than fling it, having a device that you can dissemble also leaves it feeling a little chunky and over-complicated. A Statista.com study suggests that while men and women place similar importance on a phone’s design, male consumers tend to be more interested in the phone’s technical characteristics. Language plays a vital role in resolving this hurdle, Gouwens insists. Tech engineers operate in a world of jargon, which, to the untrained ear, can make mobile technology feel inaccessible and off-putting, she says. Gouwens speaks from experience. In her early days at Fairphone, conversations with the firm’s product engineers felt to her like “listening to a different language”. She had the same sensation when she first disassembled her phone, admitting a sense of “nervousness” the initial time she tried. Those fears didn’t last long. Indeed, today she lauds the ability to tinker with Fairphone’s internal mechanics as one of the phone’s prize assets, arguing that it provides people with a stellar introduction into the world of technology. “We want people to open up the world behind our phones. That’s why all our sets come with screwdrivers. I think it’s especially important for young people, and girls in particular, who might think that technology is not really for them.” This minnow Dutch brand isn’t about to dent the sales of the smartphone giants – Fairphone’s first two models sold 175,000 units though the company hopes to ship 42,000 units of its latest phone by the end of the year – but Gouwens hopes they might see in Fairphone a model of doing tech differently, including with respect to gender. She takes encouragement here from Anita Roddick, founder of the Body Shop, who, when challenged about being too small to have an impact, liked to retort: “Try going to bed with a mosquito in the room.” In the smartphone industry, Gouwens quips, “Fairphone is that mosquito.”
29||Deeplight by Frances Hardinge review – a rich and strange island adventureThe Costa-winning children’s writer Frances Hardinge is known for the fascinating strangeness of her settings: The Lie Tree’s stifling Victorian society conceals a plant nourished by deceit, and A Face Like Glass takes place in an underworld where wines can extract memories and perfumes enforce trust. Whether they are wholly invented or rippled glass visions of familiar history, however, her worlds are navigated by characters who stay human to the marrow – flawed, cowardly, doubtful, determined, unprincipled and brave. This remains true of her latest novel, Deeplight. In the island chain of the Myriad, gods once rose from the weird waters of the Undersea, ravaging shipping and coastlines, devouring sailors. Razor-mouthed or glass-tentacled, they were a source of fear and reverence – until one day they turned on one another, and tore each other apart. Now “godware”, the powerful detritus of their corpses, is the basis of a thriving economy for those courageous and foolhardy enough to seek it in the depths. On the island of Lady’s Crave, 14-year-old Hark scrapes a precarious living scavenging godware with Jelt, his unscrupulous best friend. When one of Jelt’s schemes misfires, Hark is left indentured to a scientist, and a new opportunity opens up for him: he might acquire an education, giving him agency, worth and independence. Jelt, though, is unwilling to let him leave, and during another reckless get-rich attempt he almost drowns, prompting Hark to deploy a dangerous artefact to save him, ignorant of what it might unleash. Hardinge’s inimitable prose has the ringing clarity of cut crystal, whether in one-liners (“Hope reared its pitiless head”) or unnerving descriptions (“Talking to her was like accepting an invitation to someone’s house, only to find that the walls are made of teeth and all the doors lead to the moon”). Her layered, intricately textured world, peopled by smugglers, fanatics and priests, is filled with careful and absorbing detail; many of the Myriad’s submariners are “sea-kissed”, or deaf, for instance, necessitating a common sign language. The deftly drawn central relationship between Hark and the manipulative Jelt, impossible to refuse or leave behind, is as compelling as the widening, frightening ripple of revealed secrets about the nature of the gods and the reason they died. Like the subject of Ariel’s Song in The Tempest, Deeplight is headily “rich and strange” throughout, preoccupied with transmuted forms, the fearsome fascination of the sea, loyalty warring with self-interest, and the human yen to placate and venerate the monstrous. • Deeplight is published by Macmillan (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&amp;p on all online orders over £15.
7||Why are Democratic party elites so desperate for a 2020 centrist candidate?When something has been done one way for many years, and when doing things that way has made a certain group of people fat and happy, it is natural that that group of people will want to continue doing things that way. It is also natural that the much larger group of people who have been hungry and neglected for all those years as a result of the way things have been done will want to do something different. Eventually, the larger group, full of righteous anger, will win. But the fat and happy class will cling tightly to what they have for as long as their swollen fingers can hold on. This is essentially what’s happening within the Democratic party right now. The weak grip of the old guard is being broken, one finger at a time. The election of Donald Trump and the sudden viability of Bernie Sanders as a candidate in 2016 were both enormous flashing billboards reading “THINGS ARE DIFFERENT NOW”. To fail to read these signs amounts to active, willful ignorance. Many people were surprised by the way things went in the last presidential election, but there is no excuse for being surprised by the same things again. Four decades of growing inequality and a class war by the rich that has been too successful for its own good have pushed Americans toward political positions that would have been considered fringe back in the carefree 1990s. The extremities have waded into the mainstream. You don’t need to be a genius to understand this basic fact – you just have to watch a little Fox News, look at a few income inequality charts, and have a chat with a couple of uninsured people who are trying to pay the medical bills for their school shooting gunshot wounds via GoFundMe. People’s patience with the status quo has worn away. Americans themselves understand this instinctively. Political polls confirm it. Donald Trump revels in it. The only ones who don’t seem to grasp it are the wizened establishment figures of the Democratic party, who are making calculations based on a picture of the world that no longer exists. Joe Biden, the establishment, centrist Democratic candidate of choice, is weak. He’s old; he is showing clear signs of age-related mental decline; he’s an uninspiring speaker, he’s out of touch, and he can’t raise money from small donors. The candidates who can raise that money are Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren – unsurprisingly, the two people whose policies are most suited to our current reality. The last thing that the centrist Democratic party establishment, a power structure still rooted in the triangulating ideas of the Clinton era, wants are policies suited to our current reality, because the radicalism of such policies would necessarily place the old guard in the trash, at last. And so the old guard must desperately pine for a savior. And we all must endure months of pathetic casting about for a nonexistent Centrist Jesus to rescue the Clinton wing of the party from its inevitable fate. It is like watching a fish fruitlessly trying to flop out of a bucket before it suffocates. Oprah reportedly “begged Disney chief executive Bob Iger to jump into the race”. Hillary Clinton backers hint darkly that she might still jump in. For those who crave an even more decrepit candidate, Mike Bloomberg and John Kerry’s names have been floated. And then there are the also-ran candidates at the back of the current pack, who are eyed like meat by wealthy donors musing over whether they can be effective Trojan horses for Goldman Sachs. Is Mayor Pete clean-cut enough? Can Klobuchar knife Warren while maintaining a sweet midwestern grin? The desire for some alternative to leftism is so powerful that even Michael Bennet, a man with no demonstrated constituency and the charisma of a cardboard box, is still lurching along, serving no purpose except to pipe up in off-hour cable interviews about how impractical Medicare for All is. To some extent, this is a normal campaign season ritual: chasing the dragon of the imaginary perfect candidate. But this time, it is not hard to see that the motivation is more materialist than usual. The core concern of those who consider themselves “moderate Democrats” is not really that Trump might win – it is that Warren or Sanders might win. This is a political faction that finds itself caught between its aesthetic distaste for Trump’s social policies and its distaste for wealth taxes, public healthcare, and other policies contrary to their ambition to afford that lake house. For decades, the Democratic party has been effectively controlled by the sort of people who work at an investment bank but also support gay marriage (at least when the polls say that it’s safe to do so). These people are almost as responsible as Republicans for our current political predicament. Even if they didn’t start the war on terror or the war on the poor, they utterly failed to stop them. The time has come to pay up for those mistakes. The price will be a large chunk of the fortunes that have been built over the past two generations. Those who view socialism as an awful fate are searching in every phone booth for a capitalist Superman to renew the tastefulness of the White House while also calming down the unnerving calls for the sort of equality that can cost a lot of money. Sadly for them, superheroes don’t exist. There aren’t that many rich people out there. The only way they can maintain their political power is to buy it. They are now experiencing the shocking realization that, in an era of righteous popular rage, big money ain’t what it used to be. Let’s respect their trauma during this difficult transition. We can tolerate their antics for a little while. And then they can suck it up, make peace with the leftists, and pay more taxes, like responsible humans. Or they can take the mask off and vote for Trump. Either way, their disappointing time atop the Democratic party is over. Hamilton Nolan is a writer based in New York City
2||Bargain buys and Ridsdale’s advice are fuelling Preston’s promotion pushIn an era of wild spending, soft transfer embargoes and Championship clubs selling their stadiums before leasing them back to balance the books, a reminder that Preston North End’s record outlay remains the £1.5m plus add-ons they paid Manchester United to sign David Healy in 2001. Barnsley’s biggest buy dates back even further, to 1997 when they signed Gjorgji Hristov, but in the past two years 14 second-tier teams have smashed their transfer record, with five doing so this summer. Splashing the cash is not Preston’s style – their starting XI against Blackburn last weekend cost £1.6m – and they deserve credit for doing things differently. It is a model that continues to serve them well; after 14 matches Preston are second in the table and hopeful of gatecrashing the top six after a couple of near misses. Preston finished seventh, two points off the play-offs in Alex Neil’s first season in charge, and there is a belief that West Bromwich Albion’s spring pursuit of their Scottish manager disrupted their rhythm at a key stage last season. Preston’s recruitment, led by Neil and the former Leeds chairman Peter Ridsdale, an adviser to the owner Trevor Hemmings, has been impressive. Neil and Ridsdale regularly attend matches together, and Ridsdale speaks daily to Hemmings, who lives on the Isle of Man. Preston are not parsimonious – they paid Barnsley and Coventry seven-figure fees for Brad Potts and Tom Bayliss respectively – but prudent. The onus is on finding value for money. Callum Robinson and Jordan Hugill, £170,000 and £25,000 signings from Aston Villa and Port Vale respectively, were both sold for £8m in the past two years, and the team that came from two goals down to beat Blackburn on Saturday included the Republic of Ireland midfielder Alan Browne, a £15,000 signing from Cork City five years ago, and Daniel Johnson, a £50,000 recruit from Aston Villa, as well as three free transfers: Darnell Fisher, Patrick Bauer and Paul Gallagher, who is in his fourth spell at the club. Preston recruit similarly to Bristol City and Brentford in scouring the lower leagues for young and hungry talent, as well as finding homes for those with limited opportunities at Premier League clubs, such as Ben Pearson, who has excelled since joining from Manchester United. They are proactive and have already identified next summer’s transfer targets. Preston boast the best home record in the Championship – only Manchester City have won at Deepdale this season – and they are also the division’s leading scorers. Tom Barkhuizen, for whom Preston paid Morecambe £150,000 compensation two years ago, has flourished, while Sean Maguire, Jayden Stockley and David Nugent, who returned to the club this summer, provide a variety of attacking options. Only Aleksandar Mitrovic and Ollie Watkins have scored more league goals this season than Johnson, who has relished playing as a No 10 and shares penalty duties with Gallagher, an evergreen performer. Last season Preston were bottom after 11 matches and playing catch-up but, before travelling to Charlton on Sunday, they are two points off leaders West Brom, whose £8m outlay on Kenneth Zohore this summer highlights a financial disparity; Preston’s wage bill is among the lowest in the division at around £13m – a third of West Brom’s last season. An eight-point blanket covers the top half and, in the absence of runaway leaders, plenty of teams will fancy their chances of promotion, or at least being in the mix in May. No team have suffered heartbreak in the play-offs more than Preston – failing nine times in 10 attempts – but that does not stop them from wanting to get there. Preston are one of five Championship clubs to have never played in the Premier League, but it feels as if they are getting closer. “I think the difference is as a group of players we understand what it’s going to take to achieve something this year, ie to get into the top six or even get into the top two,” says Johnson. “I think our squad is a lot stronger now. You obviously want to put on a performance but you can’t always win the pretty way and we are well adapted to changing our style to dig out results. We have got everything in abundance as a team. We have been together for many years and we have been hanging around that top half for quite a while. “In our first season [back in the Championship following promotion in 2015], we finished in the top half, when a lot of people wrote us off to get relegated, but we stood strong because we know what we’re capable of and we know the quality we’ve got. Last season we went on an unbelievable unbeaten run and had a little blip at the end and the season before that we finished seventh. We’ve been in and around it [the top six] for a very long time and now is our opportunity to go and grab it with both hands and cement our place in there. We’ve been there quite a few times now and we’ve had a little feeling of that ‘it’s really nice being in the top six’, but we want to stay there at the end of the season and to be fighting for something. This league is wide open.” Talking points • With Jim Bentley stepping down after more than eight years in charge at Morecambe, the Wycombe manager, Gareth Ainsworth, has taken his mantle as the longest-serving manager in England’s top four divisions at seven years and 35 days. After Ainsworth, the longest-serving managers are Eddie Howe, Sean Dyche, Mauricio Pochettino and Accrington Stanley’s John Coleman. Kevin Ellison and Barry Roche have been placed in interim charge at Morecambe. Ainsworth, as well as guiding Wycombe to second in League One, has been busy making an early play for the Christmas No 1 with his band, the Cold Blooded Hearts, recording a cover of Dion’s The Wanderer, which will be released as a B-side and is on the matchday playlist at Adams Park. • Stoke’s woes have perhaps taken some of the heat off Jonathan Woodgate at Middlesbrough but pressure is building on the former defender, who has won two of his opening 15 games as a manager. Boro are the lowest scorers in the division, with 11 goals from 14 matches, and last Saturday they mustered one shot on target in a 0-0 draw against a Fulham side reduced to 10 men after 17 minutes. They travel to Derby on Saturday hoping to end a seven-match winless run. • Sol Campbell worked miracles at Macclesfield and, if Southend are to get out of trouble in League One, he will need to do so again. They have lost 12 of their 15 matches and are nine points from safety. The size of the task is not lost on Campbell, who takes his side to Sunderland on Saturday before a trip to Portsmouth. “I’ve got to overachieve, the players have got to overachieve,” he said. “We cannot waste a second.”
2||Which football stadiums are lopsided, three-sided or just downright wonky?Last week we included a few examples of stadiums with open ends or buildings where terracing should be. You sent us so many great examples we decided to showcase them … “You just have to look at the 6,000-capacity Estadio Olímpico in Uruguay’s first division,” cheers Guillermo Sienra. “Home to Rampla Juniors Fútbol Club, it has an unbeatable view!” “Red Star FC in Paris has only three stands, with only one in use. Behind one of the goals, there is an apartment building,” writes Joseph Chapman. “I live just over the border from Gibraltar, and Victoria Stadium, home to all the league teams and Gibraltar national team, has no stands at either end,” points out Tom Thronicker. “One looks towards a bunch of flats and is loomed over by The Rock, while the other looks out on the Gibraltar International Airport runway. Planes landing and taking off are quite the distraction for unaware visiting teams, which leads to another question: is there any level of stadium located closer to an international airport?” “Mansfield Town’s Field Mill (currently called the One Call Stadium) is a three-sider in the sense that one of its touchline stands has been boarded up for 15 years after being condemned,” mails Mike Pollitt. “It’s covered in advertising hoardings and was last used in May 2004. It’s an odd sight as the rest of the ground is otherwise quite decent. Thinking about the ground’s history has made me think of another question: when it was redeveloped in 2000, the ends that traditionally housed the hardcore support and away fans were reversed. Has this happened elsewhere?” “I‘m surprised there’s been no mention of the Estadio Municipal de Braga,” writes a surprised Michael Holmes. “It has no stands at either end, with one being the rock wall of a former quarry. However, the stadium has won the Pritzker prize for architecture. “While on the subject of Portugal, in August I went to see Belenenses v Boavista at the Estadio Nacional in Lisbon, which has stands round one side and both ends ... but a big gap on the east side.” “You seem to have missed the end apparently graced by the longest bar at a ground in the world, Avaya Stadium, home of the San Jose Earthquakes,” offers Colin Richardson, who took this picture … “Sheffield United’s Bramall Lane used to be open at one end (until 1973),” offers Guy Cudmore. “It started as a cricket ground. Bramall Lane is one of only two English grounds which have hosted an FA Cup final, an England football international and a Test match (the other is The Oval). Bolton’s Burnden Park had a Normid superstore covering half of one end until the club moved to their new stadium in Horwich 1997. “No discussion of three-sided grounds can be complete without mentioning the County Ground in Northampton,” pipes up Stewart Robinson. “Until 1994 it was shared between Northampton Town and Northamptonshire County Cricket Club, with the two pitches alongside one another. Football spectators in the Abingdon Avenue stand had an unimpeded view across to the cricket pavilion, nearly 200 metres away.” And Andre Leme Lopes writes: “Laranjeiras Stadium of Fluminense Football Club was built to host the 1919 South American Championship. It originally had a full set of stands but, in 1961, renovation work in an adjacent street caused the demolition of one stand (and the capacity dropped from 25,000 to mere 8,000). It hasn’t been used for First Division matches since 2003. Nowadays, the only Brazilian First Division stadium with an open end is Independência Arena.” What an open end it is, though. The worst points total for miles travelled in a league fixture “Has any side got a worse points/distance ratio than Carlisle to Plymouth?” asks Richard van der Wilshuizen. “One point in the last 10,000 miles seems about as poor a ratio as you can get in the UK.” We’re pretty sure Carlisle own that unwanted record for league games in the UK Richard but, globally, we can’t imagine any team has travelled further than Luch-Energiya Vladivostok for so little reward. Here’s Russel Yong: “From 2006 to 2008, Luch-Energiya Vladivostok were members of the Russian Premier League for the first and only time in their history. Being from the eastern extremity of Russia meant some epic long-distance travelling; their closest rivals were Siberian team Tom Tomsk, ‘only’ 3,465 miles from Vladivostok, while Spartak Nalchik’s home ground was an eye-watering 6,048 miles away. “Luch were famously decent at home and abysmal travellers, which made for some pretty poor away records, such as 0-0-3 (W-D-L) from three games v Zenit St Petersburg (5,984 miles), or 0 points for 35,904 miles travelled; 0-1-1 from two games v FC Rostov (5,901 miles), one point for 23,604 miles travelled; and 0-0-3 v CSKA Moscow (5,697 miles), 0 points for 34,182 miles travelled. “In 16 away games against the six Moscow teams (CSKA, Dynamo, FC Moscow, Lokomotiv, Spartak and Torpedo), Luch gained only three points, all from draws. If you calculate it based on the driving distance to/from each team’s home ground and Luch’s Dynamo Stadium (and given some fans didn’t think driving distance was an impediment, I don’t see why not), Luch travelled a staggering 182,052 miles to and from Moscow, 60,684 miles per point, the equivalent of going almost two and a half times around the Equator to get a draw, and going over three-quarters the distance to the Moon to snag a win.” Knowledge archive “I seem to remember that Darren Anderton left a game, not due to injury, but because he lost a contact lens” wrote Chris Stanley in 2009. “Have any other players suffered a similar fate?” There are a few such examples. Perhaps the most famous was during the World Cup qualifier between Wales and Scotland in 1985, the match which tragically ended with the death of Jock Stein. As Wales mounted a series of attacks Jim Leighton, the Scotland goalkeeper, flapped at crosses, dropped shots and looked generally confused. His teammates were convinced he was concussed but in fact he wore contact lenses – a fact he had kept to himself for seven years – and one of them had been lost in the Ninian Park mud. He confessed the truth to Stein at half-time and was promptly replaced by Alan Rough. • For more from the font of nerdvana, click this thing here. Can you help? “Vitória FC are 14th in the Portuguese league, with eight points from eight games,” notes David Valente. However, they have only scored once. What are the most points procured in a spell from the fewest goals scored?” “Port Vale signed Will Atkinson on loan in 2007,” begins Rob Fielding. “This season he has returned on a short-term contract. The gap between his spells is 11 years and 11 months – a club record. Is this the longest gap between two spells at one club?” Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.
12||Grenfell Tower inquiry: the chair's findings so far‘Stay put’ and preparedness People died because the “stay put” policy was not lifted earlier, but the concept had “become an article of faith within the London fire brigade so powerful that to depart from it was ... unthinkable”. Sir Martin Moore-Bick, the Grenfell inquiry’s chair, remarked that the way the London fire brigade (LFB) commissioner, Dany Cotton, had rhetorically asked in her evidence: “It’s all very well saying ‘get everybody out’, but then how do you get them all out?” demonstrated that the LFB had never itself sought to answer that question. Faith in the idea that fires will not spread was part of the LFB’s “gravely inadequate preparation and planning”. “The performance of the LFB fell below the standards set by its own policies or national guidance,” he concluded. Experienced commanders had no training in the dangers of combustible cladding, there was no contingency plan for the evacuation of Grenfell, the risk database for the building “contained almost no information of any use” and the information it did contain dated from 2009, before the catastrophic refurbishment. On the ground at the fire The first incident commanders at Grenfell Tower were not properly prepared and failed to seize control of the situation or change strategy. “None of them seem to have been able to conceive of the possibility of a general failure of compartmentation or a need for mass evacuation,” Moore-Bick said. The shortcomings were “systemic” and “both personnel and systems were overwhelmed by the scale of the disaster”, but Michael Dowden, watch manager at North Kensington fire station, was among the junior staff criticised directly. He was first in charge on the scene and remained so until 1.50am and should have realised the fire had penetrated the building, and that compartmentation, which underpins the “stay put” advice had been breached. Dowden should have decided to evacuate the building, flooding the building with firefighters, knocking on doors to get people out, Moore-Bick said. “Fewer people would have died if the order to evacuate had been given by 02.00,” said Moore-Bick. There were “serious deficiencies in command and control”, he said. Senior officers arriving later failed to give sufficient practical support or inform themselves quickly enough of conditions and operations within the building and “the best part of an hour was lost”. 999 calls Operators in the LFB control room in Stratford, east London, sometimes refused to believe desperate victims about smoke and fire as they were “overwhelmed” by an unprecedented volume of emergency calls from Grenfell residents. Operators “too often treated what callers were telling them with scepticism, in some cases contradicting the caller.” Often they “insisted the fire was on floor four, contrary to what they were being told by the caller. They appear to have been unable to grasp the fact that it had spread rapidly up the building.” Many wrongly told residents help was on its way and the advice was based purely on their personal expectations and assumptions. “That was very dangerous, because the whole concept of fire survival guidance rests on a well-founded expectation that the caller will ultimately be rescued.” There was poor communication between the control room and the fire and no TV was turned on to show images of the fire. Many saved lives. “A notable example is the courage and calm of Heidi Fox in coaxing Marcio Gomes and his family … down from floor 21.” While there was “widespread failure” to comply with regulations, Moore-Bick did not conclude errors cost lives. Construction industry Moore-Bick said the rapid spread of the fire across Grenfell Tower remained “profoundly shocking” and in one of his most significant findings, ruled the 2014-16 refurbishment of the tower breached building regulations. This will pile pressure on the companies involved in the works ahead of the inquiry’s second phase. The main reason for the spread of the fire were the cladding panels, manufactured by Arconic, “with polyethylene cores, which had high calorific value, melted and acted as a source of fuel for the growing fire”. The design of the refurbishment, overseen by Studio E Architects, as well as the insulation materials made by Celotex and Kingspan, also contributed, he said. Recommendations A law requiring owners and managers of high-rise residential buildings to provide their local fire and rescue service with information about external wall materials and building plans. Fire brigade inspections of high-rise buildings to be improved and crews trained to carry out more thorough risk evaluations. Regular inspections of lifts intended to be used by firefighters are needed. Communications between fire brigade control rooms, where emergency calls are received, and incident commanders must improve and there must be a dedicated communication link. Government should develop national guidelines for carrying out partial or total evacuations of high-rise residential buildings. Fire doors in all multi-occupancy, residential properties should be urgently inspected. Improvements should be made to the data links provided by helicopters of the National Police Air Service. Pictures transmitted on the night of Grenfell could not be viewed by the LFB because the encryption was incompatible with its receiving equipment.
12||Grenfell Tower inquiry: the main playersSir Martin Moore-Bick The 72-year-old chairman of the public inquiry retired as vice-president of the court of appeal in December 2016. Educated at a grammar school in Tunbridge Wells and at Christ’s College, Cambridge, most of his practice as a barrister and time as a judge of the commercial court involved technical cases related to shipping and transport. That knowledge of contract law is expected to come to the fore in the second phase of the inquiry, which will investigate the overlapping responsibilities around the Grenfell Tower renovation. While his legal expertise was never in doubt, he faced a greater challenge in winning the confidence of bereaved families. Dany Cotton The commissioner of the London fire brigade (LFB) was only six months into the top job when she was woken at her Kent home and called to Grenfell. She angered survivors when she told the inquiry she wouldn’t have done anything different on the night of 14 June 2017 and that planning for a cladding fire like Grenfell would have been like planning for a space shuttle landing on the Shard. She is due to retire next April after 32 years’ service. Michael Dowden A watch manager at North Kensington fire station who happened to be on shift when the fire was called in. He was the first incident commander on the scene. He had been in the LFB for 14 years but given his relatively junior rank he should not have been in charge of a 20-pump fire, which is the level it was at when he was stood down at 1.50am. His apparent failure to gather information about what was happening as the blaze developed and order an earlier evacuation was criticised by Moore-Bick. Matt Wrack The secretary general of the Fire Brigades Union represents the rank and file. He has said firefighters are braced for a “stitch-up” and that his members will rally around Michael Dowden, the watch manager who became the first commander on the scene. Wrack began his service as a firefighter in 1983 in Silvertown, east London, and then served in Kingsland station in Hackney. He was a lead organiser during the FBU strike over pay in 2002 and has seen both of the stations he worked at closed as a result of cuts. Behailu Kebede The minicab driver in whose Grenfell Tower flat the fire broke out, was turned into a scapegoat by some media before the inquiry. Originally from Ethiopia, he had lived in the tower for 25 years. He was woken by a fire alarm and discovered smoke billowing from behind a Hotpoint fridge freezer in his kitchen. He phoned 999 and banged on his neighbours’ doors on the fourth floor to warn them. “Whatever the origin of the initial fire, the evidence indicates that it was accidental,” the report states. “Mr Kebede, in particular, bears no blame for what occurred in his flat, much less for the catastrophic events that followed.” Natasha Elcock The chair of Grenfell United, which represents most of the bereaved and survivors was trapped in the building and only escaped with her partner and six-year-old daughter when the flames were roaring through her 11th-floor kitchen window. The mother of three has led the survivors group since the summer of 2018.
21||'It's a human right': the campaign for learning disabled people's love livesPam Bebbington met her husband, Mike, through a personal ad in her local paper. She’s been married for 21 years, and appreciates having a soulmate. “Relationships are important because they give you a life companion,” she says. “You can share things and cuddle up.” But Bebbington, a consultant at self-advocacy charity My Life My Choice (MLMC), says many of her learning disabled peers struggle with relationships. “Finding the right person is hard. Parents and carers can get in the way and curfews [such as in supported housing], money and travelling all make it difficult.” She says care staff must “allow people to have a relationship and encourage them to do so”. This is the aim behind the nationwide Supported Loving campaign MLMC is involved in, which offers practical advice on enabling people’s intimate and emotional lives. Research has shown that young people with a learning disability lack accessible sex education resources and only 3% of people with a learning disability live as a couple, compared with 70% of the general population. Supported Loving originally began two years ago as a social media campaign. Since then it has grown according to demand, offering good practice resources developed by support organisations and people with learning disabilities, some of whom feature in videos used in training. Claire Bates, Supported Loving founder, says the campaign’s ultimate aim is mandatory training in sex and relationships. She believes supporting someone’s emotional and intimate needs should be par for the course in social care. “This shouldn’t be [in] the ‘too difficult’ pile,” she says. “People with learning disabilities are often so far away from having a sexual partner, they need support to meet someone first. We need to help people have meaningful friendships and from that will come a sexual relationship, if they want one.” Supported Loving’s latest development is an online toolkit contributed to by a range of organisations, including family planning associations, care providers, specialist dating agencies, and staff working in relationship and sex education. There is practical advice on topics including contraception, sexual health, masturbation, online dating, LGBT relationships and sex workers. There are also plans to publish a charter promoting the relationship rights of learning disabled people, which MLMC, Supported Loving and social inclusion charity National Development Team for Inclusion are developing. One of the toolkit’s guides outlines how relationship support should be a vital part of a care professional’s role. The tips and examples, contributed by training organisation Paradigm, suggest staff receive face-to-face guidance on how to have conversations about and support people in exploring sexuality, love and relationships. There must be clear policies around relationships rather than incorporating this issue into safeguarding training. Staff must also not assume people lack the capacity to form loving bonds or have sexual relationships. Such online guidance is available alongside quarterly meetings that take place across the country. These aim to discuss issues and share best practice on everything from sexual abuse to online dating, with participants including people with learning disabilities or autism, family members and professionals working in social care and health. Supported Loving is also complemented by research at the Tizard Centre University of Kent (Bates is the project’s honorary research associate). Michelle McCarthy, the professor leading the work, says of social attitudes: “Historically we didn’t expect people with learning disabilities to have rich, emotional lives – as if they were somehow ‘other’, and if they were physically cared for that was enough. That attitude hasn’t entirely gone.” McCarthy’s project, which included four advisers with learning disabilities, explored the views of 40 learning disabled adults and 40 family carers and support staff. The research has yet to be published but emerging findings illustrate the very specific barriers created by social care services. These include a lack of one-to-one support, restrictions about overnight visitors and safeguarding concerns. McCarthy explains: “The way services are structured and run is that they themselves can be barriers to people. So if you’ve only got only a few staff you can’t offer people one-to-one support to go and meet someone to have a date.” The comments from learning disabled people gathered by McCarthy and her researchers underline just how vital it is to achieve progress in this area. When asked about why relationships are important, one learning disabled participant replied: “Sometimes I get lonely and I think if I’ve got somebody who I could trust it would make me happier.” As Bates says: “It is people’s human right to have a relationship. It shouldn’t be a ‘nice to have’, but something that adds value to people’s lives. We are social animals; if you don’t see someone in that way, then you don’t see them as human.”
2||Spanish club strike signposts huge attitude change by female footballersThe announcement that footballers in Spain’s top division will begin an indefinite strike on the weekend of 16-17 November is hugely significant in the battle for a global professional women’s game. There have been strikes and player protests before but these have often revolved around the conditions and pay of the national team. In 2017 Republic of Ireland players threatened action after going public on having to change in airport toilets and sharing tracksuits. The same year Denmark players forfeited a World Cup qualifier against the Netherlands while in a pay dispute with their football association – a decision which ultimately cost them a place in France after they finished second in the group and went into tough play-offs for the final European place. Members of the Nigeria national team held a sit-in at their hotel after this year’s World Cup exit to demand outstanding expenses be paid – they did the same after winning the Afcon in 2004 and again in Cameroon in 2016. The US Women’s National Team are suing US Soccer in their fight for equal pay. There are many other examples. But there are not examples, at least in the modern era, of players across an entire league threatening action. It marks a huge change in attitude. Previously female footballers were sort of willing to shut up, to be grateful for the right to play. The demands to be aptly compensated for representing your country felt a just cause, but this did not translate to the game at club level. What makes this threatened action significantis that it is about the day-to-day, the right to a decent standard of living and an unwillingness to go on accepting that professional standards be demanded of players without the contracts and pay to reflect it. Tellingly, it is not a handful of players threatening to strike; 189 representatives voted 93% in favour of taking action across the league’s 16 clubs. The top contracted players are standing shoulder to shoulder with the poorest. Six players from the champions, Atlético Madrid, attended the meeting which voted so overwhelmingly for action. Four turned out from Barcelona, including the Spanish national team’s fourth-highest goalscorer, Jenni Hermoso. They are symbolically backing the push for a collective bargaining agreement across the league, which would include as a minimum €16,000 (£13,800) annually for a 40-hour working week, €12,000 for a part-time 30-hour week, maternity leave and paid time off. These wages are low. They may be higher than Spain’s minimum wage of approximately €12,600 a year for 2019, but they are significantly lower than the average wage of Spanish workers which is €23,000, according to the country’s office of national statistics. There may be a fear that clubs will struggle to pay, in particular the four teams without the backing of a men’s club – Madrid CFF, Sporting de Huelva, Logroño and UDG Tenerife – but serious questions have to be asked about the commitment of those clubs and the league if that is the case. Clubs receive €350,000 a season from the federation (a requirement as a government organisation, not out of the goodness of their hearts) and they are being offered €500,000 by the league for their TV rights. If the welfare and support of players is not the number one priority and is not what sustainability is being built around, then what is the focus? For the 12 teams backed by wealthy men’s clubs the excuses are even more moot. That clubs are digging in and resistant to the most minimal of employment rights for their players ispretty galling. Strike action is always a last resort. That it has taken 18 meetings across 13 months is testament to this, but now the players have had enough. Whether we reach 16 November at an impasse remains to be seen. The threat of industrial action can be very powerful; whereas clubs are happy to let talks rumble on in the background, strike action hits them where it hurts: in their pockets. TV rights and sponsorship deals depend on games happening. It is also extremely important that a club maintains a good image for invested parties – funnily enough, striking female footballers is not a good look. Women’s football is entering a new era of professionalism and mass audiences and players are feeling empowered by it. Spain’s players are leading the way, but we can be sure they will not be the last to collectively organise on this scale. Talking points • Chelsea’s defender Maria Thorisdóttir has undergone surgery on the leg she fractured in training. Having scored a blistering late winner as Chelsea came from behind to beat Arsenal, the Norwegian suffered the break in the run-up to Sunday’s defeat of West Ham and will miss the rest of 2019. • Reign FC head coach Vlatko Andonovski has been unveiled as the manager of the US women’s national team. The 43-year-old, who has worked with Megan Rapinoe at Reign FC, takes over from two-times World Cup-winning manager Jill Ellis. It is expected that he will retain Dawn Scott as the high performance coach and the goalkeeper coach Graeme Abel. • Phil Neville has recalled Toni Duggan for England’s upcoming friendlies against Germany and the Czech Republic. Striker Ellen White and Georgia Stanway are training with the side as they continue to make their return to full fitness. Most notably Chelsea’s Fran Kirby has been omitted. The PSG defender Alana Cook, a non-playing squad member for the previous camp, has not been called up and is expected to be included in Vlatko Andonovski’s first USWNT squad as the two nations vie for the allegiance of the dual citizen. • Four of Germany’s World Cup squad are missing from the group that will travel to England for the showpiece Wembley fixture. The goalkeeper Almuth Schult, Turbine Potsdam’s Svenja Huth, captain Alex Popp and debut World Cup goalscorer Giulia Gwinn have not recovered from injury. Arsenal’s Leonie Maier and Manchester City’s Pauline Bremer are in the squad. • North Carolina Courage cruised past Chicago Red Star to confirm a second consecutive NWSL championship. Goals from the Brazilian Debinha and the USWNT World Cup winners Jess McDonald, Crystal Dunn and Sam Mewis sealed the emphatic victory in from of a sold-out 10,277 crowd. Heather O’Reilly made her last appearance for North Carolina having announced she would retire at the end of the season and was substituted in the 89th minute to huge applause.
33||A morning at the Victoria and Albert Museum with Jonathan JonesBook now Great art connects us to the past and offers a fresh perspective on the world around us. During this intimate and unmissable masterclass, Guardian art critic Jonathan Jones will guide a small group of people around the Victoria and Albert Museum, one of Jonathan’s favourite London museums. Over the course of the morning, you’ll join Jonathan on a magical mystery tour of surprises contained in this world-renowned museum of art and design. You will learn how to interpret and appreciate the works housed in the V&amp;A and have plenty of opportunities to chat with Jonathan. Suitable for beginners or those who want to deepen their understanding of art, this is a phenomenal opportunity to explore one of the world’s finest collections with one of the UK’s most passionate art critics. Tutor profile Jonathan Jones writes on art for the Guardian and was on the jury for the 2009 Turner prize. He also writes the series Framing the debate, which takes a closer look at photographs and videos that divide opinion. Jonathan is the author of two books on art, The Lost Battles: Leonardo, Michelangelo and the Artistic Duel That Defined the Renaissance and The Loves of the Artists. Read his Guardian articles here. More from this tutor… An evening at the National Gallery with Jonathan Jones An evening at Tate Modern with Jonathan Jones Details Book now Date: Saturday 14 March 2020 Times: Morning course, 10.30am-12.30pm Location: Victoria and Albert Museum, Cromwell Rd, London SW7 2RL Price: £99 plus £5.11 booking fee Event capacity: 18 You may also be interested in... How to find your purpose How to write a comic book: A masterclass with Marvel’s Kieron Gillen Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses Terms and conditions can be found here. While the venue for this event is accessible, there will be some walking involved. If you are considering coming along and have limited mobility or other access requirements, please do email us to discuss your needs. Information regarding access at the venue can be found here. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.
29||Chastity belts, torture tools and ... a bit of skin? Three authors on their spooky inspirations‘Bits of people, drifting in time’ Sarah Moss The Wellcome Collection’s permanent exhibition, Medicine Man, has plenty of disturbing objects. Partly because I arrive in and leave London through Euston station, just over the road, I often stop by if I’m early for a train (this kind of casual visiting is one of the joys of free museums), and so I find myself gazing out of the window at Watford Junction and still thinking about a box of false eyes or an amulet. It’s good to be a little haunted. I’d never noticed the tattoos. There are two of them displayed, part of a collection of more than 300 stored elsewhere. There’s a man’s face and a woman’s head and shoulders, inked on to what at first looks like vellum, with deckle edges like an old book. It is, of course, vellum of a kind: medieval books were written on split, stretched animal skins, and this is human leather. Like many of the objects collected by Henry Wellcome, the provenance of the tattoos is vague. They were bought in Paris in the 1930s from another collector, and probably removed from bodies in the late 19th century, probably in France. Human remains without provenance are worrying to curators. They can’t be returned to anyone, reincorporated into the culture or community from which they came. It’s hard to display them with dignity and compassion when there’s no story to tell, no history to offer context or connection. The tattoos appealed to me as a subject because research for my last novel, Ghost Wall, left me thinking uneasily about skin and leather, marking and preservation, and less nobly because like many of my fortysomething friends, I’d started to wonder if maybe I might like to get a tattoo myself. But when I first saw the two faces, I didn’t think abstractly about the fragile barrier between inside and outside the human body, the container of the self, but about individual bodies. There were the skins of two people, and also the work of two tattooists, and the faces of the subjects of the tattoos; the woman with her complex hairdo, above, and the man in the matelot top. And the work of the people who removed the skin from the bodies and pinned it out and preserved it, and the hands of the dealer who bought it for Henry Wellcome, though probably not the attention of the man himself who, like many Victorian collectors, was more interested in owning than seeing or handling objects of interest. I kept asking the museum’s curator: who were they? Why are they here? Where are all the others? What are you going to do with them? He answered as best he could, and referred me to some excellent research, but the individual stories are long lost. The tattoos are bits of people drifting in time, present among us at least a century after the rest of the bodies, and the bodies of the subjects and tattooists, turned to dust. They are cut off from their stories, and so the writer’s work is to make new ones for them. ‘The more you contemplate the chastity belt the less sense it makes’ Imogen Hermes Gowar Years ago as a gallery warder at the British Museum I would often choose an object as I patrolled, and extemporise a brief story from it. I used it as a way to gather seeds for new voices, themes, characters and places. Some took, some didn’t; one, happily and surprisingly, grew into a novel. In the Wellcome Collection, the 16th century chastity belt was an easy choice for me. What drew me was the suggestion that this was not an “authentic” Crusades-era relic, and in fact such a thing is unlikely to ever have really existed in practical use. The more you contemplate it, the less anatomical sense it makes. Its design speaks to a lack of interest in – or ignorance of – the way women’s bodies really work; it eroticises control and restraint in a way that can exist only in fantasy. On the face of it, fakes and curios of this sort exist to bring pieces of the past into the modern world: in fact it’s the opposite, and their purpose is to sneak modernity into the past. They make history what we would wish it to be, retrofitting our own preoccupations and tastes to make them venerable and, therefore, unassailable. This chastity belt does not reflect medieval ideas about women’s sexuality. Only what Victorians wished them to be. ‘The scold’s bridle was a tool of shame and disgrace’ Oyinkan Braithwaite The scold’s bridle is an instrument of punishment, torture and public humiliation, peculiarly created for the purpose of correcting the shrew-like behaviour of women; in other words, the perfect gift for a writer who is fascinated with women who misbehave. The bridle is a muzzle-like object placed on a woman’s head with holes for her eyes, nose, a slit for her mouth. It is near impossible to eat with the scold’s bridle on. It is a tool of shame and disgrace used to punish a woman for gossiping or being troublesome, and it would often come with a chain attached, to lead the woman in public, much as you would a beast of burden; all in the guise of curing her, teaching her. This one came from a prison in Brussels, and dates from the 14th century. I could not hold it, much less put it on; so I circled it, strained my neck to see all its angles behind its glass case. It was how I had imagined it, except it did not have the spike going into the mouth that some models have. I decided to keep that detail, as it was important to my tale. I don’t know how or why the scold’s bridle stopped being used, but in the realm of fiction, my characters could and would overcome it. • Homeless Bodies and Other Stories from the Wellcome Collection is available from 30 October on Audible.
9||Labour should stay neutral in Brexit 'culture war', warns Corbyn allyLabour must avoid taking sides in the Brexit “culture war” if Jeremy Corbyn is to win the upcoming general election, one of his key advisers has warned. Andrew Murray is the chief of staff of the Unite union and worked closely with Corbyn in the Stop the War coalition. He has been seconded to the Labour leader’s office part-time and is closely involved in conversations about a series of issues, including Brexit. In a rare interview, with a general election looming after Corbyn declared on Tuesday that Labour’s conditions for an early vote had been met, he warned that the campaign to stop Brexit had increasingly become a form of identity politics, with remainers and leavers pitted against each other. “It’s had aspects of it from the beginning, and now the culture war aspect of it is very, very powerful,” he said. “If Labour becomes one side of the culture war – the side that is, stereotyping, the liberal side – that would be very damaging to the present project, and would have no basis in social justice.” Labour’s Brexit policy has shifted over the past 12 months. The party now advocates negotiating a softer deal within three months of coming to power – and then putting it to the public in a referendum. Many Labour members and MPs, not least the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, and shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, would like their party to go further, and embrace an all-out remain position. But Murray insisted that that would be a mistake. “Most of the Labour party membership is remain, with varying degrees of intensity. About two-thirds of the 2017 Labour vote was remain. But that vote, as I keep reminding people, isn’t big enough. The Labour vote as it stands needs to be larger – you have got to think about people who aren’t voting Labour that voted leave.” He added: “To go from speculation to fact, we actually lost six seats at the last general election. Only six, but had we held them, Theresa May’s deal with the DUP may not have stacked up. And they were all the leave-voting areas.” Those six lost seats included Mansfield, Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland, and Stoke-on-Trent South, while in many remain seats, such as Norwich South and Bristol West, Labour MPs saw their majorities increase significantly in 2017. Murray voted leave himself, he admits – and was disappointed that progressive voices were absent from the Brexit campaign. “I personally voted leave, but the leave campaign unfortunately gives no warrant for a Lexit position, because it was dominated by this alliance of xenophobic nationalists and Thatcherite utopians. And they set the tone.” Together with his old friend the senior Corbyn aide Seumas Milne, the recently sidelined chief of staff, Karie Murphy, and the Unite general secretary, Len McCluskey, Murray is part of a group branded the “four Ms”, regarded by remain campaigners as a block on Labour’s shift towards supporting a referendum. Asked if he thinks of himself as part of a shadowy cabal manipulating the Labour leader, Murray said: “I think – and I hope I’m not maligning him – that was an invention of Alastair Campbell, because he’s still got the old magic.” He continued: “I don’t take that seriously. For one thing, none of the four Ms are elected politicians, and in the end it’s elected politicians who are going to decide these things. And Jeremy has advisers who don’t begin with M who have as much influence as those that do.” But he is unrepentant about the influence of his union. “Unite has influence, and it should have influence,” he said. “It’s Labour’s biggest affiliate, and it has been rock solid in supporting JC from the very beginning.” Murray has just published a book, The Fall and Rise of the British Left, placing Corbyn’s leadership of Labour in a historic context. His influence alarms many centrist Labour MPs. Murray – a longtime member of the Communist party, who has in the past expressed solidarity with North Korea and praised aspects of Stalin’s legacy – only joined Labour in 2016. Some also balk at the juxtaposition between his comfortable background (his grandfather was the governor of Madras, and he attended a minor public school) and the class struggle he espouses. But he insisted: “I’ve always voted Labour in a general election – never voted anything else. My joining Labour was largely motivated by the wishes of my union: that as its chief of staff I be in a place to help advance its political strategy, which requires being a member of the Labour party. And Jeremy Corbyn’s election removed any remaining doubts.” He has some reservations, however, about some of the radical policies bubbling up from Labour’s grassroots. Plans passed at the party’s conference last month included “integrating” public schools into the state system (under the slogan #AbolishEton), and implementing eye-wateringly ambitious carbon reduction targets. Murray sees little need for policy to “rush far ahead” of the 2017 manifesto. Even once passed by the party’s conference, policy motions are only included in the manifesto if agreed at a “clause V” meeting, which includes members of the national executive committee, the shadow cabinet and representatives of the trade unions. “I think the 2017 manifesto – which I had no direct part in writing – was extremely well-judged and successful. And I’d imagine when the clause V meeting convenes, that politicians and others there would want to look at good reasons why you would be doing something very different,” he said. At Labour’s annual conference – which Murray missed, because he was recovering from heart surgery – the chat in the bars and cafes was about who could replace Corbyn if, as even some of his staunchest supporters fear, Labour loses another general election. But he is convinced that such an outcome would not mean a return to the politics of New Labour. “Corbynism’s critics haven’t really articulated an attractive alternative. And I think politics as usual – or politics as was usual from the mid-1980s until 2008, or maybe a bit later, because politics takes a while to catch up with economics – is not coming back anywhere in the world that I can see. And the main question is whether it’s going to be a nasty authoritarian right wing that benefits, or radical progressive movements like the Labour party has become.”
8||Why it’s all kicking off everywhere: inside the 1 November Guardian WeeklyA wave of dissent has swept across the globe in recent weeks, from Latin America to the Middle East and a multitude of points in between. Is there a common thread fuelling the protests – and if so, what? Michael Safi and the Guardian’s international correspondents put five key flashpoints into context, while foreign affairs commentator Simon Tisdall argues that the planet’s huge population of networked young people is the common denominator. Could the death of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, Islamic State’s erstwhile leader, draw a line under the terrorist group that has sowed chaos around the world for the last five years? While Donald Trump revelled in the role played by US special forces in Baghdadi’s demise, Middle East correspondent Martin Chulov sounds a note of caution, while also charting the background to the end of the hunt for one of the world’s most wanted men. David Attenborough is the most beloved figure in Britain, and, at 93, a global superstar. His films long shied away from discussing humanity’s impact on the planet. Now they are sounding the alarm – but is it all too late, wonders nature writer Patrick Barkham. Facebook’s chief executive Mark Zuckerberg was grilled by the US Congress last week over the social network’s opaque policies on misinformation in advertising. On the opinion pages Carole Cadwalladr praises New York congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who made sure Zuckerberg’s visit was an uncomfortable one. Elsewhere there’s a terrific long read on why meat-eaters get so annoyed by veganism, Marina Hyde on the shambles of the NBA-China standoff, and peek into the lost letters of the late pop star Prince. Thanks for reading. Subscribe here.
6||Standard Life Aberdeen to offer nine months of full pay for new parentsInvestment group Standard Life Aberdeen is introducing one of the UK’s most generous parental leave policies, offering nine months of full pay for all new parents. The new policy, which comes into force on 1 January 2020, will apply to all new mothers and fathers working for the company, including those who adopt or have a child through a surrogate. Campaigners said the move was the sort of initiative that could help to close the country’s yawning gender pay gap, in which women are paid £260,000 less than men over their careers. Fathers and same-sex parents working for Standard Life Aberdeen will be able to take a full nine months of paid leave, without having to ask their partner to cut their time short or share their entitlement. Sam Smethers, chief executive of the women’s campaign group the Fawcett Society, said it was a “potentially transformational” policy for Standard Life Aberdeen employees. “It is at the generous end of the spectrum and extremely rare.” Rival insurer Aviva raised the bar in 2017 when it introduced equal parental leave for both parents and six months’ full pay, while management consultancy Accenture offers 36 weeks of fully paid maternity leave. Between 180 and 200 Standard Life Aberdeen staff are expected to benefit from the policy next year. The company would not confirm how much the new programme would cost, but it is likely to be about £5m a year. As of next year, new parents at Standard Life Aberdeen will be granted 52 weeks leave, 40 of which will be fully paid. Additional paid leave will be offered to parents whose child is born premature. Staff will also have the option of breaking their leave up into three separate periods over two years, and will be able to take advantage of the policy from their first day in the job. Sophie Walker, chief executive of the Young Women’s Trust charity, said: “It’s especially encouraging to see that this is a day one right, as far too many parents are currently missing out on paid parental leave because they haven’t worked at their employer for long enough. “If we’re ever going to close the gender pay gap and enable all parents to thrive in the workplace then it’s time for all employers to get serious about adopting parental leave and family-friendly policies which are fit for purpose.” Smethers said: “The reality is that even a relatively modest additional period of paid leave for dads at work would make a real difference. Families need to be able to make unconstrained choices about who does the caring. For most parents that simply isn’t possible at the moment.” Standard Life Aberdeen’s human resources chief, Rose Thomson, said: “Our new policy represents a potentially life-changing opportunity for new parents, whatever their family circumstances. We know that our people need to balance their work lives with their personal lives and this new policy is one example of the actions we’re taking to help them maintain that.” Other generous parental policies across the UK include: Aviva: 26 weeks of fully paid leave for both parents UK civil service: 26 weeks of fully paid maternity leave Etsy: 26 weeks of fully paid leave for both parents Accenture: 36 weeks of fully paid maternity leave Transport for London: 26 weeks of fully paid maternity leave Source: Money Guru survey, January 2019
33||An evening at the National Gallery with Jonathan JonesBook now Great art connects us to the past and offers a fresh perspective on the world around us. During this intimate masterclass, Guardian art critic Jonathan Jones will guide a small group of people around the National Gallery and discuss some of his favourite works of art – from the mysterious Arnolfini Portrait by Jan Van Eyck to Cezanne’s post-Impressionist landscapes and the elegant pointillism of Seurat’s Bathers at Asnières. Over the course of the evening, you’ll discover how to interpret great paintings and sculptures, and appreciate how they’ve been created. Plus, you’ll learn how to enjoy art more fully, and have plenty of opportunities to chat with Jonathan and ask any questions you might have about art. Suitable for beginners or those who want to deepen their understanding of art, this is a phenomenal opportunity to explore one of the world’s finest collections of paintings with one of the UK’s most passionate art critics. More about your teacher… Jonathan Jones writes on art for the Guardian and was on the jury for the 2009 Turner prize. He also writes the series Framing the debate, which takes a closer look at photographs and videos that divide opinion. Jonathan is the author of two books on art, The Lost Battles: Leonardo, Michelangelo and the Artistic Duel That Defined the Renaissance and The Loves of the Artists. Read his Guardian articles here. More from this tutor… A morning at the Victoria and Albert Museum with Jonathan Jones An evening at Tate Modern with Jonathan Jones Details Book now Date: Friday 21 February 2020 Times: Evening class, 6.30pm-8.30pm Location: National Gallery, Trafalgar Square, WC2N 5DN Price: £99 plus £5.11 booking fee Event capacity: 18 You may also be interested in... How to write your family history with Nick Barlay Free your creativity and get started on your book Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. While the venue for this event is accessible, there will be some walking involved. If you are considering coming along and have limited mobility or other access requirements, please do email us to discuss your needs. Information regarding access at the venue can be found here. Please contact us at masterclasses@theguardian.com if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.
2||Football transfer rumours: the 'new Andrea Pirlo' to Manchester United?Hola España, guess what? I’m coming back. So says Zlatan Ibrahimovic, in a decidedly cryptic social media post, which means he’s planning a move back to La Liga, or a family holiday to the Costa del Sol. It’s hard to see the 38-year-old re-signing for Barcelona but perhaps he would be tempted by a January move to second-placed Granada? Watch this space. Newcastle could probably do with a bit of the Swede’s razzle dazzle up top, but they may have to settle for the France U21 international Ibrahima Sissoko, who is no relation of the former Toon favourite Moussa. The word on the wire is that Newcastle have met Strasbourg’s £13m valuation and will begin talks over personal terms in the coming days, as Steve Bruce looks to reinforce a midfield currently being held together by the Longstaff brothers. Manchester United have sent their finest to watch the Italian teenager Sandro Tonali, who has been dubbed the “new Pirlo” on account of him playing for Andrea’s first club, Brescia, and the fact that he nearly always stands on the near post at corners. Probably. The 19-year-old midfielder could cost United around £40m. Everton have forgotten that their £22.5m summer signing Jean-Philippe Gbamin is due to return from injury in January because they are already making plans to spend some more dosh on Spartak Moscow’s Alex Kral. The midfielder – who played in the Czech Republic’s victory over England this month – likes a tackle and would cost considerably more than the €12m Spartak paid a couple of months ago. Rumours that Granit Xhaka has already set sail on the good ship, Do One, are premature – Arsenal’s players have reportedly told the Swiss they want him to continue as the club’s captain. However, the Gunners are thinking about about new blood, namely Xhaka’s compatriot Denis Zakaria, who is currently tearing up trees for Xhaka’s former club and the Bundesliga leaders, Borussia Mönchengladbach. The thing is, Liverpool are also keen and PSG had a €30m bid rejected in the summer.
33||An evening at Tate Modern with Jonathan JonesBook now Tate Modern is Britain’s national gallery of modern and contemporary art. During this intimate masterclass, Guardian art critic Jonathan Jones will guide a small group of people around this world-renowned gallery, exploring works by artists such as Mark Rothko, Marcel Duchamp, Joseph Beuys and Pablo Picasso. Over the course of the evening, you’ll learn how to appreciate and interpret great works of international art. Plus, you’ll discover how to enjoy art more fully, and have plenty of opportunities to chat with Jonathan and ask any questions you might have about art. Suitable for beginners or those who want to deepen their understanding of art, this is a phenomenal opportunity to explore one of the world’s finest collections with one of the UK’s most passionate art critics. Tutor profile Jonathan Jones writes on art for the Guardian and was on the jury for the 2009 Turner prize. He also writes the series Framing the debate, which takes a closer look at photographs and videos that divide opinion. Jonathan is the author of two books on art, The Lost Battles: Leonardo, Michelangelo and the Artistic Duel That Defined the Renaissance and The Loves of the Artists. Read his Guardian articles here. More from this tutor… An evening at the National Gallery with Jonathan Jones A morning at the Victoria and Albert Museum with Jonathan Jones Please note: Tate Modern is a large gallery with different levels and staircases, so this event involves a lot of walking. Lifts are available between the different floors of the venue, but please email us in advance if you have any mobility requirements. Details Book now Date: Friday 17 January 2020 Times: Evening class, 6.30pm-8.30pm Location: Tate Modern, Bankside, London SE1 9TG Price: £99 plus £5.11 booking fee Event capacity: 18 You may also be interested in... How to raise teenagers in the 21st century How to pitch your book to publishers Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. While the venue for this event is accessible, there will be some walking involved. If you are considering coming along and have limited mobility or other access requirements, please do email us to discuss your needs. Information regarding access at the venue can be found here. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.
0||Talking Horses: Appleby banks on Old Persian for shot at Breeders’ Cup TurfThe Breeders’ Cup meeting at Santa Anita lost three of its European team members on Monday – including Magical, the Champion Stakes winner – but there is still likely to be a total of 33 runners from the continent’s stables in California on Friday and Saturday, on a par with recent years and including representatives in all but one of the seven turf events. All but three of those are from Britain and Ireland, with two generations of the O’Brien racing dynasty – Aidan and his son Joseph – accounting for the bulk of Irish runners. The British team, though, are spread between a much wider range of stables, with no fewer than 13 trainers sending horses to Los Angeles, most of whom have a single runner. Charlie Appleby’s challenge at the meeting was reduced from two to one in desperate circumstances on Saturday when Line Of Duty, who took the Juvenile Turf last year and was due to contest the Mile on Saturday, suffered a fatal injury on the gallops. Appleby will now rely on Old Persian, a leading contender for the Turf, as he attempts to improve an already remarkable strike rate at the Breeders’ Cup, where he has had three winners and a second from six starters. “It was six years ago that we were here with Outstrip, bless him,” Appleby said on Tuesday, looking back to his first Breeders’ Cup runner, and winner, in the 2013 Juvenile Turf. “It’s great to be here but it’s not a holiday, as much as it’s lovely to have the [mountainous] backdrop we see out there. We try to bring the right horses out, with the experience we’ve had through the years. “I was always looking [for a juvenile to run] but didn’t want to put one on the wagon just to have a spin around. The great thing about a horse like him [Old Persian] is that shipping is second nature to him. He went to Dubai, he went to Canada [to win the Grade One Northern Dancer Stakes at Woodbine last time] and he’s shipped well here. “This race was our target from Dubai [in March, where he won the Group One Sheema Classic]. I was confident he’d take all the beating [in Canada], he was the class horse in the race and he showed it. We wanted to keep the dream alive and we were always going to come straight here. “Sometimes going into these big races, you look at the challenge and don’t know with some horses how they’re going to adapt. But for me he ticks a good few boxes, going into it: quick ground won’t worry him, the tight turns, the travelling, the day-to-day work going into the race, he’s unfazed by it all.”Old Persian, currently top-priced at 7-2, is one of three horses that dominate the betting for the Turf, with Aidan O’Brien’s Anthony Van Dyck, the Derby winner at Epsom in June, the narrow favourite at 9-4 and US-trained Bricks And Mortar available at 9-2. Magical’s last-minute departure from the weekend’s cast list means that European horses head the market for four races: the Turf, the Juvenile Turf (Arizona), the Mile (Circus Maximus), and the Juveniles Fillies Turf, where Albigna and Daahyeh, trained by Jessica Harrington and Roger Varian respectively, are locked together at 7-2. O’Brien’s two entries for the Turf Sprint – So Perfect and Fairyland - were withdrawn on Monday leaving it as the only turf event without a runner from Europe, despite it seemingly being an obvious one for European turf sprinters to target. And the dirt events too are, once again, effectively being left to the Americans. Jane Chapple-Hyam is the only European trainer with a runner on the dirt, as Ambassadorial, who finished third in a race in Seoul in early September, has made it into the Dirt Mile with Jamie Spencer booked to ride. Wednesday’s best bets Nursery handicaps can be a capricious betting at the best of times and heavy going does not make life any easier for punters, but if there is an obvious bet to be had it is probably the hat-trick-seeking Ainsdale (1.50) in the valuable nursery at Nottingham. Karl Burke’s runner was available at 11-8 overnight and that looks a very fair price for a horse with winning form on heavy ground and just four rivals to beat. He is up another 8lb for his second success of the month but has shown improved form on both occasions and finished two-and-a-half lengths clear on his most recent start despite being eased in the closing stages. Goshen (2.50) is also going for a third win on the bounce and is worth a close look. His juvenile form was uninspiring but stepping up in trip has brought significant improvement on both starts this term and his nine length success at Sandown last time out was backed up by a strong time. Nathans Pride (3.10), who returns at Fakenham, showed hints of a return to form last time and has also dropped 10lb in the weights since the start of the year, while Pointed And Sharp (3.00) has a big chance on the card at Taunton. Casa Comigo (7.10), who had plenty to spare when winning his third handicap in a row at Kempton earlier this month, looks best at Kempton.
10||Unravelling Rudolph Giuliani’s labyrinthine ties to UkraineIn 2003, Rudolph Giuliani made his first trip to Ukraine to lay a symbolic capsule at the site of a new memorial to the victims of 9/11, the tragedy from which he had emerged as “America’s mayor.” The ceremony, organised by a local businessman and politician named Vadim Rabinovich, was a modest affair attended by Kiev’s deputy mayor and diplomats from the US and Israel, but it marked the beginning of what would become a lucrative string of deals for Giuliani in the former Soviet state. “I have met many young and promising politicians here who are not indifferent to the fate of their government,” Giuliani told local reporters. “I have understood how hospitable and friendly the people of Ukraine are, how they honestly strive to reach out to Americans, how much they want to oppose violence and terror.” Sixteen years later, Rudolph Giuliani’s labyrinthine ties to Ukraine have emerged as a central element in the impeachment inquiry against his client, Donald Trump, as details emerge of what one senior diplomat called a “shadow foreign policy” to trigger an investigation into Joe Biden. The following account is based on interviews with associates of Giuliani and his business partners in Ukraine, prosecutors familiar with his attempts to gather information about the Bidens, and officials and politicians concerned about the flamboyant former mayor. The Guardian’s reporting shows that Giuliani boasted of his ties to Trump to gain access to high-ranking prosecutors and officials while his associates used the Giuliani name to bolster their reputations and legitimise dubious business ventures. “He announced that he was a lawyer for the president of the United States, that he was working for Donald Trump, there was nothing to hide,” said Andrii Telizhenko, a former Ukrainian embassy official who met with Giuliani in the US over burgers and cigars. Giuliani’s ties became a US political story when two Soviet-born American businessmen, Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, helped connect Giuliani with powerful Ukrainian prosecutors who claimed to have information about a scandal tied to Biden’s son, Hunter, and in turn sought to trade in on Giuliani’s name to advance their own business interests. The pair were arrested on charges of violating campaign finance laws while attempting to travel to Vienna, shortly after they met with Giuliani in Washington DC. Giuliani is also reportedly under investigation for whether his work in Ukraine broke laws on foreign lobbying. A crucial contact for Giuliani was Yuriy Lutsenko, an embattled top prosecutor who faced being fired after the election of the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Lutsenko, who has himself been accused of corruption by civil society activists, said he met Giuliani because he was ready to discuss a joint official investigation into Burisma – the gas company where Hunter Biden worked – and also to pursue a separate investigation into money stolen by the previous government. Lutsenko was one of five prosecutors contacted by Giuliani, including the former general prosecutor Viktor Shokin, who resigned under pressure in 2016. In Ukraine, Lutsenko was widely seen as an intriguer. Yegor Sobolev, a former politician and head of the Ukrainian parliament’s anti-corruption committee, said that he was “a new kind” of prosecutor, “not afraid to step across the line and get involved in politics” unlike his predecessors. Lutsenko also clashed with the then US ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, who told congressional investigators earlier this month she had learned of a “concerted campaign” to have her fired. Yovanovitch was abruptly removed in May after Giuliani pressed for changes at the embassy. According to the indictment against Fruman and Parnas, the campaign against her was led by a Ukrainian official, but Lutsenko denied he had asked Giuliani to lobby to have Yovanovitch fired. “Giuliani and especially these two guys [Parnas and Fruman] told me that they are against her as an ambassador long before our meeting,” Lutsenko said in a telephone interview from London where he is attending English classes. “Yes I had not a good relationship with her because she tried openly to control my activity and to interfere in our activity … but I never asked about any deal.” Lutsenko said last year that Yovanovitch had given him a list of people he should not prosecute, but later retracted the claim. A law enforcement source has told the Guardian that Lutsenko exaggerated claims to Giuliani, including the “don’t prosecute” list, in order to curry political favour to help him keep his job. Giuliani has since claimed, without evidence, that the “don’t prosecute” list was part of a liberal anti-Trump conspiracy bankrolled by the philanthropist George Soros Also in Giuliani’s meetings with Lutsenko were Parnas and Fruman, two Florida real estate developers born in the former Soviet Union, who had become key operatives for Giuliani to dig up dirt in Ukraine. They had turned heads with a $325,000 donation to a Trump-aligned political action committee in May 2018, facilitating access to the White House and the US president’s Florida resort Mar-a-Lago. They also paid Giuiliani $500,000, the former New York mayor has said, and accompanied him to high-profile events such as the state funeral of George Bush, the former US president, in December. Fruman, 53, had the better connections in Ukraine. Since the 1990s, he had run a luxury goods business in Odessa, the Black Sea port city, that provided everything from Jaguar automobiles to exotic food products to Ukraine’s jet set, and he also owned stakes in hotels and Kyiv clubs including Buddha Bar. But business could be unpredictable: SEC records show that Fruman’s company, Fd Import &amp; Export Corp, sued in 2001 for nearly $1m in damages when a shipment of bananas from Ecuador to Ukraine was shown to be diseased and “fraudulently and intentionally” mislabeled as Bonita bananas. By 2016 – even before a difficult divorce settlement with his ex-wife – Fruman was seen as desperate. “He was just a bankrupt guy, a crook I would say, who was looking for some fortune and opportunities,” said David Sakvarelidze, a former Ukrainian regional prosecutor who met Fruman after he was assigned to work in Odessa in 2015. “He had big financial troubles and I was told he basically already was living in the United States at that time, in Miami. He was looking for some opportunities to settle his financial problems. Maybe he could use his connections to Giuliani’s team to settle his financial troubles, that’s my presumption.” Fruman and Parnas appeared to do just that, attempting to persuade the Ukrainian oligarch Ihor Kolomoisky to set up a meeting with Zelenskiy, the new president, and also pitching a scheme to replace the head of Naftogaz, the Ukrainian state oil and gas company, with an executive who could direct business their way. Rick Perry, the US energy secretary, later made similar efforts, lobbying the Ukrainian government to make changes to Naftogaz’s board of directors, the Associated Press reported. Fruman also had become a major player in Kyiv’s Jewish community, employing Giuliani’s public profile to help fundraise for one of Ukraine’s top rabbis, Moshe Reuven Azman. At a celebration for the 120th anniversary of the founding of Kyiv’s Brodsky synagogue, Fruman pledged to raise more than $1m for orphans at a village established by Azman for Jewish refugees from the war in east Ukraine. And in an interview with an Israeli journalist, Fruman claimed to have delivered a handwritten note from Azman to Trump. Azman declined repeated requests for interviews. Also present at the synagogue was Rabinovich, the Ukrainian businessman, who donated the memorial in Kyiv to the victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York bearing the words “thou shalt not kill”. Through his library foundation, Rabinovich claimed Giuliani had not been paid and said he had not seen Giuliani since the visit. But the 2003 visit heralded a decade of consulting and publicity trips to Ukraine for Giuliani, who has traded on his US political connections and his reputation as the mayor who steered New York through the Trade Centre attack to collect a small fortune in lucrative speaking fees and security contracts in the ex-Soviet state. In 2008, he consulted the former heavyweight boxer Vitali Klitschko during his campaign to become the mayor of Kyiv. In 2017, he spoke at a conference organised by Victor Pinchuk, the Ukrainian metals magnate who had previously donated $150,000 to Trump’s charitable foundation, attracting scrutiny from the special prosecutor, Robert Mueller. His security firm was also hired by Pavel Fuks, a wealthy businessman from Kharkiv, in 2017 to consult the city on its emergency services and foreign investment. While the value of the contracts have not been made public, a person with knowledge of Giuliani’s business dealings said their total value was well above $1m. For many Ukrainians, Giuliani was seen as a bridge into exclusive political and decision-making circles that could review US policy toward Ukraine. “Giuliani was not searching for us, we were searching for him,” Telizhenko, the former Ukrainian embassy employee, said of how Ukrainians concerned about political pressure in the country sought out Giuliani. Giuliani “knew the names, who was connected to who. He’s the filter in all this situation ... He might be the top expert on Ukraine in the United States”.
0||Inside the six-figure project to solve the mystery of NBA floppingKen Clark did it for science. It was 2014, and Clark, then a doctoral student at Southern Methodist University, was part of a biomechanics group tasked by Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban with studying – and perhaps fixing – flopping, basketball’s dark, daffy art of fooling referees into calling fouls that aren’t. Like all researchers, the SMU team needed data. Specifically, collision data. The underlying idea, Clark tells the Guardian, was “what if we just imagine people like billiard balls and go from there?” And that’s how Clark, his colleagues, and some hardy student volunteers found themselves in a campus lab, slamming each other off their feet, over and over again, as sensors captured every pileup. “I don’t want to get the lab in trouble, as far as exposing students to bumps and bruises,” says Clark, now a kinesiology professor at West Chester University in Pennsylvania, with a laugh. “But I’ll say this: the collisions were designed to replicate what goes on in a game.” Years after a company owned by Cuban gave a six-figure grant to SMU to investigate a perpetual hoops quandary that leaves game officials perplexed and fans apoplectic – flop or not? – the school’s Locomotor Performance Laboratory has released its findings in an amusing and informative video that breaks down everything you wanted to know about the physics of flopping, but probably never thought to ask: It takes surprisingly little force to knock a stationary human off balance or entirely onto their keister, even someone as large and strong as the typical National Basketball Association player – which means flopping may not be as common as people assume. If a player throws their arms skyward upon contact like they’ve just crawled through 500 yards of sewage-smelling foulness to escape the Shawshank penitentiary, then yes, they’re probably flopping. Floppers bring a distinct quality to their performances – measurable momentum – that can be used to help identify and perhaps even police the act. “The athletes in the NBA and college basketball are incredible,” Clark says. “But when you watch them take a hit, it’s obvious that sometimes they are positioning themselves in a way to topple with the least amount of force possible – and that’s putting it tactfully. To put it bluntly, they’re exaggerating collisions and falling down when they wouldn’t normally have to. So when are they flopping? We felt we could address that from a rigorous scientific framework.” Everybody flops Marcus Smart did not step on a landmine. It only looked that way. During an Atlanta-Boston game in 2016, the Celtics guard – and acknowledged grandmaster of contemporary NBA flopping – dashed along the baseline to position himself for an offensive rebound. Hawks forward Kyle Korver bumped (brushed?) Smart with his hip. Smart went airborne, knees tucked toward his chest like a platform diver, groan-gasping as if Mike Tyson had just landed a kidney shot, eventually landing somewhere in the vicinity of the basket stanchion. Speaking to ESPN earlier this year, Smart didn’t defend his flop, which earned him a $5,000 fine from the league office. But he didn’t exactly condemn the practice, either. “Let’s get that straight, that’s a flop, this was hilarious,” he said. “I deserved everything that came my way after that. I flop on defense, your favorite player flops on offense. That’s the only difference. Especially in a game where the offense has nothing but the advantage, the defense has to do something to get the advantage back.” Smart wasn’t wrong. In the NBA, there are two types of players. Those who have flopped, and those who haven’t – yet. LeBron James flops. Chris Paul flops. Stephen Curry flops. Hoops history’s attic is crammed with Oscar-worthy efforts: a Vlade Divac pratfall here, a Dwyane Wade tumble there, a truly magnificent offense-defense double dive from Manu Ginobili and Raja Bell, the flopping equivalent of the Al Pacino-Robert DeNiro diner face-off in Heat. “Flops have been around for a long time,” says Ronnie Nunn, a former NBA referee and league director of officials. “We even have rebounding flops! Dennis Rodman was really good at grabbing the wrist of his opponent while going up and making it look like he was being fouled. Karl Malone introduced an arching back on rebounds – if he was closer to the basket than his man, he would make it look like he was pushed [in the back] and was being moved, even if that [opponent’s] forearm never came forward.” Nunn laughs. “Basketball is a crafty game. In terms of fooling the referee, flopping is part of its art and culture.” Cracking down Flopping is also, to use a technical term, cheating. A kind of athletic Fyre Festival ticket. Basketball fans love to see the good guys get away with some well-timed ersatz contact; they get irate when the bad guys pull the same trick. Players, coaches, and NBA front offices are no different. In 2012, the league cracked down, announcing that flops – defined as any physical act that appears to have been intended to cause the referees to call a foul on another player – would earn warnings for first-time violators, followed by an escalating series of fines for repeat offenders. “I think flopping had a lot of [general managers] up in arms,” says Washington Wizards general manager Tommy Sheppard, who has worked in the NBA for 26 years. “It had become a weapon, and it seemed like an unfair advantage. It’s not fair. It’s not right. It doesn’t pass the eye test. So the league tried to shame people into not flopping.” To stop flopping, however, you first have to spot flopping – yet by definition, a good flop is indistinguishable in real time from a genuine foul. According to Nunn, separating fiction from fact isn’t always easy. Not when the game features some of the world’s most explosive athletes. And not when officials already are keeping a watchful eye on a half-dozen different things in any given moment. Besides, not all flops are considered flops. Pretending to get hit and falling down? Verboten. Acting as though a forearm that never touched your face nearly removed your head? A no-no. But adding a dramatic physical flourish when you’re also really and truly being fouled? That’s just “selling a call” – and the NBA is fine with it. “Embellishments are the other piece to this,” Nunn says. “Players use them to win calls they were going to win anyway. Say you have a dribbler putting his arm into the chest of a defender. The defender flailing away like the offensive player threw a punch may be less bad than the offensive player using their arm to get an advantage.” Beyond the eye test Enter Cuban. Curious and data-driven, he approached SMU biomechanics professor Peter Weyand in 2013 with a novel request. Could Weyand’s lab study flopping, the better to reduce referee guesswork by creating some basic guidelines on what levels of force, speed, and size contribute to genuine falls – especially in a league where guards weighing less than 200lbs regularly bowl over front court players more than 50lbs heavier? “If you look at a high-contact sport like football, you see few pancakes, where guys end up on their behinds,” Cuban told the Wall Street Journal at the time. “Yet in our sport, guys end up on their backsides all the time.” Weyand and his team specialize in athletic performance – they’ve researched Usain Bolt’s unique stride, Oscar Pistorius’ artificial legs, and how to run a marathon in less than two hours. Yet when they began to investigate athletic performance art, they quickly realized it was virgin scientific territory. “We looked at sports science related to soccer – there’s obviously a lot of flopping there,” Clark said. “We looked at the biomechanics of slips and falls in daily living. We looked all over the place. There wasn’t much out there.” Facing a void, the SMU researchers began with a basic question: just how much force does it take to knock someone off balance, or completely over? Weyand’s team wrote predictive equations. They fashioned a mechanical dummy – nicknamed “Gus” – out of plywood, PVC pipes, and galvanized tubing and repeatedly knocked it down with a padded, sensor-equipped yellow bar. They used to same bar to topple lab volunteers outfitted with reflective sensors. “I wanted to put a [San Antonio] Spurs jersey on Gus,” Weyand said with a laugh. “Maybe Ginobili or someone else known to be a flopper. But not everyone in the group would have been happy with that – it would have been pushing it little too far to put [the Mavericks’] cross-state rivals in there. No pun intended.” All three experiments told the same story. It doesn’t take much to knock someone standing upright off balance – just 50lbs for a quarter of a second, roughly the same as walking or lightly jogging into someone. Weyand, who played basketball at Bates College, was surprised. “If we had found that it takes huge amounts of force, then you could assume that every time you see someone falling over in a NBA game, they’re faking it,” he says. “But no – in many cases, if the defender just doesn’t move their feet, then down they go. I’ve been through thousands of charge-block collisions, and never realized how easy it was.” Adding extra Next came human-on-human collisions. One person got a running start. The other remained stationary. Participants wore boxing headgear and baseball catcher chest pads, and fell into a padded track and field pit mat. “It was more fun than dangerous,” Weyand says. “We had very thick mats.” Did anyone end up needing to wear a cup? “If someone had gotten really doubled over or took a shot [between the legs], it would have been common knowledge in the lab,” he says. The researchers staged hundreds of collisions at different speeds, heights, and angles. In some, the stationary targets were told to react naturally; in others, they were told to flop. All of the hits were recorded using a 12-camera system similar to the ones used to create motion-capture animations for video games such as NBA 2K. Analyzing that data, Weyand and company drew two key conclusions. First, during natural two-person collisions, the stationary recipient will fall backwards with their arms out – but not up, and certainly not high enough to direct traffic on an aircraft carrier flight deck. “Those big, above the head gestures you see in the NBA?” Clark says. “That’s not natural counter-movement. That’s what floppers do.” Second, the SMU researchers confirmed that human collisions are subject to the same laws of physics as billiard balls. How so? When two objects collide, total momentum is conserved – that is, the stationary object can’t gain any more momentum following the impact than the moving object loses. In flops, however, total momentum increased, a telltale sign that the floppers were adding something extra to the equation. “Either they were jumping after the collisions, or it was excessive arm action,” Clark says. “Either way, we could measure it.” Lasting value Drawing on their study, the SMU group has recommendations for NBA officials – and anyone watching at home – making Flop or Not calls: Make sure the defender’s body and feet are stationary; Make sure actual contact has occurred; Make sure the defender’s response time is appropriate – that is, that they don’t start going down before a collision, nor too late after one; Check for defender arm motion that’s excessively upward. “The main thing is just to look at what players do with their upper bodies,” Clark says. “That’s the major giveaway. Anything going on probably isn’t necessary. They’re doing it to sell it. It may still be a charge, but they are selling.” If that all seems obvious – less Galileo championing heliocentricity than the latest concussion study confirming that getting hit in the head is bad – well, sometimes the scientific method leads to known territory. Besides, Clark does have one potentially revolutionary idea: use data from the sophisticated motion-tracking cameras installed in every NBA arena to calculate the momentum conserved or added during questionable player collisions, the better to flag who might be flopping. “We thought about that a lot,” he says. “They know much these players weigh, and what speed they’re moving at all times. Depending on how accurate the cameras are, you don’t need a system like we have in our laboratory to do similar calculations.” But does the NBA need a system at all? In the first three seasons following the adoption of anti-flopping rules, the league reportedly handed out a total of 87 warnings and 13 fines to 73 players. Last season, by contrast, just five warnings and zero fines were issued. Nunn attributes the drop to improved officiating. Sheppard says an emphasis on perimeter play means fewer low-post backdowns and rim-attacking drives – which also means fewer opportunities for traditional defensive pratfalls. Still, neither man believes flopping is a dying art. Instead, it’s simply evolving. “Now you have more varied flops,” Nunn says, “and more flops by offensive players.” To wit: in 2017, Houston guard James Harden’s ability to draw dubious fouls on three-point shot attempts led the league to adopt new officiating guidelines. “[Flopping] gets passed down from generation to generation,” Sheppard says. “Usually it’s peer-to-peer, but sometimes players become a coach and teaches it. It’s getting that handful of jersey, or sticking that elbow under someone’s arm, and somehow you’re the one being held or being hit. Guys that can master it can squeeze another year or two out of their careers. Setting screens, drawing fouls, getting an extra possession – that is valuable.” Should Cuban again decide that flopping is valuable enough to research, there’s much more to study. “The circumstance we looked at in the lab was stationary defender, offensive player coming in, the most controlled situation so we could be most certain of the numbers,” Weyand says. “But a lot of collisions on the court are not like that. You have off-ball picks, rolls with two players moving. To have firm answers to those, we’d have to [study] an actual NBA game. Is it potentially possible? Sure.”
0||'Sick and delusional': Astros fans torn over Trump's World Series booingOne man’s choice of apparel stood out amid all the orange gear in the stands on Tuesday as the Houston Astros hosted the Washington Nationals in Game 6 of the World Series. Standing near the Crawford Boxes behind left field, Chuck Jones pointedly sported a cap with the slogan: “Trump 2020: Keep America Great!” It was two days after the US president was jeered when he attended the previous game, a mere three miles from the White House. Trump, who visited with the first lady, Melania, and several Republican congressmen, was pictured on the big screen inside Nationals Park after the third inning, sparking boos and chants of “Lock him up!” Fans in the stands also waved a couple of banners calling for Trump’s impeachment that were quickly confiscated by stadium security. Fox, which broadcast the game live, had earlier shown viewers the president – but no mention was made of the taunts, which went viral on social media, raising the question of whether broadcasters should decide to cover newsworthy events that resonate beyond sports, or stick rigidly to the game. Jones, a 49-year-old Astros fan, said the boos were “a disgrace … To boo him, and continue to boo him? This is how sick and delusional the far left has gone.” Though Harris County, which includes Houston, voted Democratic in the 2016 election, thousands of supporters queued for hours last October to attend a Trump rally at the Toyota Center, the 18,300-seat home of the NBA’s Houston Rockets located a short walk from the Astros’ ballpark. Had Trump turned up for a game in Texas, Jones speculated, the crowd would have reacted more cordially. “[It] would have been ‘hail to the chief’. We have respect,” he said. “It doesn’t matter who the president is. If it were Obama and he got booed, I’d say, ‘that’s a frigging disgrace’. He’s the president of the United States, I don’t care Democratic, I don’t care Republican. That’s the commander in chief of our country.” Mike Layton, a 36-year-old Astros fan, said he was unaware of the jeering as it happened. “I didn’t hear any of that during the live game,” Layton said. “Personally I don’t care what people think of him or don’t. I’m here to watch a baseball game. I would like to think that he wouldn’t get booed here but you never know.” Kelly, 33, an Austin-based Nationals fan who declined to give her last name, saw nothing wrong with the crowd’s reaction. “I think you’re fair game wherever you are. You can’t really completely separate the two: politics and baseball. He’s a public figure and when you’re a public figure you’re going to be subject to what people think. I think he’s used to that, it kind of comes with the territory,” she said. Artie Anderson, a 59-year-old Astros supporter, felt otherwise. “I don’t think that’s the right thing to do, personally. I don’t like booing players on the other team, even if they’ve destroyed you in the past. That’s just poor sportsmanship. Let’s have an affirmative, fun atmosphere and enjoy ourselves,” he said. He added: “I think it depends on where you are. The northeastern part of the United States is a little bit more abrasive than those of us in the south. We’re a little bit more cordial, still.” Also, Anderson said, he prefers to focus on the game rather than the guest VIPs: “I mean, I don’t want that infringing on my experience of figuring out what the count is and how Justin Verlander’s doing.” The answer to that last one: not well. Verlander, one of the Astros’ ace starting pitchers, extended his streak of World Series futility to historic proportions as the Nationals won, 7-2, to set up a winner-takes all seventh game in Houston on Wednesday. Yet Dave Martinez, the Washington manager, was ejected for furiously arguing a dubious interference call, becoming the first skipper in 24 years to be tossed out of a World Series game. Trump may have looked surprised to be the target of ire at a ballpark, but all umpires know that for them, it is an inevitable part of the job.
11||Backpacker tax a form of 'discrimination based on nationality', court rulesThe federal court has blown a hole in the government’s so-called “backpacker tax”, ruling it does not apply to some visitors who are in Australia on a working holiday visa. In a judgment handed down on Wednesday, judge John Logan said the impost – a 15% tax on income that would normally be tax-free – could not be levied on some backpackers who were also Australian residents at the time because doing so violated agreements with other countries. Catherine Addy, the backpacker who brought the test case, is a British national but the solicitors who organised the lawsuit, Taxback.com, said similar treaties also existed with the US, Germany, Finland, Chile, Japan, Norway and Turkey. These countries account for about half of all visitors to Australia who hold working holiday visas, they said. Australian residents are not taxed on income they earn up to a threshold of $18,200. However, in 2016 the government introduced the backpacker tax, which hit people who come to Australia on a working holiday visa with a tax of 15% from the first dollar they earn. Logan found that the government discriminated against Addy by charging her the tax in 2017 because she held a working holiday visa. “That is a disguised form of discrimination based on nationality,” he said. “That is exactly the type of discrimination which is prohibited by … the double taxation agreement.” A Taxation Office spokesman said an appeal was being considered and played down the significance of the ruling. “This decision only affects the tax rates applying to a minority of [working holiday makers] who are also residents, and only those from countries affected by a similar clause in the double tax agreement with their home country,” he said. “We consider most working holiday makers are not residents for tax purposes and this decision has no impact for these working holiday makers.” However, this interpretation is likely to also face challenge, based on another of Logan’s recent rulings in which he said a backpacker who intended to move to Australia for 10 months, and does so, would become a resident for tax purposes. The minister responsible for tax, assistant treasurer Michael Sukkar, said it would be up to the commissioner of taxation, Chris Jordan, to decide whether to appeal. “The government will await the finalisation of any legal process before considering if any policy response is needed,” he said.
21||Ex-ballerina Deborah Bull: ‘I’ve found great strength in dancing and singing’Early on in her career with the Royal Ballet, the principal ballerina Deborah Bull had the chance to dance in a hospice. And when she saw firsthand the positive impact her performance had on terminally ill people, a simple question began to burn away inside her: why? It is a question that nearly 40 years later, medical researchers are starting to ask – thanks in part to Bull herself, now a life peer – and one that has the power to revolutionise healthcare in this country. But back in the early 1980s, when Bull was a young, inexperienced dancer, the idea that art could help to heal the nation’s health problems was not deemed worthy of serious academic study. This puzzled Bull, who saw dramatic transformations take place before her own eyes after she joined the Royal Ballet. “I was made aware of a project led by the education department to take pairs of dancers into hospitals and hospices to perform for the patients,” she explains. At the time, it merely felt like an opportunity to grab the limelight. “Here was a chance to do the repertoire I was dreaming of: the star roles.” Bull, now 56, has never forgotten the chat she had with an elderly female patient after one such performance in a hospice. “She talked about my costume and my headdress, what it felt like to wear it and what it felt like to dance.” At the time, Bull thought nothing of their conversation. “But as I left, the ward sister said: ‘Thank you so much for doing that. That’s the first time she’s spoken since she arrived here.’” Bull felt immediately that something fundamental had happened – not only to the patient, but to Bull herself. That was the moment, she says, that she realised just how powerful the arts could be. “It was the very beginning, for me, of thinking: this art that I have been passionate about since the age of seven has the potential to really make a difference.” Today, as vice-principal of King’s College London, Bull is the executive sponsor of the world’s largest-ever study of the impact of arts intervention on physical and mental health. The project, funded by a £2m grant from the Wellcome Trust, will study three interventions: movement and music sessions for stroke patients, singing for women with postnatal depression, and dance for people with Parkinson’s disease. About 300 stroke patients will be recruited to see whether attending movement, music, song and spoken word workshops improves cognition, mobility and speech. Researchers will also measure the oxytocin and cortisol levels of 400 mothers to monitor the impact of singing on the mother’s body. And 135 Parkinson’s patients will be assessed to see if weekly ballet classes improve their mobility, stability and tremors. Of the Parkinson’s patients, she says. “It’s about the ability to control one’s own body, but it also has a wellbeing and mental health component.” It will form part of treatment pathways at Guy’s and St Thomas’, King’s College hospital and South London and Maudsley NHS foundation trusts, and community centres in Lambeth and Southwark. Carmine Pariante, professor of biological psychiatry at King’s, and Daisy Fancourt, associate professor of psychobiology and epidemiology at University College London, will lead the study. “We know these interventions can work – now we need to know whether they work for the NHS and in the NHS,” says Pariante. For Bull, who spent decades observing what was happening to people’s health when she danced for them, the research project represents a huge leap forward. “In my time in the company, we took part in lots and lots of these interventions. Sometimes in schools, sometimes in health settings. All the time I was getting this feeling: the art I do can make a difference. I could see people were altered, that they felt better about themselves, that they behaved differently. And I really wanted to understand why. But there were no researchers there.” One of the reasons she says she left her previous role as creative director of the Royal Opera House and came to King’s was so she could get closer to academics studying the changes she had witnessed as a dancer. Shortly after joining the university in 2012, she led “a mission”, she says, to find peer-reviewed, “proper research” around the globe about the impact of arts and culture on health and wellbeing, as well as other environmental, social and educational impacts. Each piece of research was given a 300-word layman’s summary by a team of academics and put on a free site, with a link to its original paper. It soon became obvious that the biggest sector of research by far was arts, health and wellbeing – and also that “there is a lot of research going on, but most of it is on a very small scale”, according to Bull. Some of the interventions detailed in the papers had even been robustly trialled, but never rolled out at scale: “The sector was crying out for the potential to test at the next level.” This was the impetus for the new, large study. “Through King’s Health Partners, we have the potential to take these three interventions and roll them out to bigger populations, and test whether they are clinically effective, economically effective and implementable,” she says. Throughout her career, she says she noticed that “when people engaged, not just in something that was good for them, but in something that they enjoyed, they were much more likely to change their behaviours.” She welcomes the move by the government to promote “social prescribing” as a recognition of the benefits of the arts in transforming patients’ lives. “I do think we’re seeing a shift. There is a move towards social prescribing, and arts interventions would be an element of that,” she says, citing the fact that these social and physical activities bring psychological and physical benefits to patients. Bull believes the project could have wider applications. “It’s about partnership. The world’s greatest challenges are not going to be solved by working in isolation. They are going to be solved by working imaginatively across institutions and disciplines and between partners like the English National Ballet and Parkinson’s researchers.” For Bull, it has been a tremendous journey. “I’m not a researcher myself, nor will I ever be. But I want to be in an environment where I can be closer to these questions.” She puts her faith in the research. “But from my own experience, I have had great joy and found great strength in dancing, singing and the arts. So I very much hope this is what we will find. And I wait with excitement to find out.” Curriculum vitae Age: 56. Family: Lives with her partner. Lives: north London. Education: Royal Ballet School from the age of 11 until 18. Career: 2012-present: vice president and vice principal, King’s College London, and senior advisory fellow for culture; 2001-2012: creative director, Royal Opera House; 1981-2001: dancer, Royal Ballet. Awards: CBE 1999. Awarded honorary doctorates by Derby, Kent and Sheffield Hallam universities. Public life: Made a life peer in 2018, with a focus on arts, culture, creativity, education and social mobility. Interests: Playing the piano, walking along beaches, reading and going to ballet productions that challenge convention.
29||Island Stories by David Reynolds review – how British history is shaping BrexitFor diehard Brexiters, the most potent image of their project is the “clean break”. It is in itself a rather attractive notion, especially in our culture of personal make-overs and radical transformations. Brexit is the New You. It proposes a Year Zero and an Independence Day – points of origin at which a whole other story of British greatness begins. Like most revolutions, it imagines a sloughing off of history, especially, of course, the history of half a century of deep entanglement with the European Union. It offers a free programme of collective rehab, a political version of the Scientologists’ goal of “going clear”. Yet one of the many incoherences of the Brexit project is that it cannot sustain even this rhetoric of a magical escape from the past. It proposes a giant leap into a glorious future but, as the Anglo-Irish philosopher Johnny Rotten snarled more than 40 years ago, “there is no future in England’s dreaming”. What is to follow from the great rupture has always been fuzzy. There is, instead, an awful lot of past. There is Jacob Rees-Mogg’s ecstatic effusion at the Tory conference in 2017: “We need to be reiterating the benefits of Brexit! ... Oh, this is so important in the history of our country … It’s Waterloo! It’s Crécy! It’s Agincourt! We win all these things!” There is the same genius’s laugh-a-minute literary pageant The Victorians, whose dead white males are paraded as the exemplars and progenitors of the post-Brexit future. There are Boris Johnson’s literary and rhetorical Churchill impersonations. There are the zombie refrains of empire in the dream of Global Britain. Above all, there is the constant harking back to the second world war, to the Dunkirk spirit and the blitz spirit and, more darkly, to a rhetoric (aimed at the infidels) of appeasement, collaboration and, in Johnson’s endlessly repeated term for the Benn act that sought to prevent a no-deal exit, of surrender. In a plaintive appeal to party members last April, the Tories’ great lost leader Matt Hancock (remember him?) agonised that “we have got to sound like we actually like this country. We have got to be patriots of the Britain of now and not the Britain of 1940.” But neither the Britain of now nor the putative future Britain can hold a candle to the imagined flame of past glory. In this mixed-up discourse, the Brexit project can’t decide whether it is a revolution or a restoration. If, like the characters in Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials, it has an animal daemon to represent its true self, is it a beautiful butterfly emerging from the cocoon of European slavery or a homing pigeon returning to the comfortable roost of old England? It wants, perhaps, to be both, to suggest simultaneously that all things will be made new in the buccaneering, disruptive, hyperglobalised capitalism that will be unleashed once freedom is gained; and that everything is just going back to the way it was meant to be before the terrible mistake of 1973. In this sense, the contradictory notions of history also expose the much deeper contradiction of Brexit – for most of those who are driving it, it is a radical breach in the British postwar social order; for most of those in the back of the bus, it is supposed to be a refurbishment and strengthening of that same social order. Complicating all of this is the way the very potency of the idea of a restoration of the past is itself a restoration of the past. As David Reynolds points out in his concise, elegant and lucid revisiting of key themes in British history in the light of Brexit, Margaret Thatcher, in her very first election campaign, when she was just 24, said: “Britain’s prestige in the eyes of the world has gone down and down … it is our earnest desire to make Great Britain great again.” That was in 1950, just after the triumph of the second world war and before the shock of the Suez crisis. Yet here, in this proto-Trump rhetoric, there is already the notion of intolerable national decline: if British greatness has to be regained, it has by definition been lost. Decline – or rather declinist rhetoric – is one of Reynolds’s four themes. As an overriding notion in British political psychology, it has the odd quality of being at once inevitable and irrelevant. Inevitable because “greatness” as defined by the empire was an extraordinary episode of political gigantism. Great Britain became Greater Britain as a result of a historically freakish conjunction of circumstances. It could not possibly sustain a situation in which it accounted for 33% of the world’s exports of manufactured goods or one in which it controlled nearly a quarter of the world’s population. But this inevitable retreat is irrelevant because Britain’s descent from these impossible heights went hand-in-hand with great improvements in the lives of its own inhabitants. Given a choice between continuing to hold India captive and building a National Health Service, there is little doubt that ordinary people in Britain would have chosen the dignity of good healthcare over imperial “greatness”. Reynolds gives a nicely crisp account of all of this but he might have risked a further thought. If it is true that a story of relative decline does not really matter to most people so long as their own circumstances are improving, then perhaps when people’s lives stop improving, as they did as a result of static wages and austerity, they become susceptible to declinism. Their lives, they may come to accept, are not great because Britain is no longer great. This sleight-of-mind is surely one of the central and most effective tactics of Brexit. It suggests that membership of the EU, in which Britain is “reduced” to the normality of being one country among 28, is the real reason why people’s own life chances have been reduced. It is possible to make this false connection because of Reynolds’s second theme, the persistent ambivalence in English politics about whether or not it is possible to stand aloof from continental Europe. It goes back a long way, certainly more than 1,000 years, and even in the postwar era, it has weighed heavily on both main parties. It is good to be reminded by Reynolds that even in the infamous Bruges speech of 1988 that gave its name to the Eurosceptic wing of the Tory party, Thatcher insisted starkly: “Our links to the rest of Europe, the continent of Europe, have been the dominant factor in our history.” (Not, note, empire, industrialism or Protestantism, which she might have chosen.) And equally that it was a Labour leader, Hugh Gaitskell, who insisted in 1962 that “we are not just a part of Europe – at least not yet. We have a different history.” Here we see that the very notion of British history has long been deeply uncertain: is it fundamentally shaped by Europe or is it “different”? One great appeal to difference is the profound exceptionalism that was seemingly endorsed by imperial success, the notion, as the historian and Whig politician Thomas Babington Macaulay put it in 1833 of the British as a “people blessed with far more than an ordinary measure of political liberty and intellectual light”. But the other is the history that the Brexiters have been most anxious to ignore: the complex, fraught and often violent nature of the interrelationships of England, Scotland, Wales and of course Ireland. There is here not history but histories. The “island story” is neither; it pertains not to an island but to an archipelago and it contains multiple, shifting and sometimes competing narratives. Reynolds provides a very useful primer on the delusions of an English mentality in which, as John Pocock put it in a ground-breaking essay in 1974, the Welsh, Scots and Irish “appear as peripheral peoples when, and only when, their doings assume the power to disturb the tenor of English politics”. This myopia has been inextricable from the delusion of a “clean break”. The “peripheral peoples” of the Irish borderlands have been the ghosts at the Brexit feast and their insistence on being heard has radically changed the tenor of English politics. Johnson’s deal with Brussels, which essentially jettisons Northern Ireland, can be seen as a last desperate attempt to go clear from history. But even if it succeeds, the Scots, the Welsh and even the English may prove to have historical imperatives of their own that cannot be wished away. • Island Stories by David Reynolds is published by William Collins (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&amp;p on all online orders over £15.
18||Climate crisis: business leaders say cost to taxpayers will spiral unless new policies introducedIndustry, farming and investor groups say the federal government signed up to a goal of global net zero emissions under the Paris agreement and have warned unless new policies are introduced taxpayer spending on climate programs will need to be dramatically increased. A joint letter by 10 business organisations, including the Australian Industry Group and the National Farmers’ Federation, says the government will either need to back new climate policies that drive private-sector action or boost taxpayer funding now and into the future. The letter was sent to a panel of business leaders and policy experts appointed by Angus Taylor, the emissions reduction minister, to find new ways to “enhance” the emissions reduction fund, the government’s main climate policy. The panel’s appointment, which was not made public, is seen as an admission the fund is not reducing national pollution. Only select groups were asked to give feedback to a discussion paper circulated by the panel. The Clean Energy Council confirmed it wasn’t approached “directly” to participate in the rapid-fire review, which began in mid-October and is expected to offer initial feedback early next month, but said it welcomed the government’s putative shift on one of its signature policies. The business group letter says the 10 organisations have different views on policy but agreed on broad principles that should underpin what the government does. It says Australia’s medium-term climate target set for 2030 is just a staging post on the way to meeting the Paris deal goals of keeping global heating well below 2C and pursuing efforts to limit it to 1.5C. This would ultimately mean global net zero emissions. In Australia, it would require policy mechanisms that could efficiently deliver “immediate, cost-effective abatement opportunities” in every part of the economy and also encourage innovation. The letter says the emissions reduction fund has worked in “the land sector” – mostly projects supporting native vegetation – but was poorly suited to driving cuts in industry and buildings and unlikely to bring change in energy and transport. The groups would support well-designed policies that put less of the cost of cutting emissions on taxpayers, as the emissions reduction fund does, and instead encouraged the private sector to act. “In the absence of such policies, the government will need to commit more resources – both now and over time – to finance abatement,” the letter says. The panel, which is headed by Grant King, the outgoing president of the Business Council of Australia and a former chief executive of Origin Energy, was appointed after the government has been privately sounding out some groups about an overhaul of the fund for months. But stakeholders were taken aback when the panel approached them to provide detailed comments on options in less than two weeks. Interviewed on the ABC, King said it was sensible for the government to look at how the fund was working and take on feedback. “What the government has done is say ‘let’s run a quick process … that’s going to listen to that feedback and see whether we can enhance the way the fund works’,” he said. King stressed the government’s target, a 26-28% cut below 2005 levels, was not a cap. “What we want to do is exceed those targets and we can do that that, we believe, through listening to people’s experience … and improving the way it is working,” he said. Taylor agreed the government would “like to beat our targets” and said the review was about “using the best expertise we can”. “We are doing everything we can to use that money [committed to the fund] to maximise the abatement we get from it,” he said. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, gave the Coalition a blast for failing to have a coherent policy. “The government doesn’t have an energy policy,” he said. “It doesn’t have a plan. What they need to do is to have a comprehensive plan for energy.” Kane Thornton, the chief executive of the Clean Energy Council, said he welcomed “any steps towards stronger national climate and energy policy to provide the necessary certainty for investors”. He noted the emissions reduction fund had to date focused on areas other than energy, such as agriculture and industrial processes. Thornton said his organisation, which represents major renewable energy players, had “not been directly approached to participate in the review of the (fund) to date”. But he would welcome any opportunity to put forward ideas that would ensure the fund played a more substantial role in providing investor confidence across all sectors of the economy. As well as contributing to the joint letter, the Australian Industry Group (Ai Group) has contributed its own submission to the process, urging the Morrison government to pursue least cost abatement in the reboot. Its submission says market mechanisms, including “price signals and tradable instruments”, can be efficient and effective if well designed, but there are also roles for careful regulation and public funding. “The existing landscape of policy and proposals is far from consistent with these principles,” it says. The discussion paper floats changing the scheme known as the safeguard mechanism, which was supposed to limit emissions from big industry but in practice has allowed pollution to increase, so companies that emit less than their limit are awarded carbon credits they could sell to the government or business. The Ai Group says adjusting the safeguards regime is an important option for the government, but will “require especially careful and consultative development”. It says in theory it should be simple to reward facilities for emissions cuts when they emit less than tight limits, or baselines, but in reality “there are many difficult issues involved”. Other signatories to the business group letter backed by the Ai Group are the Investor Group on Climate Change, the Property Council, the Energy Users Association, the Energy Efficiency Council, the Green Building Council, the Australian Alliance for Energy Productivity, the Carbon Market Institute and the Australian Sustainable Built Environment Council. The emissions reduction fund works as a reverse auction, rewarding landowners and businesses that make cheap, viable bids for taxpayers’ support to cut pollution. The most recent auction bought emissions cuts equivalent to only 0.01% of Australia’s annual greenhouse gas pollution after officials found just three projects worth backing. The emissions policy review came to light as the government announced it would give the government green bank, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, an extra $1bn to invest in projects aimed at ensuring a reliable electricity supply. The new fund is earmarked for power generation, storage and transmission projects such as pumped hydro, batteries and gas. National emissions have risen each year since 2015 and analyses have found the government would not reach its 2030 target, a 26%-28% cut below 2005 levels, unless policies changed. Scientists say Australia should be aiming for deeper cuts if it is play its part under the Paris agreement.
9||Brexit: Parliament breaks deadlock with vote for 12 December electionMPs voted on Tuesday night to finally resolve their Brexit deadlock by calling a general election, setting the stage for a 12 December contest that could be the most unpredictable in a generation. Boris Johnson won his fourth bid to go to the polls by 438 to 20 after Jeremy Corbyn declared that Labour would support an election as a “once-in-a-generation chance to transform our country”. The pre-Christmas vote will be the first December poll since 1923. The Liberal Democrats and Scottish National party abstained, after their preferred day for it to be held – 9 December – was rejected. Almost half of all Labour MPs were absent or voted against the legislation in a sign of unhappiness about a snap election, although some blamed a mix-up by the whips for their failure to attend. Parliament will dissolve next Wednesday for a short campaign of five weeks, so long as the House of Lords passes Johnson’s legislation as expected in the coming days. Corbyn set the stage for his campaign by calling on voters to kick out Johnson’s Conservatives who think they are “born to rule”, while Jo Swinson, the Lib Dem leader, said it was “our best chance to elect a government to stop Brexit”. Speaking earlier in the House of Commons, Johnson argued that a “new and revitalised” parliament was needed to take Britain out of the European Union. “We are left with no choice but to go to the country to break free from this impasse,” he told MPs. But he later struck a cautious note, telling a backbench meeting of Tory MPs that it would be “a tough election but we will do the best we can”. He told them he had not wanted an election but was forced to seek one because Labour would have “sliced and diced” his Brexit legislation beyond recognition. In a move to unite his party, the prime minister decided to readmit 10 of the 21 MPs he expelled last month for defying his Brexit plan. The major battle lines of the campaign will be drawn along on the subject of Brexit, after Johnson failed to take the UK out of the EU on 31 October “do or die” as he had promised. The Conservatives will campaign to get Brexit done by pushing through Johnson’s deal, while Labour is promising a second referendum to let the people resolve the EU question. The Brexit party will try to outgun the Tories by arguing for a no-deal Brexit, while the Lib Dems will seek to attract remain voters from Labour by pledging to revoke article 50. Although parliament voted decisively for an election, many backbenchers in the two biggest parties are extremely nervous about going to the polls at such a politically volatile time and an unusual time of year. The Tories under Johnson are about 10 points ahead of Labour in the average polls, roughly half the lead that Theresa May had before she led her party to a disastrous result that saw her lose her majority. Labour has been deeply split for months about whether to back an election or a second referendum first. In a sign of reluctance on the backbenches, more than 100 Labour MPs abstained and 11 voted against the motion. Those rejecting an election included strongly pro-remain campaigners such as Margaret Beckett, Peter Kyle, David Lammy and Owen Smith, who later said he would be standing down. Speaking earlier in the Commons, Corbyn confirmed that the party would back a poll after rejecting one on three previous occasions, after getting confirmation that the EU had granted an extension to article 50. “I’m ready for it, we’re ready for it,” Corbyn said. “Because we want to be able to say to the people of this country there is an alternative to austerity. There is an alternative to inequality. There is an alternative to sweetheart trade deals with Donald Trump.” Polling experts have said the result is likely to be hard to gauge, with the British Election Survey suggesting a third of voters have switched parties in the last two elections. The Tories will be targeting leave-voting Labour marginal constituencies in Wales, the Midlands and the north of England, while defending areas of the south-west against the Lib Dems and its seats in Scotland against the SNP. Labour will be hoping to build on its successes in 2017 at picking up marginal seats from the Tories, especially in remain-voting urban areas. Corbyn’s campaign will also be bolstered by the leftwing activists in Momentum, who are planning to mobilise tens of thousands of people to knock on doors in marginal seats and launch a “viral video response unit” to reach millions online. The Lib Dems have been speaking to the Greens and Plaid Cymru about maximising the chances of pro-remain parties, by standing single “Stop Brexit” candidates in certain seats. However, the number of these is likely to be limited. Paula Surridge, a political sociologist at the University of Bristol, said the 12 December election was “likely to pose key challenges to both the Labour and Conservative parties, both of whom need to improve on their performance in terms of seats, while simultaneously unlikely to match their 2017 vote share”. “Who manages to hold on to the larger part of the 2017 votes is likely to form the next government. Will this be the Brexit election 2017 never quite managed to be? The Liberal Democrats and the Brexit party will be pushing hard to make it so, while Labour are likely to want to talk about almost anything else,” she said. In its remaining days of business, the government is planning to hold a debate on the Grenfell Tower fire report and rush through legislation relating to Northern Ireland’s budget. However, it is still unclear whether a vote on the new Commons Speaker will be able to take place on Monday, as many MPs will be heading back to campaign immediately and are likely to be reluctant to return. The candidates for the job are split as to whether to press ahead, with Lindsay Hoyle, the favourite, and Meg Hillier, pushing for it to happen, while Chris Bryant, Harriet Harman, Rosie Winterton and Eleanor Laing, would prefer a new parliament to decide. John Bercow, the outgoing Speaker, could decide to defer his decision to stand down and allow the new parliament to elect his successor.
7||Meme tourism has turned the world into the seventh circle of selfie hellThe latest tourist hotspot is not a lagoon in Iceland or a beach in Bali – it is a staircase in the Bronx, New York. More specifically, it is the concrete flight of steps that Joaquin Phoenix, caked in clown paint, dances down in the film Joker. The scene has become a meme, and scores of influencers and imbeciles are flocking to the #jokerstairs, as it is now tagged on Instagram, to recreate the image. Such is the fervour that the location was briefly marked as a religious site on Google Maps. Bronx locals are not thrilled by their staircase going viral. One resident put up posters explaining that “it is disrespectful to treat our community … as a photo opportunity”. Someone else, clearly fancying themselves as a yolker, threw eggs at tourists while yelling: “Y’all not spending no money in my store but come and take pictures!” There is nothing new about disrespectful sightseers. Nor is there anything new about movie locations becoming tourist attractions. However, the speed with which a scene can break off from its original source, take on new life as a meme and transform an offline location into the seventh circle of selfie hell is a modern phenomenon. Some people call it the Instagram effect. Wired described it recently as “meme tourism”. Other people – me – call it “Yet another sign that humans deserve to go extinct”. There was a time, not so long ago, when we all at least pretended that travel might broaden our horizons. Now tourism seems to be about building our personal brands. Forget “meme tourism” – this is more like me-me-me tourism: getting likes by jumping on the latest viral trend or showing how edgy you are by snapping selfies at Chernobyl. “All the world’s a stage,” as a famous influencer once put it. That is more true than ever, but only a privileged few are the players – everyone else is merely #content. •Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist
3||The hour you are most alone: how I got trapped by poverty and depressionTwo young black bulls stormed up out of the ditch to fight the middle of the road, muscles straining as they bludgeoned one another with their flat, heavy skulls. The red dust they kicked up clung to their sweat-dampened flanks like old blood. I turned the truck around and took the next side trail into a field and parked – nose out, in case I had to leave in a hurry – next to a man-high pile of cut brush. I fished my headlamp from the glove box, built a fire and, once it was going, put on a pot of water. While it came to a boil I laid out my bed in the back of the truck: sleeping pad, wool blanket, down bag and a duffle of clothes for a pillow. Beyond the fire true night had set in, blue-black as a bruise, stretching over the steppe and sage brush country of the southern British Columbia interior. I threw a pack of ramen in the hot water and ate it, without relish, straight from the pot. Later, I poured myself a generous cup from a box of wine. It had a cheap, tinny taste but I took a greedy sip as I reached for my phone. I had dozens of unread messages. Happy Birthday, Lori! Lori, it’s your birthday! Hope you’re having a great birthday! It was 13 September 2018. I was jobless, homeless, reeking of dirt and smoke and sweat, and had just turned 32. ••• The ship which keeps a life afloat is constructed of surprisingly flimsy material. Not all shipwrecks are physical; there are things which can swallow up what’s inside you as easily as the sea. At the time I was setting up camp in that field I had been living in poverty – either homeless or housing insecure – for over two years. I had been cripplingly depressed for just as long. The demise of my old life began with a single, tiny mistake: my partner, making a left-hand turn, forgot to signal. The car accident shattered our lives; my partner incurred a concussion which left her in need of near-constant care. I maxed myself out – physically, emotionally, mentally, financially – only to be met with another blow: when my partner recovered, she cheated on me, ending our relationship. This emotional strike was worsened by a practical one – I had given up my apartment just weeks before the breakup because we had intended to move in together. Now I was left reeling, one-two gut-punched by the financial and emotional distress of the situation. Studies have shown depression and anxiety can impair the decision-making process – anxiety, in particular, can disrupt action in the prefrontal cortex, the seat of rational decision-making. Poverty, likewise, affects the decision-making process, negatively impacting cognition. Essentially, poor or unwell people make choices with short-term payoffs, rather than looking at long-term goals. I soon began to make decisions based on what I could tolerate, not on the wisest and most logical outcome. I quit my job and fled into the bush, where I worked as a professional forager. I lived in an old truck and camper without running water, electricity, proper food, sanitation or internet. Naturally, this only further strained my precarious finances, which in turn required more and more mental energy to handle. Soon, I was living hand-to-mouth in the bush, so profoundly depressed that to get out of bed without a drink was impossible. The coup de grace was not so much a blow as a blade on which I fell willingly. I began a relationship with a man who quickly took what little control I had left. A master manipulator, he threatened and abused me physically and emotionally, assuming control of my money, curating where I went and who I spoke to. When I had the strength to protest, he battered me down. No one else would have me – that my ex had cheated on me was proof of that – because I was crazy, he said. Anything I said or did, especially if it was about the way he treated me, was a result of this instability. When the relationship reached its bitter, violent crescendo – a drunken sexual assault – I was so convinced of my own insanity that, the next day, when he told me he had not raped me but “punished” me for the way I had treated him so he could forgive me, I believed him. I believed him so much that, with my body still bruised and aching, with his hand marks still red in the small of my back, I apologized to him. After that, there wasn’t much left of me for a long, long time. ••• Back at the campsite, I had begun to cry and the jag threatened to turn into a panic attack, which I pushed back with wine. I forced myself to breathe deeply and reached for the empty coffee can in which I kept my money. Earlier in the year, my credit card had been closed and the meagre contents of my bank account – $86.32 – seized. What little money I made now I kept in cash, which I counted daily, a soothing act. Money is power in that it determines the range of your choices: what you can eat, wear and do. Counting it was like holding that power in my hands, a physical tabulation of my ability to survive. I opened the tin and, under the light of my headlamp, counted out the contents. I had $3,000 in crumpled $5, $10 and $20 bills. That money had been painstaking earned over the spring and summer, which I had spent as a farmhand, fruit-picker and vineyard worker, hustling from town to town as the work came and went. I was 2,000km (1,243 miles) from my destination – home – in Whitehorse, Yukon territory. Eating as little as I could, sleeping in my truck, if nothing went wrong – if I didn’t get in an accident, if I did not hit bad weather, if another bearing did not go, as the left front one had a week ago – then I would get to Whitehorse with around $2,300. I had no job or housing arranged and winter was coming, but I had the money to get home, so I was going. It wasn’t much of a plan, but it was the only one I had. ••• After I left my violent ex-boyfriend, I had washed up on a friend’s couch in Montreal. In this new city, away from him, I was supposed to be safe, but I didn’t feel safe. Anxiety coloured everything in neon hues of danger, made more real by the omnipresence of poverty. I took brutal panic attacks which petered into dissociative episodes, in which I felt as if some other person – one I did not know or like – was playing the part of myself in a movie I had not seen. I drank copiously in the day, self-medicating. My nights were a blur of hot-wired, drunken insomnia. Later, I would be diagnosed with PTSD. My condition made me near unemployable. I got by on a mixture of charity, odd jobs and freelance work, which I was often late on, unable to maintain concentration. I did not know where to ask for help. What few clinics offered free therapy – when I had the energy to look – had long wait lists. I was sick, so I was poor. I was poor, so I was sick. I was deeply, deeply ashamed of both. The cycle felt inescapable. All that long, dark winter in Montreal, the thought of suicide – the relief of it – was with me. I did try – and fail – in the end. I was so lucky, through all this, to have been blessed with so many good friends, who loved me and stood with me through so much, even when I did not deserve it. I was not a good friend at that time, selfish and needy. To give to others – a dollar or a minute of yourself – you need surpluses, and I had none. I am humbled my friends saw this, and forgave me. I would like to write that it was this great love which saved me, but that’s not true. In the hour you are most alone, all the love in the world is not enough. ••• In the morning, my breath had frosted over the inside of the windows and the field was covered with a pall of wet snow. As I moved about in the cold, making coffee and eating a slice of dry bread, I noted a pain in my right eye. All day it grew as I drove north. That night I had a fever, sweating and tossing in my sleeping bag. An ER doctor told me I had a severe stye – an infection by staphylococcus aureus bacteria of the eyelid – caused by my poor diet and dirty living conditions. He wrote a prescription for antibiotics even as he said they wouldn’t work. I didn’t fill it; instead, I picked yarrow and plantain, crushed and wrapped them around teabags soaked in cheap whisky, which I taped to the infected eye, hidden behind a pair of sunglasses. I drove home like that, 1,500km of twisting mountain passes, changing the compress in gas station bathrooms. I saw a better doctor the day I arrived in Whitehorse; gently holding my head with one hand, she lanced the infection. A thin trickle of poison ran down my face as it drained. When it was over I felt better, but also empty, aching, as you do after you have cried for a long time when crying for a long time was what you needed. In the following months, I lived on couches and housesat, penniless in the brutal Yukon winter. I drove editors crazy chasing the money from freelancing assignments. I took cash jobs fixing houses. I keenly felt my poverty and sometimes slipped back into depression. Slowly, though, cheques and assignments came in. I filled the fridge with food, went to bed warm. One cold day in February, I bought a package of wool socks. I threw out my old ones, full of holes. I wept when I put on the new ones. ••• Recently, I went out with a few friends. We had drinks and pizza. When the evening was over I went home – in July, I found housing, a room in an apartment downtown. I went inside and sat down in an armchair next to a shelf full of books and read for an hour. Then I got undressed and into bed – my own bed, which is in a house with water and electricity – and lay down, pulling the cool, clean sheets up. It does not yet have a green down duvet, but it will, when I can afford one. I turned out the light. It was 13 September 2019. I had just turned 33.
11||Australian Signals Directorate reports breaches on spying, wire tapsThe Australian Signals Directorate has disclosed legal breaches including cases of failing to get ministerial authorisation before producing intelligence on Australians and intercepting communications without a warrant. The annual reports of the ASD and the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security reveal the intelligence and cybersecurity agency has “reported three confirmed breaches of legislation and two potential breaches of legislation to IGIS” in the last financial year. The Centre Alliance senator Rex Patrick seized on the IGIS report, telling Guardian Australia it “is worrying as it shows Australia’s electronic espionage agency has repeatedly illegally intercepted and communicated the telecommunications of Australian persons and failed to promptly report those breaches of the law to the IGIS and the defence minister”. “Aside from revealing a disturbing pattern of noncompliance with legal requirements, perhaps the most striking feature of the IGIS’s annual reports is the absence of any reference to consequences,” he said. The ASD’s legislated functions are to obtain intelligence about and disrupt cybercrime undertaken by “people or organisations outside Australia”, a limit highlighted by Annika Smethurst’s reporting on a proposal to extend spying powers to Australians. But the Intelligence Services Act allows the defence minister to authorise the ASD to produce intelligence on Australians provided it is “necessary” and reasonable because the Australian is likely to be a significant risk to a person’s safety or is committing a serious crime. The IGIS annual report revealed that in June 2018 ASD disclosed it was investigating an incident when it “conducted intelligence activities in relation to two Australian persons without obtaining authorisation from the minister”. “ASD then contravened the requirements of [the Act] by conducting a subsequent activity without consideration of the ASD privacy rules,” the IGIS report said. “The combination of human error and a failure to comply with ASD policy contributed to the breaches.” In August 2018 the ASD advised IGIS of an investigation into another breach which “involved undertaking activity to produce intelligence on an Australian person without obtaining ministerial authorisation to do so”. “The breach resulted from a failure to consider if there is a purpose to produce intelligence on an Australian person where there is more than one purpose,” it said. In January 2019, ASD confirmed an incident where it had failed to provide a report to the defence minister about activities conducted under an emergency ministerial authorisation, a breach of its reporting requirements it corrected in March 2019. The IGIS said in all three of those cases it was satisfied with the ASD investigation and remedial action. The IGIS report noted in July 2018 the ASD advised it had “intercepted communications without a warrant … and had then communicated the intercepted material” – both in breach of the Telecommunications Interception and Access Act. “The breach was the result of a system processing error,” it said. Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In May 2019 the ASD notified the IGIS on two occasions it “may have” breached the TIA Act by “enabling interception without the correct warrant”, and in June 2019 confirmed the breach. In June 2019, ASD informed the IGIS office it “may have” breached the TIA Act by “unauthorised interception of a specific type of communication” and in June 2019 confirmed it “likely contravened the TIA Act”. “In addition to these confirmed instances of non-compliance, ASD also advises this office of ‘potential breaches’ where a breach is technically possible but cannot be proven.” Those included “a potential breach of section 7 of the TIA Act as a result of the misconfiguration of an ASD system” and “an incident whereby communications were potentially intercepted due to a system error”. The IGIS report said in late 2018 ASD disclosed it had “contravened certain legislation” but due to “the sensitive nature of ASD’s operational activities” the IGIS could not provide details of the breach. Patrick said the report shows at best that ASD is “on a slow learning curve” and “at worst they reveal a cavalier attitude towards legislative compliance and to the agency’s accountability to ministers and oversight agencies”. “This is quite unacceptable for a national security agency that has such great power to intrude on the privacy of Australians,” he said. Patrick called for a parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security inquiry into the failures and “what measures would be appropriate to ensure that ASD’s executives have a greater appreciation of the importance of compliance with the law”. Despite the criticism, the IGIS praised the ASD for its “strong record of proactive self-reporting” and said it had taken “mitigation and remediation actions where required in consultation with the office”. The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said the revelations showed the importance of regular reporting requirements, which the third-term Liberal government “has consistently tried to water down … as part of its sustained assault on the public’s right to know”. In June police raided the home of the News Corp journalist Annika Smethurst over the publication of a leaked plan to extend ASD powers with respect to Australians. The home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, has claimed it is “complete nonsense” the government wants to enable spying on Australians, but has confirmed the substance of the report by calling for a “sensible discussion” about whether ASD should gain powers to disrupt paedophile networks and stop cyber-attacks in Australia.
7||All that perfectly good water dumped into the ocean like some sort of enormous NATURE TOILET!
21||‘Brexit has brought civil servants a barrage of unfair criticism’It’s essential that you get ready for when the UK leaves the EU on 31 October” tweeted the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy last Friday, at almost exactly the same time as the chancellor, Sajid Javid, appeared on national television to admit that the UK will not be leaving this Thursday. That tweet – part of a multimillion-pound ad campaign – was sent out by civil servants. It’s their job to carry out the will of the government of the day, whatever they may think privately. Being impartial is defined by the civil service code as acting “solely according to the merits of the case and serving equally well governments of different political persuasions”. Right now, that means one thing: Brexit. Thousands of civil servants have been working on Brexit since 2016. Hundreds of staff have been pulled into the huge Yellowhammer operation (described by one anonymous civil servant working in it as “just for show”) to prepare UK businesses for a potential no-deal Brexit. But what should – or could – civil servants do if they feel the government’s course of action will harm the country? In August, former head of the civil service Bob Kerslake, said officials should consider putting their “stewardship of the country ahead of service to the government of the day”. Talk like this makes Gus O’Donnell, former cabinet secretary and former head of the civil service, apprehensive. “That’s a very dangerous route to go down. I’m very nervous about that,” he says. “People think of it in terms of Brexit, but it could be something from the other end of the spectrum.” The only circumstances in which officials should refuse to carry out government business is where it is illegal, or where they feel it is very poor value for money – and even then, he says, “it’s not that you don’t do it, but you will only do it if given a direction by ministers”. O’Donnell says today’s top officials face far harder issues than anything he had to deal with when he served prime ministers Tony Blair, Gordon Brown and David Cameron between 2005 and 2011. Worse still, the civil service has been attacked as never before, often by the government’s own ministers, amid accusations that civil servants are either “traitors” or “remoaners”, as well as by top advisers, including Dominic Cummings, who believes a permanent civil service should be consigned to the history books. Several high profile officials have recently thrown in the towel, including Jon Thompson, the chief executive of HM Revenue and Customs, who faced death threats for advising that post-Brexit customs options could cost up to £20bn. Last month, senior civil servants told the FDA union they were worried that if they assisted the government in defying parliament, they could be breaking the law. The PCS, another civil service union, has raised its members’ concerns with the Cabinet Office. “Civil servants should never be put in a situation where they could be accused of breaking the law because of the reckless actions of governments,” says Mark Serwotka, PCS general secretary. “In an ideologically riven world, the civil service has been pulled into conflicts, and people have been very concerned about that,” says Philip Rycroft, who headed up the Department for Exiting the EU until he took early retirement in March. “There has been a constant barrage of unfair criticism of civil servants. The job of giving ministers the advice they need, without fear or favour, has not been made any easier by ill-judged criticism by MPs.” Rycroft says it’s critically important for civil servants to continue to give ministers impartial advice – such as the assessment last November of the economic impact of the UK’s exit from the EU – even if the government doesn’t like what it hears. O’Donnell agrees. In a speech he is giving on Wednesday evening to celebrate the centenary of the FDA, he will passionately defend the concept of an impartial civil service. It has, he says, made the UK’s service the most effective in the world, and enables it to build long-term relationships vital to the smooth operation of government. Unlike countries such as the US, where a change of president means a wholesale clearout of senior staff in administrative bodies, the UK system ensures continuity when governments change, he says. Perhaps surprisingly, he remains optimistic that the UK civil service will withstand the present pressure. It’s true that not everything to do with Brexit has been bad for civil servants. After years of budget cuts, the preparations for Brexit have led to a surge in recruitment. There are now more than 400,000 civil servants, reversing previous cuts in many departments. For many ambitious civil servants, particularly those still at the early stages of their career, it’s been a huge opportunity – and one many have taken. Rycroft says it was not a problem to attract staff to the new DExEU. “We were able to attract really good people from elsewhere in the service and from outside. They knew what they were coming in to.” Former senior civil servant Jill Rutter, now senior fellow at the Institute for Government thinktank, agrees – up to a point. “This is a massively interesting piece of work for those who want to take it as an opportunity,” she says. But the real impact, she adds, is on the thousands of staff trying to get other work done. “They are being asked to do more. They [non Brexit-focused departments] are surrendering up people because Brexit’s the priority. Being in the ‘if we have time, if we can get any legislation, if we can get a date in the minister’s diary’ bit of a department is a very depressing place to be,” she points out. “And the bulk of the civil service is in that place. Because although a lot of people are dealing with Brexit, even more aren’t.” Amid the continuing political chaos over Brexit, pressure on the civil service clearly won’t be going away any time soon. But it may be some small comfort for them to know that trust in civil servants has risen six percentage points since 2016 (according to an Ipsos Mori poll last November) while trust in MPs has tumbled.
22||10 of the best tiny castles in the UKCromwell’s Castle, Tresco, Isles of Scilly One of the UK’s most far-flung strongholds, Cromwell’s Castle is in a glorious location on a rocky promontory guarding a channel. A rare surviving example of a fortress built during the Commonwealth, it was erected to deter Dutch invaders. Despite their defeat to Cromwell, royalists were still using Scilly as a base for their “privateers” (a euphemism for pirate ships) that often waylaid passing Dutch vessels. Cromwell dispatched Admiral Robert Blake, who captured the islands and built this fortification on top of a Tudor blockhouse. The ruined 16th-century castle directly above it was so poorly sited that to hit enemy ships its cannons had to be aimed downwards … causing cannonballs to roll out before they could be fired. • Admission free, open daylight hours, english-heritage.org.uk Stokesay Castle, Stokesay, Shropshire Built in the late 13th century, Stokesay was the creation of Laurence of Ludlow, a wool trader who had become one of the wealthiest men in England. It proved successful in protecting his fortune from the brigands who plagued the Welsh border but not in conserving its master’s life: he drowned when his wool-packed ship sank in the Channel. Stokesay’s highlights include the south tower – whose roof affords wonderful views over the Shropshire countryside – and the wood-and-plaster gatehouse, with its mustard-yellow colouring. • Admission £8.60 adult, 5-17s £5.20, family (2+3) £22.40, open 10am-5pm daily until 3 November, then 10am-4pm weekends only until 16 March, english-heritage.org.uk Pendragon Castle, Mallerstang, Cumbria Legend (and indeed the castle’s name) would have visitors believe that this bijou fortress in the Vale of Mallerstang was constructed by Uther Pendragon, father of King Arthur. Actually, it was a Norman, Ranulf le Meschin, who built the castle in the 1100s, probably on the site of a Roman fort. Once owned by one of the knights who murdered archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Becket, Pendragon was burned down twice by Scottish raiders and, despite a later valiant restoration, was abandoned to its fate. It stands today the very definition of a craggy castle, its ruined walls, doorways, arrow slits, spiral staircases and windows a fascinating hotchpotch of eras set amid stunning scenery. • Castle is on private land but visits, with care, are free, yorkshiredales.org.uk Nunney Castle, Nunney, Somerset A visit to Nunney Castle can be very illustrative – especially if you’ve ever wondered about the power of a 17th-century cannon. An exquisitely small castle (there’s so little room on its tiny island that the corner towers bash into each other at both ends), Nunney was built by Sir John de la Mare with the money he made by kidnapping French nobles during the hundred years war. By the time of the civil war the castle was in the hands of staunch royalist Richard Prater and was besieged by Sir Thomas Fairfax. On the third day of the siege, the Roundhead general ordered a single cannon shot to be fired from a nearby hill. It blew such a large hole in the north-west wall that Prater surrendered immediately. • Free, open daylight hours, english-heritage.org.uk Preston Tower, Chathill, Northumberland If you lived on the England-Scotland border during the time of the reivers, your chances of making it to old age (or at least dying in your bed) were considerably improved if you lived in a well-fortified pele tower. This elegant example first saw life in the 1390s, when English and Scottish border raiders were at each other’s throats. Its three storeys contain a minute cell with an unfeasibly low door, a bedroom and living room decked out with the spartan accoutrements of the day, and a room devoted to the story of the Battle of Flodden, which took place nearby in 1513. • Admission £2 adult, 50p child, open daily year-round 10am-6pm or dusk, prestontower.co.uk Dolbadarn Castle, Llanberis, Gwynedd A symbol of Welsh defiance, Dolbadarn became arguably the nation’s oddest prison. Constructed in around 1230 by Llywelyn the Great on a knoll overlooking Llyn Peris, it guarded an important pass through Snowdonia. Some 25 years later, Llywelyn ap Gruffydd seized power after winning the battle of Bryn Derwin against two of his brothers. The victor captured one of them, Owain Goch, and imprisoned him in the castle keep. He remained there, all alone, for the next 22 years. The solitary inmate was the subject of a famous lament (well, it was a big hit in the middle ages) by 13th-century poet Hywel Foel ap Griffi, and Owain’s singular prison remains remarkably well-preserved to this day. • Free, open daily 10am-4pm except 24-26 December and 1 January, cadw.gov.wales Wiston Castle, Wiston, Pembrokeshire Though very small in comparison with more famous Welsh castles, Wiston is an immaculate fragment of the country’s history. A classic motte-and-bailey affair, its on a hill in the midst of farmland and still retains its unusual 18-sided shell keep. It was probably built in the early 1100s by a Flemish colonist – the gloriously named Wizo – on the site of an iron-age camp. Riled by this intrusion, the locals captured the castle at least three times over the following 100 years. It even managed a civil-war cameo before finding peace as a picturesque attraction on a manor house estate. • Free, open daily 10am-4pm except 24-26 December and 1 January, visitwales.com Portencross Castle, Portencross, North Ayrshire It’s nigh on impossible to resist the charm of this wee stronghold and its delightful setting. An unassuming tower house, it stands alone on a low headland between a long sloping beach and a small natural harbour. Though it’s hard to imagine it, Portencross was once the preferred venue for the signing of important royal charters and Robert II, grandson of Robert the Bruce, was a frequent visitor. Abandoned in the 18th century, it later took on an unexpected new life as a base for fishermen, who mended their nets in its cellar right up to 1980. The dangerously dilapidated fortress was recently saved by the heroic work of the Friends of Portencross, who have now opened this tiny treasure to the public. • Free, usual opening hours 11am-4pm, see website for variations, portencrosscastle.org.uk Broughty Castle, Dundee Follow the River Tay downstream from the centre of Dundee and you’ll find an unexpected treat in the midst of the suburbs. Built in the 15th century to guard the mouth of the Tay, Broughty Castle is as neat and trim a castle as you could hope for. In its youth, it was also the subject of a somewhat unusual military tactic. When Henry VIII launched a series of attacks on Scotland, instead of besieging Broughty, he got in touch with the castle’s owner, Lord Gray, and bought it from him. In the years since, it has been used, with varying degrees of success, to ward off the Scots, the English, the Russians, the French and the Germans. Nowadays it’s keener on attracting folk of all nations to its excellent museum and art gallery. • Free, open Tues-Sat 10am-4pm, Sun 12.30pm-4pm (October-March), Mon-Sat 10am-4pm, Sun 12.30pm-4pm (April-September), historicenvironment.scot Cubbie Roo’s Castle, Wyre, Orkney Just over a square mile in area, Wyre is one of the smallest inhabited islands in the Orcadian archipelago, and was part of Norway for more than 600 years. Its star attraction was described in King Haakon’s Saga as “a very unhandy place to attack” – which, if you own a castle, is the sort of review you like to read. There are no Norse castles at all in Scandinavia, and Cubbie Roo’s is one of only two to have been excavated in Britain. While few of the remaining walls are particularly high, the main outlines of the castle buildings are well-preserved and, along with the defensive ditches and ramparts, give the feel of an ancient labyrinth. • Free, open daylight hours, historicenvironment.scot Dixe Wills’ book Tiny Castles is published on 31 October (AA Publishing, £16.99). To order a copy for £14.95, visit The Guardian bookshop • This article was amended on 31 October 2019. The original picture of Cubbie Roo’s Castle actually showed St Mary’s Chapel at the foot of the castle hill. Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips
5||TV tonight: Putin, punch-ups and propaganda – it’s Russian TV!The World According to Vladimir Putin 10pm, Channel 4 From karaoke to topless fishing expeditions and political punch-ups, it seems anything goes on state-controlled Russian TV; that is, anything of which Putin approves. This tongue-in-cheek documentary examines how state news controls the agenda – and Russian citizens’ perceptions of their country. While the clips of shows may be entertaining and somewhat exoticising, there is a worrying undercurrent of propaganda that seemingly fuels one of the world’s major powers and its people. Ammar Kalia George Clarke’s Old House, New Home 8pm, Channel 4 Two period homes are getting a makeover in the new series of George Clarke’s does-what-it-says-on-the-tin property show. In West Yorkshire, Pip is renovating the house in which she grew up. Will sentiment get in the way of her renovation? Elsewhere, a couple from London who are on countdown to their first baby are taking on a Victorian terrace. Hannah Verdier The Apprentice 9pm, BBC One With energy levels depleted by last week’s electric bike task, the would-be apprentices take on Oxbridge. Well, sort of. Lord Sugar tasks them with a scavenger hunt around Oxford and Cambridge, leading to much confusion and – of course – the trademark roar of “You’re fired” when it’s all over. Hannah J Davies Children in Need: Got It Covered 7.30pm, BBC One Olivia Colman sings Portishead, David Tennant does the Proclaimers and Helena Bonham Carter tries her hand at Joni Mitchell – no, it’s not all-star karaoke, but the new Children in Need cover record, helmed by Robbie Williams’ producer Guy Chambers. Wholesome, out-of-tune viewing. AK Police Raids: Caught By Surprise 9pm, Channel 5 This series offers schooling in hard knocks as law-enforcement agencies gatecrash suspected crooks. Tonight’s episode features a trading-standards crackdown on counterfeit goods in London, but it’s the 5am drug swoop in Wales that requires a custom chainsaw. Graeme Virtue Britain’s Lost Masterpieces 9pm, BBC Four Art sleuths Emma Dabiri and Bendor Grosvenor return for another series of unearthing forgotten art gems belonging to British public institutions. This week, they travel to the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford to look into a portrait of an 18th-century medical student. AK Film choice Dogman (Matteo Garrone, 2018), 10.50pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Matteo Garrone, the director of Gomorrah, returns to the southern Italian underworld with this downbeat, bitterly funny tale of criminal lowlife in a near-derelict seaside town. Marcello Fonte is the mournful Marcello, who grooms the ferocious dogs of local gangsters with loving care; Edoardo Pesce is his tormentor. Paul Howlett Live sport Snooker: World Open 6.25am, Eurosport 1. The third day of the event, featuring third-round matches. Tennis: Shenzhen Open 10.15am, BT Sport 1. Day four of the WTA finals from Shenzhen Bay sports centre. Carabao Cup football: Chelsea v Manchester United 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Livepool v Arsenal airs at 7.30pm on Sky Sports Football.
1||Wednesday briefing: New plan – we're having an electionTop story: Is Johnson making same mistake as May? Good morning – Warren Murray here. Did you know election signs are made of something called “correx”? You’re going to be seeing quite a lot of it … Brexit will again be taken to the ballot box with a general election to be held on 12 December. Parliament will dissolve on Wednesday of next week for a five-week campaign, assuming the House of Lords passes the election bill as expected, as soon as today. MPs voted in favour of an election by 438 to 20; a majority of 418. For toeing the line this time, the Conservatives restored the party whip to 10 of the 21 rebel MPs ejected in September when they voted against the government. This morning our political team assess how well the parties are prepared. Dan Sabbagh asks whether Labour can eat into the 58-seat majority projected for Boris Johnson, who is ahead 10 points in published opinion polls. Labour has axed its “trigger ballot” process where incumbent MPs could be deselected by the local branch membership. The party’s national executive committee will meet to consider the fate of controversial MPs such as Keith Vaz, Chris Williamson and Roger Godsiff. Our editorial carries a reminder that Theresa May called a snap election in 2017 thinking she had the upper hand – but ended up dumped into minority government. “More often than not, politicians overestimate their ability to frame the terms of political debate … Boris Johnson might be on the verge of making a similar mistake.” The spectre of the Brexit party looms, with incumbent Tory MPs reportedly begging Nigel Farage’s party not to run candidates against them. Electoral meltdown or not for the Tories, thousands of 50p coins minted in advance to mark 31 October as Brexit day are going to be melted down until when (and if) the metal is actually needed. The Liberal Democrats, Plaid Cymru and Green party are set to unveil a pact in which the parties will stand aside in certain seats to boost each other’s chances and reduce the risk of a damaging Brexit. The Lib Dem MP Heidi Allen – who arrived at the party by way of the Conservatives, then Change UK, then a stint as an independent – is standing down, citing the “invasion into my privacy and the nastiness and intimidation” she has experienced as a politician: “Nobody in any job should have to put up with threats, aggressive emails, being shouted at in the street, sworn at on social media, nor have to install panic alarms at home.” This morning it emerges that the Conservatives’ election manifesto is being drawn up by Rachel Wolf, a lobbyist for the fracking company Cuadrilla and partner at a business that lobbies ministers on behalf of the shale gas industry. Much more news and many more twists to come as we embark on the trudge to 12 December – head over to our live blog to keep track of this first full day of campaigning. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; Priti Patel’s chief of staff, James Starkie, was escorted by armed police out of the Strangers’ Bar in the Houses of Parliament last night. Witnesses said he had started swearing, punched a door and been refused service. He apologised as he was ejected. &gt; “Extremely disturbing” testimony to the Trump impeachment inquiry from Lt Col Alexander Vindman, a decorated military officer, has left Republicans grappling with how to counter a highly credible account from a Purple Heart veteran about the president’s attempts to recruit Ukraine into a political smear campaign. &gt; Police are hunting Ronan Hughes aka Rowan Hughes, 40, and his brother Christopher, 34, both from Armagh, for the suspected manslaughter and human trafficking of 39 people whose bodies were found in a lorry trailer in Essex. &gt; Female MPs have condemned the British media’s treatment of Meghan, Duchess of Sussex, in running “often distasteful and misleading” stories that sometimes display “outdated, colonial undertones”. &gt; The climate campaigner Greta Thunberg has declined a prestigious environmental award, declaring: “The climate movement does not need any more awards. What we need is for our politicians and the people in power start to listen to the current, best available science.” * * * WhatsApp sues spyware lab – WhatsApp has launched a lawsuit against the Israeli cyber-weapons and surveillance firm NSO Group, alleging its software was used for attacks on more than 100 human rights activists, lawyers, journalists and academics. The attacks exploited a vulnerability that allowed a malicious party to install spyware on people’s phones. WhatsApp said it believed the technology sold by NSO was used to target the phones of more than 1,400 of its users in 20 different countries during a 14-day period from the end of April to the middle of May. The lawsuit, filed in a California court on Tuesday, demands a permanent injunction blocking NSO from attempting to access WhatsApp computer systems and those of its parent company, Facebook. * * * And finally – The Great British Bake Off is done and dusted (with cocoa powder and the like). Here is the result. Today in Focus podcast: The day Baghdadi’s time ran out The Guardian’s Martin Chulov describes how US special forces finally tracked down Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who died in a raid at the weekend. Plus: Robert Booth on the criticism of the London fire brigade’s response to the Grenfell Tower disaster. Lunchtime read: How to love your job – forever What is it like to have the same job in the same company for as long as 40 years? A tailor, school meals supervisor, bus driver and sexual health nurse tell all about being some of Britain’s most loyal employees. Sport England coach Eddie Jones has gone back to what he feels has worked, writes Ugo Monye, and ahead of the Rugby World Cup final, we have discovered the new trend is actually an old trend. Saturday’s opponents, South Africa, are using the experience seven of their squad have of playing in the Premiership to aid their preparation. Meanwhile, England have been reprimanded and fined for their V-shaped formation when facing the haka before their semi-final victory over New Zealand. Richard Freeman, the former British Cycling and Team Sky doctor, will admit to telling “a lot of lies” and supplying banned testosterone to a senior figure in both organisations, an independent medical tribunal heard. Ashleigh Barty experienced mixed emotions as she became the first Australian to secure the year-end No 1 ranking simply by stepping onto the court at the WTA Finals in Shenzhen but then lost in three sets to Kiki Bertens. Bulgaria have been sanctioned by Uefa after the racist chanting which marred the Euro 2020 qualifier with England this month, but people should stop throwing stones inside English football’s glass house, writes David Conn. Sergio Agüero scored twice in Manchester City’s 3-1 win in the Carabao Cup as Southampton at least avoided a repeat of their hiding by Leicester. And goals from Mason Holgate and Richarlison spared Marco Silva’s blushes against his former club Watford and sent Everton into the quarter-finals. Business Asian share markets have slipped as the prospect of a rate cut by the Federal Reserve is countered by worries a China-US first-stage trade deal could be delayed. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan fell from Tuesday’s three-month high while Japan’s Nikkei also dropped off from a one-year high. On Wall Street the S&amp;P 500 index touched a record intraday high, led by strong earnings from drug manufacturers such as Merck and Pfizer, before ending down 0.08%. A disappointing profit report from Google parent Alphabet kept the Nasdaq in the red. Sterling is trading around $1.286 and €1.158 at time of writing; the FTSE is flat. The papers Wednesday’s papers all look ahead to a festive snap election with turkeys, a Grinch and even a New Year’s Leave party. The Guardian casts the election vote in terms of Brexit: “Parliament breaks deadlock with December 12 election” and notes the national poll could be the most unpredictable in a generation. Metro goes with a cheery “Jingle polls!” for its headline and says it is the first December election in almost a century. The Mail features a cartoon Boris Johnson dressed as Santa and a green-skinned Jeremy Corbyn riding a sleigh: “Don’t let the Grinch steal your Christmas.” The Mirror says “It’s time to stuff the turkey” and superimposes the head of the PM on the animal. The Telegraph chooses a picture in which Corbyn and his shadow cabinet resemble Christmas carollers, above the simple headline: “Christmas election.” The Sun skips Christmas and heads straight for “New Year’s Leave” and says Johnson has a chance to get a Brexit deal done before the end of 2019. It pitches 1 January as “the first day of the rest of our lives”. The Express chooses a Churchillian picture of Johnson and predicts that 12 December will be the day “when Britain will vote … once and for all … to deliver Brexit.” The Times is less confident, saying the PM has gambled on voters backing him to secure Brexit. The FT casts the election as a way to break the paralysis. The i begins its election countdown timer – 43 days – and predicts the race will be won and lost on social media. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com
9||Election pact pursued by Lib Dems, Plaid Cymru and GreensThe Liberal Democrats, Plaid Cymru and Green party are set to unveil a general election pact in which the parties would stand aside in certain seats to boost each others’ chances. An announcement expected next week on the pact, which is a successor to the so-called progressive alliance discussed before the 2017 general election that achieved little mainly due to local parties’ inability to agree who should stand down where. The 2019 incarnation does not include Labour and thus would have a necessarily limited scope, as Plaid Cymru has just four MPs and the Greens one. However, this variant has already had success, with Plaid and the Greens not standing candidates in August’s Brecon and Radnorshire byelection, allowing the Liberal Democrats a clearer run, helping them take the seat from the Conservatives. The three-party process is taking place under the umbrella of a grouping called Unite to Remain, whose directors include Jim Knight, a former Labour MP who is now a peer, and Jessica Simor, a prominent remain-supporting QC. When the campaign was formally launched earlier in the month, the Lib Dems’ Heidi Allen, who announced on Tuesday she was standing down as an MP, said it hoped to cover 70 constituencies. This would involve the three parties standing down for each other and, in some places, not standing against strongly remain Labour candidates. Sources said a formal announcement was expected in the coming days, probably next week. One party source said there had been a meeting several weeks ago, but none more recently. “I imagine a general election will concentrate people’s minds and the process will now move fairly quickly,” they said. One complication is that decisions have to be agreed by local activists. The three parties involved are notably decentralised, with constituency parties having considerable autonomy. The source said: “The hope is that with such an uncertain election, and the tight timetable, we can get people to agree more willingly.” The 2017 plan ran into problems, mainly because of a perceived unwillingness of parties to give ground, especially Labour. The Greens subsequently expressed scepticism about taking part in a similar process again. But a Green spokeswoman said the party was committed to the process now: “It is right that political parties engage in grown-up discussions about how to best stop a deeply damaging Brexit. Our party is in talks about the potential to stand a single remain-supporting candidate in some seats in England and Wales, as was successfully done in the Brecon and Radnorshire byelection. No decisions have yet been made and any agreement will involve the relevant local parties.”
0||South Africa expect brains as well as brawn from England in finalSouth Africa’s forwards coach Matt Proudfoot has spent the week working out a response to the performance by England’s pack against New Zealand last Saturday that he summed up in one word: “Wow.” New Zealand, the favourites to win the semi-final and keep hold the trophy they had retained in 2015, were knocked back in challenge after challenge, culminating in their captain, Kieran Read, being stopped dead on the charge by Sam Underhill. South Africa are expected to provide England with their most physical challenge this tournament, but Proudfoot noted that New Zealand fell victim to brain as well as brawn. “I think the final will be very tight,” said Proudfoot. “England were very efficient and powerful against New Zealand. We have spoken about having to match that intensity, but it was not just about brute force. There was a lot of very intelligent play from their pack. I was very impressed with what I saw. We know it will be a big challenge. “We played them four times last year, but as a pack they are a lot more confident in what they are doing. There is more understanding about what they want and so they are executing better. The New Zealand game was a great one to watch and they will look to play the same way. As a team we watched it and went: ‘Wow.’ They were just great. “We know what we are up against, but I have been impressed with how mature our guys have become. The pack is experienced and solving problems internally. A number of them have played in the World Cup before and our coaching philosophy is to empower them. We know the pressure a final can bring and it will come down to which side does what they do better.” South Africa’s captain Siya Kolisi will win his 50th cap in the final and the veteran frontrow Tendai Mtawarira paid tribute to the impact the flanker has made since he was appointed by head coach Rassie Erasmus last year. “What he has achieved is remarkable,” said Mtawarira. “He has come from being a young kid in a Port Elizabeth township and risen above his circumstances to become the Springbok captain and an inspiration to South Africans in all walks of life. “Winning the World Cup would cap my long career, but we will not be getting ahead of ourselves. That is one thing I have learned in my long career. Rassie has made a big difference. He says it as it is, and that was not something I had experienced before. The players really respect him.” South Africa’s prop Vincent Koch has noticed similarities between the way England and his club, the Premiership champions Saracens, play. “I have noticed a few things with England that Saracens do,” he said. “Different jerseys but a similar gameplan. We will be ready for whatever they bring.”
0||Justify wins muddy Kentucky Derby as Mendelssohn falls short – as it happenedSo, disappointment for Mendelssohn but a huge new star of American racing in Justify, a horse with a huge future and a very live tilt at the Triple Crown in front of him. As a son of Scat Daddy, he is also now worth a staggering amount of money as a stallion prospect, whatever else he does. Quite a day for a crowd of 157,813 to look back on as they head out into the gathering gloom and look forward to a change of clothes. Thanks for sharing it with me, this is Greg Wood at Churchill Downs, signing off. Here’s Mike Smith: My job was just to get him out of there. Once we jumped well, I basically stepped out of the way and kept a leg on each side and my mind out of the way. Bob Baffert is (finally) here: He broke clean, and I knew that he wasn’t going to lay down. It’s like having LeBron James on your team, you’d better win a championship with him. The main players will be in the interview room shortly, quotes will follow. Mendelssohn was last across the line, Ryan Moore accepted the inevitable before they had reached the far turn but it was really lost at the start. He looked as though he took a bump too as Moore tried his best to find some sort of a position, but to no avail. A race that was run in awful conditions but Justify fully lived up to his billing from Bob Baffert as the possible successor to his Triple Crown winner, American Pharoah. He looked the winner from the moment he hit the front and will now be a very short price for the Preakness Stakes, the next leg of the Triple Crown. It is certainly difficult to see any of today’s rivals overturning the form at Pimlico. Good Magic was second, Audible third, Instilled Regard fourth and My Boy Jack fifth. A long way to come for a muddy disappointment, but Justify was a ready winner, he took it up a long way out and has finally beaten the Curse of Apollo. Mendelssohn never threatened sadly. Photo for second, Audible and Good Magic. Justify wins! Justify leads around the home turn, from Bolt Dorof Really fast second quarter too Justify moving up Only a fair break by Mendelssohn, a very fast pace led by Promise Fulfilled Off and running “Let’s go Mendelssohn” is the cry from just behind me. The first few are in. Now they approach the starting gate .... Apologies to At The Races viewers, who must have thought there was a hell of a delay on their coverage. Correction, they are not quite starting to load, though post time was a minute ago. They are starting to load for the 144th Kentucky Derby. Come on Ryan. He’s from Brighton too, y’know. And now some Fat Boy Slim. They must know I’m from Brighton. I will have my binoculars focused on stall 14 as they open and do all I can to describe the Greatest Two Minutes In Sport as it’s happening. The Final Countdown blares out across Churchill Downs, in less than 10 minutes, one of these 20 horses will be in the history books. Going down to the gates. Mendelssohn got a huge cheer too, a lot of people here would love to see a first winner for Europe The horses are parading in front of the stand and being introduced to the crowd. A huge cheer for My Boy Jack. The roar that ripped through Churchill as the bugler sounded Reveille was blood-curdling, while my new friend Crow is currently dabbed away the tears thanks to a wonderful rendition of My Old Kentucky Home. Bit teary myself, never though I’d be here to hear it. Laila Ali, the daughter of Louisville-born Muhammed Ali, has just announced “Rider’s Up”. And they are! There is an argument at least that Moore may try to ride Mendelssohn a bit closer to the pace that might otherwise be the case, but plenty of other riders are likely to be thinking the same thing as they try to avoid getting buried in a slop-storm on the inside. The last five favourites have won here, but these conditions must make an outsider winning more likely. Mendelssohn very steady in the betting at 6-1, but there’s little doubt Justify is going to start favourite from seven. How will Ryan Moore have plotted this out? He would probably have had quite a few ideas in his head, but has he had to junk the lot as a result of the rain? Mendelssohn is on the big screen being led into his saddling barn, and the jockeys are leaving the jockeys’ room. Still the rain comes down. That stat about it never having rained during the Kentucky Derby itself is looking very down in the mouth. The runners in the Kentucky Derby are making their way across from the barns. Just been down to the parade ring for a quick chat with Aidan O’Brien, who is, understandably, still buzzing after his son Donnacha’s win on Saxon Warrior in the 2,000 Guineas earlier. He’s as much in the dark as anyone about Mendelssohn’s ability to handle the slop. You just wouldn’t know. We took him to Dubai to prepare him for the dirt, and now it’s completely different. [But] he’s an unusual horse with a big personality, and when you put the blinkers on him, his focus changes completely Nice line: The serious buildup to the 144th Kentucky Derby starts here. The rain is a big unknown for Mendelssohn as it is for most of the runners in the race, but it has to be a particular concern for his supporters as he floated over the fast dirt at Meydan in March. The track TV has just shown the “Puppy Predictor” for this year’s Kentucky Derby, which runs on a late-night talk show. About 15 puppies race over what looks around 10 feet to reach a tray of dog biscuits, and apparently, the puppy representing subsequent Triple Crown winner American Pharoah was the winner in 2015. This year’s winner according to puppy lore? It’s Mendelssohn. Yoshida has just won the Turf Classic for Bill Mott and Jose Ortiz, and the rain is still coming down. The runners are out on the track for the Turf Classic, the last race before the Kentucky Derby itself, although there are all sorts of traditions to run through before the big race itself at 23.46 British time (18.46 here). I met an extremely pleasant chap called Crow Hollister while having breakfast in a local cafe this morning. He’s a Louisville native and made it plain how much this race means to the city and the state. The whole place stops at post time, everyone is in front of a screen if they’re not at the track and as he put it, it would be great to be hovering above Louisville to hear the roar that goes up from every corner of this city of 1.2m when the gates crash open and the field sets off. He also admits that he still gets misty-eyed when the crowd sings “My Old Kentucky Home” with the horses heading for the gates. That will, as always, be quite a moment, and it is now scarcely an hour away. Oh, and they were also stopping people bringing in umbrellas at the gate before racing. There is a huge umbrella graveyard somewhere nearby. Odd thing about all the rain is that it wasn’t forecast at all, even yesterday afternoon there was some confidence that there might be the odd shower but nothing too serious. The previous record for the wettest Derby day ever, incidentally, was apparently in 1918, so here’s an early warning to racegoers in 2118 to be sure to pack a raincoat. This is now, officially, the wettest Kentucky Derby ever, with 2.31 inches of inch so far today. Another runner in the big one that deserves a mention is My Boy Jack (stall 10, 5-1), as his current odds are well below the “morning line” prediction of 30-1. That may just mean that the early punters all know someone called Jack, as the serious money has yet to hit the pools, but he was tipped up by a few decent judges as likely to finish strongly through tiring horses from off the pace. as he did here in the Stonestreet at Lexington. Vino Rosso (stall 18, 14-1) is an interesting runner in the big one, as John Velazquez had a few options and came down in favour of the Wood Memorial winner. And three lengths behind Vino Rosso here is Enticed (stall 12, 55-1), who runs for Godolphin’s US operation overseen by Kiaran McLoughlin. Good Magic’s latest run was an improvement on his start behind Promises Fulfilled (stall three, 46-1) in the Fountain of Youth at Gulfstream on 3 March. Good Magic (stall 6, 9-1) took last year’s Breeders’ Cup Juvenile, with Bolt D’Oro, who set off as the hot favourite, back in third. The track here at Churchill Downs is now officially “sloppy”, and the big outsider Funny Duck just took the Pat Day Mile on the dirt with Seahenge &amp; Ryan Moore out of the frame. Some more form from YouTube. Audible, currently a 6-1 chance to win from stall five, beat Hofberg, (25-1, stall nine) in the Florida Derby on 31 March. It was only the third start of Hofberg’s career and personally I have a feeling he might get a fair bit closer to Audible today. Don’t cry for me, David Johnson. I’m loving every minute. On the subject of HST’s day out at the Derby with Ralph Steadman, here’s a piece in the Courier Journal this week where they caught up with the artist to talk about his somewhat hazy memories of the 1970 Kentucky Derby. Went for a walk on the infield earlier (thankfully before the worst of the rain) to see if it bears any resemblance to the scene depicted in Hunter S Thompson’s famous piece “The Kentucky Derby is Decadent and Depraved”. There were plenty of moderately offensive bespoke suits in outlandish colours and designs but nothing too debauched, though it was early and I can’t imagine what it must be like out there now after several inches of rain. A proper gonzo journalist would head out there and wade in. I’m happier being non-gonzo and (relatively) dry. On with the form guide. Todd Pletcher’s Magnum Moon, who will break from stall 16, is, like Justify, trying to brake the so-called Curse of Apollo. He was the last horse to win without running as a juvenile, back in 1882. Whatever you think of stats, that’s quite a stat. Here he is winning the Arkansas Derby, with Solomini, who is drawn in 17 today, back in third. Deauville, one of Ryan Moore’s three rides on the undercard before the Kentucky Derby, has been scratched from the Turf Classic. Just went for a quick spin around the paddock. There are racegoers taking bets on whether they can jump puddles without getting their feet wet, and there are enough around to construct a entire Grand National course of puddles should you so wish. There’s a monster near the parade ring that would be a very daunting Chair. Justify, meanwhile, put up two of the best Beyer figures of the year in his first two starts this year, which were also the first two runs of his career, and then established himself as the likely favourite today with an easy win in the Santa Anita Derby on 7 April, where Bolt D’Oro, who is also in today’s field, was three lengths away in second. US fans are a little unsure what to make of Mendelssohn’s romp in the desert, not least after Rayya, the runner-up, completely failed to fire in the Kentucky Oaks here on Friday. But the time guru Andy Beyer put a figure of 106 on it, which is just 1lb behind Justify, the favourite, and Mendelssohn also has winning form in the States in last year’s Breeders’ Cup Juvenile Turf, where the beaten horses included Masar, who was third in today’s 2,000 Guineas. Three hours to the off for the 144th Kentucky Derby and here’s the first of the video form for tonight’s big race. Mendelssohn’s romp in the UAE Derby seemed extraordinary at the time and still looks fairly remarkable when you look at it again a few weeks later. Threeandfourpence, Ryan Moore’s first ride for Aidan O’Brien here today, was never a factor and out of the frame behind Maraud (Todd Pletcher/John Velasquez). Hello from a decidedly damp Churchill Downs racecourse in Louisville, Kentucky, where steady – and at times torrential – rain has been an unwelcome addition to what is, without any doubt, one of the great occasions in any sport. It is not just a horse race, it is a national and international event which permeates the consciousness of pretty much everyone, in terms of an awareness that it exists at any rate. The Kentucky Derby stars in films, books and popular culture. Like the Grand National, people just know about it. For European racing fans, this year’s race is mostly about Mendelssohn, the 18-and-three-quarter length winner of the UAE Derby last time out and the most credible transatlantic contender for the Run For The Roses for at least 26 years. For the Americans, though, this is the final stop at the end of a traditional four-month trail that leads through trial events in Florida, Arkansas, New York, California and Kentucky towards what they like to call, with some justification, “the most exciting two minutes in sports”. And this year’s renewal is, by fairly general consent, one of the best for years, with no significant absentees among the main trial winners and Justify, who may shade Mendelssohn for favouritism, touted as a potential superstar by Bob Baffert, his trainer. Baffert, of course, prepared American Pharoah to win the first Triple Crown for 37 years in the 2015 season, and has been unstinting in his admiration for Justify, who is, like Mendelssohn, a son of the late stallion Scat Daddy. Scat Daddy’s final crop of yearlings went through the ring last year and fetched some astonishing prices as buyers fought to take their last chance to buy a piece of his genes. As was the case when Galileo eventually taking over the mantle of Europe’s top stallion from his own sire, Sadler’s Wells, a Derby-winning son of Scat Daddy would command a huge fee at stud and for all the tradition, history and glory attached to a win today, there is potentially a staggering amount of money at stake as well. As mentioned earlier, the weather here at Churchill is nothing like the warm temperatures and clear skies that were forecast just a couple of days ago (by my weather app, at any rate). There was a slight but steady drizzle in the early part of the morning, and then a proper downpour which started about three hours ago (17.30 BST), and while it has eased off somewhat since, the dirt track – which was officially “fast” this morning – is now described as “muddy” and has been sealed (which basically means compacted to keep it as even as possible. The racing here has been underway for nearly six hours – there are 14 races in all, with the 144th Kentucky Derby at number 12 – and Ryan Moore is due out imminently to ride Threeandfourpence for Aidan O’Brien in the Grade Two American Turf. He also rides Seahenge – like Mendelssohn, a son of Scat Daddy – over a mile on dirt at 4.28 local time (21.28 BST), and Deauville in the $1m Old Forester Turf Classic (10.25 BST) before climbing aboard Mendelssohn when the traditional “Riders Up” call goes out about 15 minutes before the off for the big one. The on-track betting for the big race is relatively unaffected by the changing conditions, with Mendelssohn currently showing as a 6-1 chance behind the 7-2 favourite, Justify. Mendelssohn’s odds with British books range from 3-1 to 5-1 and they are probably looking at quite a few tasty doubles after his stable companion Saxon Warrior took the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket earlier today. I’ll be posting plenty of YouTube video form for the big-race contenders shortly if you are hoping to make up your mind which way to jump. An enthralling few hours lie ahead with a potential moment of horse racing history in the offing and I’m very much looking forward to sharing it with you.
1||‘I got a bit terrified’: Simon Baker on filming Tim Winton’s Breath“I’ve done a lot of work as an actor making a living that I’m not necessarily proud of, and I’d be quite happy if it just sort of disappeared, to be honest,” Simon Baker confesses. “I wanted something that might last a bit longer.” The actor is best known in Australia for his television work, on procedural The Mentalist and drama The Guardian, but he’s currently promoting his feature film directorial debut: a big-screen adaptation of Tim Winton’s controversial novel Breath, in which he also stars. • Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon “A lot of the roles that I’ve played, where they’re – on paper – only two dimensional [or] they’re not that rich, it’s because they’re generally devices,” he explains. Diplomatically, he doesn’t point fingers. “Often it doesn’t matter how much you bring to it; it’s just going to become what it is. That’s where being the director is a bit more interesting, because you can flush out the nuance and the detail.” Set in 1970s Western Australia and shot in the coastal town of Denmark, Baker’s flick hews closely to Winton’s text. It follows Pikelet (Samson Coulter) and Loonie (Ben Spence) over a formative few years as they get taken in under the wing of the ageing surf legend Sando (Baker), and grow enraptured with Sando’s troubled wife, Eva (Elizabeth Debicki). Coulter and Spence were both amateur actors selected for their surfing ability, captured stunningly by water cinematographer Rick Rifici. When Sando and Loonie head off on a surfing adventure without Pikelet, the teen finds comfort in Eva’s bed. She later raises the stakes in a manner that gives grave meaning to the title, pulling out a pink plastic bag and strap for Pikelet to affix to her head. Having been written by Winton, the novel has plenty of local lingo – “ducks nuts” gets a guernsey twice – and reflects warmly yet solemnly on the loss of innocence. It confronts male identity and has its protagonist reckon with a fear of ordinariness and a very confused sexual awakening. But in WA – where Winton lives and where nine of his texts are on the year 12 syllabus – Breath is known for one thing specifically: Eva’s dangerous infatuation with breath play, a taboo act that requires Pikelet to strangle or suffocate her during sex. In the novel, Eva’s asphyxiophilia – or arousal through oxygen deprivation – is written as an eye-watering blow-by-blow account, with Pikelet describing the “evil, crinkly sound of the bag and the smeary film of her breath inside it”. But for the film, Baker edited the sequences elliptically, not showing much at all. He put a number of other sex scenes aside, while toning down the ferocity with which Pikelet takes to his task. (“I gently throttled her,” remembers Pikelet, as an older man in Winton’s book.) Baker spent a long time thinking about how he’d approach the scenes. “There was a while there where I considered not even showing the bag over her head,” he says, before describing the shot order in precise detail, to emphasise that the remaining “two-second shot” and the suggestive images that follow are “far more potent”. “In the book, it really goes there in a lot of ways, because you can do that in a book,” he says. “You don’t have to worry about ratings, you don’t have to worry about what’s going to turn an audience off.” By side-stepping the titular act, the film was awarded an M rating, which will mean it can still be studied in schools. “With the book, it’s black ink on a white page, and you paint the picture and you join the dots yourself,” Baker says. “But, on a 30-foot screen, it’s there in front of you, and it can be far more confronting without a word spoken.” Another omission in the film is the book’s tragic prologue and epilogue, featuring an adult Pikelet – now a paramedic haunted by his past and present kinks – encountering not one but two deaths by autoerotic asphyxiation. Instead, Baker keeps Breath planted in the 1970s. “It’s just not going to work in a film,” he says of the excised chapters. “I wanted to make a film that, when you watched it, it felt like you felt when you read the book, as opposed to a checklist of literal translation of what the book is to the film. It wouldn’t make a good film if you just went through the book and put all the points down.” The idea of adapting Breath first came to producer Mark Johnson, who thought of Baker for the character of Sando, based on his heritage, history and love of surfing. Baker’s initial plan to simply produce alongside Johnson proved unsatisfying after he read the book and found himself ensnared. “Normally, whenever I read anything that was related to surfing at all, I’d run a mile from it, because it always – in script form – felt a bit corny or cheesy,” he says. But after a few meetings with prospective directors, Johnson finally asked Baker if he was keen to take the helm: “I thought you’d never ask,” Baker says with a laugh. Approaching the text, Baker was driven mostly by a fear of failing it. Like Pikelet, he was reckoning with the elemental fear of ordinariness. “[Before production began] I got a bit terrified and started to consider backing out of it, pulling out of it or just letting it fade away,” Baker admits. He confided in his wife, telling her: “I’m scared that I can’t make the film the way I want to make the film; as good as I want it to be.” “[Winton’s] book is intact as a beautiful piece of work,” he says. “I could come unstuck and make a terrible movie completely, but I just needed to know I was free to go and do that. [Winton] was completely accommodating. He completely understood and he said, ‘you go mate, you go ahead and do it’.” “I’m really proud of this movie and I still sort of pinch myself that we were able to pull it off at all. What I wanted to do with this movie [is] try to make a film that had a bit more longevity and, for my own personal satisfaction, [had] some kind of a legacy that I felt proud of.” • Breath is in Australian cinemas now • This article was amended on 9 May 2018. An earlier version referred to “autoerotic asphyxiation” in the subheading. This has been corrected to “erotic asphyxiation”.
2||For the recordPerhaps a printer’s devil tempted us to give Anthony as the first name of San Francisco-based satanic guru, Anton LaVey (“Siren, satanist or comic genius? The many myths of Jayne Mansfield”, News, last week, page 14). Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736
3||Letters: heroin abuse is a public health issueYour special report “Death by the sea: how drugs blighted our coastal towns”, News) raises once again the issue of the appalling death rates from heroin usage. I was struck by the statement that the Royal College of Physicians has declared that the problem must be seen as a public health rather than a criminal justice issue. As a (now retired) GP, and since the deaths in the 1980s of four young patients from heroin overdose in our small market town, I cry: “At last!” Most of us take mood-altering substances, whether alcohol, nicotine or heroin. They are all dangerous, but by treating, for example, tobacco as a public health problem, look at the impact on pubs, the workplace, public transport etc. Bringing heroin into the public health arena and out of the criminal justice system would have an immense impact on crimes related to drugs and prison populations and death rates, particularly among the young, would fall. What government will have the courage to introduce controlled legalisation of drug use, as the Portuguese and Norwegians have done to remarkable effect? Nick Maurice Marlborough, Wiltshire Getting a grip on wind power Regarding the article “Powerful case for UK to get on board with onshore windfarms”, (Business leader), before onshore wind farms are so enthusiastically encouraged by the Welsh government and others, several matters need to be addressed: having moved larger turbines from hills to the settled lowlands, developers need better advice on scale and siting, with a restraint on their urge for the largest turbines; the public need to see tighter controls set over adverse impacts and we need timely enforcement of the conditions. Turbines are sometimes hugely out of scale and so badly sited that they leave residents with a degraded quality of life. We have found that conditions on noise levels can be sidestepped by tweaking turbines during a test period. Since we, the public, pay for the electricity produced out of our high energy bills, and thus public funding is involved, we would like to see any increase in onshore wind accompanied by a guarantee that the size, siting and operation of schemes will be better controlled, that conditional planning consent will mean what it says and that conditions will be enforceable and enforced in a timely manner. Mary-Rose Sinclair Chair of the Pembrokeshire Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales Narberth, Pembrokeshire Generations should unite Rather than pitting generations against each other (“Millennials are suffering… is it really the baby boomers’ fault?”, Focus, last week), economic and social policies and programmes should unite all ages. Everyone should have the chance to work, somewhere decent to live and support for families with caring responsibilities. Underpinning action on homes, care and jobs should be fair taxation, shifting the balance from taxing income to taxing wealth. Taking care of all generations highlights our interdependence. Let’s focus on what unites us – our mutual hopes and concerns; prevention being better than cure; technology working for all; support throughout life; and giving power to people. Enabling older and younger people to mix more would help increase mutual understanding and develop common solutions. We can create a Britain for all ages. To make progress, we need leadership and a new spirit in Britain that uses the assets and the contributions of citizens of all ages. Stephen Burke Director, United for All Ages Rewriting Spanish history Those fighting for a historic Spanish image makeover (“Spain fights to dispel legend of Inquisition and imperial atrocities”, World) would struggle to gloss over Charles Darwin’s observation of the Spanish methods of colonisation of South America at the time of his journey on horseback from the Plata to Buenos Aries in the late 1830s. He wrote in The Voyage of the Beagle: “This is a dark picture; but how much more shocking is the unquestionable fact, that all [Indian] women who appear above twenty years old are massacred in cold blood! When I exclaimed that this appeared rather inhuman, he [Spanish Lieutenant] answered, ‘Why, what can be done? They breed so!’ ” Darwin asks: “Who would believe in this day and age that such atrocities could be committed in a Christian civilised country?” Does the Hispanic Civilisation Foundation have an answer? Margaret Eason Darlington Night nannies for all Having worked as a health visitor for 30 years, I have seen the exhaustion experienced as a result of sleep-deprivation after the birth of a baby (“The new Mary Poppinses: night nannies are wealthy mothers’ latest must-have”, Focus). This is a major contributory factor to the failure to establish or continue breast feeding, feelings of depression and can lead to family breakdown. It would seem that the “must-have of the night nannies”, if available to all for the first six weeks, would be a very cost-effective way of promoting health and supporting all families. Barbara Small Norwich Actions and words Please can Jonathan Bouquet turn his attention to the use of adjectival words to categorise people (“May I have a word?” Comment)? I thought progress was being made, as we seldom hear references to “the disabled” or “the blind”. Recently, I have heard a lot about “illegals”, as in “this country is overrun with “illegals”. Actions can be illegal, people never. Alison Evans Dewsbury, West Yorkshire Unjust deserts Will Hutton concludes his depressing article on the consequences of our leaving the EU by writing that “our country needs and deserves better” (“Struggle as I may, I can find no grounds for optimism on the economy”, Comment). We “need” to be rescued from the folly of the referendum result and cannot be said to “deserve” it. Another sage observed that in countries with democratic rule, people deserve the government for which they vote. Martin Smith Felixstowe, Suffolk Fallacies of the Brexit vote No, Mrs May, in voting to leave the EU, the British people didn’t vote “to leave the single market and the customs union” (“Mrs May’s attempt to muddle through Brexit is fast approaching crunch time”, Andrew Rawnsley, Comment). They couldn’t. The government denied them the option. Its official guidance explicitly distinguished between the EU and the single market as separate entities. Leaving the EU, it said, risked only losing “full” and enjoying “less” – not all – access to the single market, a potentially important factor for many voters. The ballot paper then offered a choice, in what the government had presented as “a once in a generation decision”, on staying in or leaving only the EU. For Mrs May to presume that voters would also have decided to leave the single market is an abuse of democratic process. She should reread and honour the government’s published confirmation of continued access. David Crawford Norwich One TSB problem solved Questions are justifiably being asked about TSB and what it stands for (“Don’t look so worried, Paul. TSB’s tech glitch will be resolved. Eventually”, Business leader). It seems to me that the late Denis Healey was his usual prescient and succinct self on the matter: the silly billies. Mike Pender Cardiff
1||New kids on the Croisette: Cannes’ stars of the futureIt was with that distinctively French manner of casual, even shrugging, hyperbole that the Cannes film festival director, Thierry Frémaux, prefaced the announcement of this year’s lineup by promising “a great renewal of a generation”. He sounded, as is his wont, unfussed about this and, in turn, those listening at the press conference could understandably have dismissed the boast as a hollow one. Isn’t Cannes more or less the same every year, after all? The roster of high-minded films from brand-name auteurs mixed in with the annual concession to blockbuster celebrity-bait takes a similar shape from one edition to the next. The parties and premiere photos are all but interchangeable across the years. The controversies, too, are more or less fixed in place: every year you can count on headlines about gratuitous provocations on screen, press conference gaffes, booing in the aisles, the paucity of female film-makers in the programme, and the sartorial sexism of the rigid red-carpet dress code. Journalists covering the festivals are constantly checking they haven’t reused last year’s bon mots; a four-year cycle, at least, seems more or less reasonable. Yet once Frémaux had unveiled his 2018 selection, eyebrows remained largely raised. European Twitter wags gleefully declared a “Frémauxcalypse”; many Americans were left bewildered. “Seriously?” shrieked the reactionary Hollywood blogger Jeffrey Wells, swiftly declaring the lineup, sight unseen, the worst in memory. “I get the overwhelming feeling we’re being punished for something,” half-joked New York Magazine’s Emily Yoshida. Over in London, Mike Leigh, a former Palme d’Or winner, might have wondered something similar. His forthcoming historical epic, Peterloo, widely seen as a sure bet for the Cannes competition, had been passed over – the most surprising of several high-profile auteur omissions whose films had been seen and assessed by Frémaux’s selection committee. Italy’s Paolo Sorrentino, whose last six films all competed at Cannes, was frozen out with his Berlusconi biopic, Loro. Japan’s Naomi Kawase, a mainstay of the festival since winning the Camera d’Or for her 1997 debut, Suzaku, was left off the list too, despite the Cannes-friendly presence of Juliette Binoche in her latest, Vision. Meanwhile, Claire Denis, a critics’ darling who somehow hasn’t been in competition at Cannes since 1988, was widely expected to break the hex with High Life, a sci-fi film starring Robert Pattinson. Frémaux had other ideas. The bloodbath was compounded by the immediate fallout from the festival’s much-publicised dispute with the content streaming monolith Netflix, the distributor behind several big-name attractions that had been expected to premiere on the Croisette, including Alfonso Cuarón’s Roma, Paul Greengrass’s Norway and the eagerly awaited completion of Orson Welles’s The Other Side of the Wind, which had been decades in the making. Netflix famously opts to release its films immediately online. French exhibitors, resistant to this new model, require a window of cinema exclusivity. Failure to broker a compromise between the two resulted in Netflix withdrawing its films altogether. Bar an unlikely softening in stance on either side, last year’s Netflix-backed competition entries Okja and The Meyerowitz Stories will remain anomalies for the foreseeable future. In place of the predicted big shots are several names that have casual observers scratching their heads: Eva Husson (Girls of the Sun), Ryusuke Hamaguchi (Asako I &amp; II), Kirill Serebrennikov (Leto), Sergei Dvortsevoy (My Little One), Nadine Labaki (Capernaum) and Abu Bakr Shawky (Yomeddine). Apart from the Egyptian newcomer Shawky – granted a competition slot for his debut feature, an irregular occurrence at Cannes – these directors are not unknown quantities to critics and industry folk schooled in the contemporary festival circuit. But they are the sort of up-and-comers, mostly hailed for previous, promising but modestly exposed works, that Cannes tends to reserve for its secondary Un Certain Regard section: a lively strand dominated by rising stars, mixed in with the occasional competition regular serving some sort of demotion sentence. This year’s relegated major is Ukraine’s Sergei Loznitsa, whose impressive but grindingly difficult A Gentle Creature was in competition last year, and proved sufficiently alienating to earn his latest, Donbass, an opportunity as this year’s Un Certain Regard opener. While the odd talented upstart is occasionally fast-tracked to competition status – Andrea Arnold made the grade with her 2006 debut Red Road, and has competed twice since – the festival tends to take a cautious, conservative approach to programming its top tier. An old boys’ club (with emphasis, regrettably, on “boys”) predominates: veterans like Michael Haneke, Ken Loach, Pedro Almodóvar and the Dardenne brothers make the cut for almost every film they make, major or minor, competing principally against others who have been to the rodeo before. This year’s competition lineup isn’t a complete rejection of the old guard, with contenders including the former Palme d’Or winner Nuri Bilge Ceylan (The Wild Pear Tree), the 87-year-old New Wave luminary Jean-Luc Godard (The Image Book), and revived American firebrand Spike Lee – though referring to Lee, returning on agitated form with the timely racial drama BlacKkKlansman, as any kind of elder statesman suggests the festival is experiencing some form of generational shift. But of the 21 films in the lineup, 10 come from Cannes newcomers – a far higher number than in other years under Frémaux’s rule and an exciting indication that Cannes is ready to refresh its auteur pantheon. Not all the newcomers are, well, newcomers: fresh from his Oscar win for Ida, Pawel Pawlikowski makes his Cannes debut with the similarly-styled Cold War, while Jafar Panahi, an embattled political prisoner in his native Iran, is seeking to complete the European festival triple crown (after winning Berlin’s Golden Bear and Venice’s Golden Lion) with his first competition entry, Three Faces. Hamaguchi is comparatively new on the block, but his last film, the five-hour female friendship saga Happy Hour, was an international festival hit minted at the more left-field Locarno showcase. Such selections are an encouraging sign that Cannes selectors, rather than focusing merely on the festival’s own hierarchy, are wising up and catching on to success stories outside their realm. There are still blind spots here, of course. Only three female directors in a lineup of 21 films remains an embarrassing statistic, one not masked by a female majority on this year’s Cate Blanchett-headed jury. One hopes that Blanchett, never shy about addressing gender imbalance in the industry, gives Frémaux some pointed feedback. And in a festival touted as the pre-eminent showcase of world cinema, it’s always galling when entire continents go awol from the lineup: the flip side of Asian cinema pleasingly having its best Cannes showing in years is the much-protested absence of South America. (Hopes had been high for the Colombian sensation Ciro Guerra to make the grade for his eagerly awaited Embrace of the Serpent follow-up, Birds of Passage; he had to settle instead for opening the independently programmed directors’ fortnight strand.) It’s the unusually low profile of that continent’s northern neighbour in this year’s competition, however, that remains its biggest, most bracing surprise. Lee apart, the only sprinkling of Hollywood stardust comes with David Robert Mitchell’s noir Under the Silver Lake, starring Andrew Garfield. He is the kind of ascending indie director who wouldn’t usually be admitted to the Cannes golden circle so early. Yet there he is, in a slot that former competition bad boy Lars von Trier would dearly love to have. Seven years after earning persona non grata status with his infamous “I understand Hitler” blunder, the Dane has been only half-welcomed back, landing an out-of-competition spot for his serial-killer drama, The House That Jack Built, that smacks of continuing rebuke. Pushed to the fringes in favour of fresher, less offending names, he could well feel piqued enough to say something similarly crass at his comeback press conference. Not everything at this year’s gratifyingly unpredictable festival has to change, after all. Bonjour to the new wave David Robert Mitchell Under the Silver Lake The American director, 44,made his debut in 2010 with The Myth of the American Sleepover, a wistful coming-of-age film that played in Cannes’ low-profile critics’ week section, before sharpening his teeth on the rattling indie horror film, It Follows (2014). Now, with his gonzo 140-minute, Under the Silver Lake, he makes an ambitious play for Lynchian status. Eva Husson Girls of the Sun One of the wildest cards in this lineup, Husson, 41, split the critics with her stylish, sexually explicit teenage dream Bang Gang (A Modern Love Story) in 2015 and now moves on to very different terrain with Girls of the Sun, a study of a Kurdish female battalion reclaiming their its town from extremists. Abu Bakr Shawky Yomeddine Snagging a Cannes competition slot for your directorial debut remains a rare feat, so critics will be curious to find out what the selection committee saw in Shawky, an Egyptian-Austrian film-maker by way of New York University film school, and his comedy, Yomeddine, about two lepers leaving their colony in search of their estranged families. Ryusuke Hamaguchi Asako I &amp; II The Japanese writer-director, 39, has made a number of features since his 2007 debut, but found international acclaim in 2015 with his five-hour intimate epic, Happy Hour, a bittersweet study of female friendship that won awards at Locarno. His follow-up, the romantic drama Asako I &amp; II, runs a mere two hours. Yann Gonzalez Knife + Heart A late addition to the line-up, Gonzalez – a Frenchman and a former member of the dreamy electronica band M83 – made a splashy debut in 2013 with his queer erotic drama, You and the Night, and appears to be bringing similarly neon-hued energy to the competition with his second film, Knife + Heart, a thriller starring Vanessa Paradis.
4||Ditching the satnav: the lost secrets of natural navigationTristan Gooley has got me lost in the middle of London – which, I’ll admit, isn’t a terribly huge achievement. I’m routinely lost in the middle of London. My journeys tend to consist of a hard stare at a map app, 50 paces in the wrong direction and then a kind of abject sustained fumble until I arrive at wherever I’m supposed to be 10 minutes after I’m supposed to be there. And that’s me with Google Maps. Without Google Maps, I’m 80% sure I would have given up and moved into a ditch some years ago. However, this time is different. Gooley, often known as the Natural Navigator, has got me lost on purpose. He’s covered my eyes and led me by the arm through the backstreets of central London, taking time to spin me around every now and again for maximum disorientation. And now, right in the middle of nowhere, he’s asked me to take him to one specific Oxford Street branch of Wasabi. “Remember what I said,” he tells me. I look up. The sun is directly in front of me, throwing all manner of shadows in my direction. It’s lunchtime, so that means I must be facing south. The clouds, too, are lazily drifting from west to east, just as they were last time my eyes were open. I tentatively make my way towards the sun and, miraculously, I find myself on Oxford Street. Then I follow the clouds eastwards and, bingo, I’ve got to where I need to be. Weirder still, it wasn’t even that hard. This is the message of Gooley’s new book Wild Signs and Star Paths. It’s a beautifully written almanac of tricks and tips that we’ve lost along the way, with the intention of helping us regain what he calls the “sixth sense”: our innate ability to scan the landscape and anticipate what might happen next. “There are potentially 11m pieces of information hitting our brain every second,” he tells me as we cross London, “but our brain filters out 99.9% of it.” Simply by being more attuned to this information, Gooley can spot things that have managed to pass the rest of us by. For instance, had I got lost on the way to Wasabi, I could have looked up for the nearest satellite dish. Why? Because satellite dishes overwhelmingly point southeast. Notice this once and you’ll never be able to unsee rows and rows of satellite dishes, all quietly informing you of your place in the world. Gooley’s motto is “Nothing is random.” He’s parsed the world in minuscule detail and located the pattern holding it all together. He’s part Spider-Man and part Neo from The Matrix, albeit much more affable and with a niftier taste in hats. He argues that he’s just managed to hone abilities we all latently possess. “My tuppence-worth is, I think, humanity consistently makes progress and then throws the baby out with the bathwater,” he says. “We had thousands of years of wanting to get from A to B in the most expedient way possible. But now we can get between places incredibly efficiently, and people have realised that they go from A to B to C to D to E to F to G to retirement to death, without actually noticing what they’re doing at those points at all.” If nothing else, his ideology is an antidote to that. It’s reminiscent of mindfulness in that sense; by slowing down and concentrating on every tiny sensation that the present offers you – the feeling of wind on your face, little noises you’d otherwise tune out – you can start to uncover new layers of understanding. However, there is a caveat. “I never made the argument that this way of thinking of the world is expedient,” he says. “There are very few situations where natural navigation is the fastest option.” Walking around London with Tristan Gooley is a copper-bottomed reinforcement of this notion. Every few paces he’ll halt to enthuse about some aspect of the landscape that has somehow passed the modern masses by. In Seven Dials he stops me to point at a tree, marvelling at what he calls “the tick” – the shape caused by its subtle lean southwards. In Soho Square he takes me through a blow-by-blow deconstruction of a holly tree, showing how the lower leaves are spikier than those higher up, and that its north-facing leaves are slightly but significantly larger than those to the south. He simultaneously explains the enormous difference in meaning between one and two pigeons taking off from a lawn at the same time. It’s mind-blowing stuff – granule by granule he’s constructed an intricate jigsaw puzzle of information that perpetually lets him know where he is and what’s going on – but if you need to get somewhere sharpish, it probably isn’t for you. “Navigation was the only thing that held my interest for more than a couple of years,” Gooley explains over tea in a Covent Garden café midway through our jaunt. As he gained more experience, it led him to bigger goals. He’s led expeditions around the world, travelling to far-flung corners to study the methods of the Tuareg, Bedouin and Dayak. He is also the only living person to have both flown solo and sailed single-handed across the Atlantic, a feat that helped remind him of his mortality. “You know you’re at the edge of sensible endeavours when more than half the people you’ve talked to have died,” he says. “I went to seven people for advice on the aviation part and, by the time I took off, three of them were dead in light aircraft crashes.” He pauses. “I think a fourth died subsequently.” But it wasn’t until that escapade was over that Gooley felt the bite of natural navigation. “It was really weird,” he says. “I’d have this major experience of climbing into a boat and sailing through gales and all sorts of challenges, and then a week later I’d be trying to cross a tiny patch of English woodland – maybe only one mile or so – and going: ‘Actually, this is more like how I felt when I was 10.’” Wild Signs and Star Paths is rammed with Gooley’s knowledge. There’s “the tick”, but there’s also “the celebration” (the burst of wildflowers on a forest floor that tells you where light falls) and “the shear” (the tilt of a cloud that indicates wind direction) and “the invisible handrail” (the use of a prominent landscape feature to help you retain your bearings). In one chapter Gooley suggests he can pinpoint the location of a bonfire, even years after it went out, based on foliage alone. The book makes much of the differentiation between what he calls fast and slow thinking – basically between instinct and analysis. The more you painstakingly study the sky for navigational pointers, he says, the more the brain will learn to automate the process. It’s the same difference between sounding out a series of letters on a page and seeing a fully formed word. Eventually Tristan and I reach Regent’s Park, and it’s suddenly as if he’s been plugged into the mainframe. In the middle of an entirely unrelated conversation he stops dead in his tracks and slaps me on the arm. “Did you hear that?” he whispers. I do not hear anything, but say yes anyway. “That’s the cacophony!” he hisses, pointing to a bush full of birds making what I’d assumed were normal bird noises. “Those were alarm calls, between wrens and tits! There’s something in there the birds aren’t happy with.” Gingerly, we make our way over to investigate, but Tristan stops dead again, even more excited than before. He’s seen a squirrel standing on its hind legs. “Look at it go!” he whispers. “We’ve got a cacophony, the birds aren’t happy and the squirrels have picked up. It’s unlikely they would have gone on hyper-alert because of us.” This has now become a mystery that demands resolution, and fortunately one presents itself. A breeze blows through a row of trees, and Gooley has his answer. “Trees picking up, lot of different cloud types, some shear there,” he notes, running through his process aloud for me. “I think this must be a weather warning. There’s the sixth-sense feel. There was something going on that the birds weren’t happy with, and I could sense it without thinking.” Had we been in the jungle, this intuitiveness could have saved our lives. The birds might have spotted a jaguar, for instance, and their cries would have served as our cue to leave before we became dinner. But we weren’t in the jungle. We were in the middle of Regent’s Park, and the birds were just being vague about inclement weather. “Is this sixth-sense stuff even all that applicable here?” I asked myself. On the way home from the station, I’m caught in an unexpected downpour. Fine, the birds had a point and natural navigation has plenty of real-world uses. Long story short, I now trust Tristan Gooley with my life. How to navigate in a city Look for satellite dishes. They all point towards the equator. In London, that is roughly south-southeast. Find an ‘invisible handrail’ and use it to remember your bearings. In the countryside, this might be a river. In a city, it could be a main road. Look at a tree. Do the branches point a certain way? That’s probably south. Are the leaves on those branches smaller than the leaves on the opposite side? That’s definitely south. Use the sun. It rises in the east, sets in the west and moves through the southern sky, giving you a very basic compass. Need to get home? Head against the flow of people at the start of the day or with the flow at the end and you are pretty much guaranteed to find a station. Wild Signs and Star Paths: The Keys to Our Lost Sixth Sense by Tristan Gooley is published on 17 May by Sceptre at £20
5||No laughing matter: how can The Simpsons solve its problem with Apu?Twenty-nine seasons in and 636 episodes since it first aired, The Simpsons last week officially became the longest-running scripted show in American primetime television history. But celebrations have been overshadowed. Once considered to be the high-water mark for biting satire, The Simpsons is the subject of a furore over racist stereotyping that is dividing cast and crew. The row can be summed up in one question: is it time to retire Apu Nahasapeemapetilon? Born in episode eight of the first series, Apu was written simply as “clerk” on the script, with the single line: “35 cents, please.” In his forthcoming book, Springfield Confidential, writer and former leading executive producer Mike Reiss reveals: “Because Hindu convenience store clerks were a movie cliche even back then, I inserted this stage direction under his line: ‘THE CLERK IS NOT INDIAN.’” At the cast reading, actor Hank Azaria, who is white and Jewish, read the part in a bumbling Indian accent anyway, inspired by Peter Sellers in The Party, and got a huge laugh. The character’s fate was sealed: Apu, the goofy, servile, Kwik-E-Mart cliche was born. Standup Hari Kondabolu, 35, from Brooklyn, had homed in on the character in his set for a while before he made the documentary, The Problem With Apu, which has fuelled the debate. For Kondabolu, “a white guy doing an impression of a white guy doing an impression of my father” was the only thing he knew while growing up, when it came to portraying the south Asian experience: “Nothing like us existed apart from this cartoon character,” he says in the film. “Twenty-eight years later, the words ‘Thank you, come again’ still follow me.” The phrase has reportedly been used by Apu only eight times in 31 years, but its mocking sing-song is recognised everywhere. Kondabolu is not alone. In his documentary, actors and comedians including Kal Penn, Aziz Ansari, Aparna Nancherla and Hasan Minhaj line up to discuss the ways in which Apu being the most famous Indian in America warped their high-school experience and their subsequent careers. The Big Sick’s Kumail Nanjiani, a Pakistani actor, has repeatedly complained about still being called to castings requiring “the Apu accent”. In an interview with the Guardian in 2014, Priyanka Chopra, one of India’s biggest showbiz names and now the star of hit ABC show Quantico, said she was sick of how she was so often perceived in the US. “We don’t all talk like Apu!” she emphasised, frustrated. Last week, on the US chatshow The View, she said: “Apu was the bane of my life growing up.” Viewing figures and critical acclaim for The Simpsons have long been in decline, but its cultural significance has not been so heavily weighed since its 1990s peak, when President George Bush was urging Americans to be “a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons”. Matt Groening, who created The Simpsons, seems nonplussed. “I’m proud of what we do on the show,” he told USA Today, in response to mounting criticism of the character. “We live in a time in our culture where people love to pretend to be offended.” Executive producer Al Jean doubled down with episode 633, in which Lisa Simpson appeared to voice the angst from the writers’ room: “Something that started decades ago and was applauded and inoffensive is now politically incorrect,” she says to Marge. “What can you do?” The shot cuts to a framed photograph of Apu, inscribed: “Don’t have a cow, man!” Reiss writes in defence of the character in his book: “We all work very hard at The Simpsons and Apu is the only person in Springfield who works hard at his job. Kids being taunted in the schoolyard by being called Apu isn’t racism, that’s just saying kids are dicks. Still there have been enough complaints to fill a nasty little documentary, called The Problem With Apu. And it has been a problem for us at The Simpsons. Hank Azaria, who takes the most heat for the character, is reluctant to play Apu any more.” Chatting to TV host Stephen Colbert last week, Azaria made clear he felt that listening to the south Asian experience was overdue and that he would be “happy to step aside or help transition [the character] into something new”. He also distanced himself from episode 633, saying: “I had nothing to do with the writing or the voicing [in that episode]. I think if anyone came away from that segment thinking they need to lighten up … that’s definitely not the message that I want to send.” Nancy Cartwright, the voice of Bart, has echoed her support in the modern fashion: on an Instagram meme criticising The Simpsons’ slack reluctance to engage with the debate, she has simply commented “Love this”. Elsewhere, Harry Shearer, the voice of Mr Burns, Principal Skinner and Ned Flanders, told the Observer: “I must pass up the opportunity to enter this particular Twitter outrage machine patch.” But how do you solve a problem like Apu Nahasapeemapetilon? Adi Shankar, a TV producer boosted last week by Kanye West on Twitter, has proposed a public screenwriting competition for an original script “that takes the character of Apu and in a clever way subverts him, pivots him, intelligently writes him out, or evolves him in a way”. He has pledged to produce the winning script as a self-financed fan project should Fox network and The Simpsons’ writers’ room reject it. The latter is a delicate institution characterised, like most US comedy writing rooms, by Harvard Lampoon alumni taking hours to craft a joke and existing on takeaways. In the show’s early golden period, cartoonist Matt Groening, writer Sam Simon (who left after a falling out in 1994) and producer James L Brooks were credited with bringing the art, smart and heart respectively. Little seems to have changed: writers rarely leave and most have worked on the show for three decades. “It’s not enough to be funny,” Reiss puts it. “You also have to get along with everyone. One irritating or obstinate writer can bring the entire machinery of a show to a halt … The Simpsons writing staff consists of 23 very funny non-assholes.” Dr John Donaldson, who devised and taught D’Oh! The Simpsons Introduce Philosophy at Glasgow University, believes the bigger controversy is that the show no longer pushes comedy boundaries. “The Simpsons has aged with its creators. If people aren’t enjoying Apu any more, they need to make him funnier and speak more to the spirit of the age.” Donaldson does not believe the character is “morally harmful or that the creators are responsible for moral harm he may have caused”. It is possible, he says, “to recognise the ethnic stereotyping of Apu without endorsing those stereotypes”. Plus, as the creators are often at pains to emphasise, The Simpsons takes an indiscriminate approach in its targets: everyone is fair game. “That’s a standard response when someone is called out for misrepresenting people,” says Dr Pawan Dhingra, chair of sociology and American studies at Tufts University, Massachusetts, where Azaria gave a speech to graduates in 2016 (some of it in Apu’s voice). “The response is always, ‘We make fun of everyone equally and you shouldn’t be offended.’ That response is flawed because it assumes everyone has equal representation in the media.” That Apu has barely been prominent recently, he feels, is irrelevant. “The damage is done. More broadly, it is felt that you [as an Indian] can never have equal presence in American public or popular culture and, growing up, this caricature is so well accepted and applauded, you think, ‘Well, is this all we deserve?’” As for Reiss, he remains sceptical about what he calls the “hoopla” but admits Apu’s future is uncertain: “It’s not my call: as a white Jewish guy, I can’t tell Indians not to be offended by another white Jewish guy playing an Indian.”
6||As the interest-only mortgage crisis hits, here’s how you can avoid the heartacheLen and Val Fitzgerald won’t be the last people to find themselves staring down the possibility of losing their home. The couple, from Eastbourne in East Sussex, found themselves in the spotlight last week in a case which highlights the crisis involving Britain’s interest-only mortgages after it emerged Santander had launched repossession proceedings against them, even though they never missed a mortgage repayment. They are far from alone. There are about 1.67m interest-only mortgages outstanding in the UK. But while the Fitzgeralds face the prospect of being thrown “out into the street” according to their MP Stephen Lloyd, there are things that others can do to stave off this threat. The wider problem There have been numerous warnings about interest-only mortgages in recent years. Just weeks ago, the main UK regulator the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) said it was “very concerned that a significant number of interest-only customers may not be able to repay the capital at the end of the mortgage and be at risk of losing their homes”. With this type of mortgage, the borrower agrees to pay off the interest each month but makes no capital repayments. Borrowers are expected to make sure they have an investment plan in place – usually an endowment policy – to pay off the debt at the end of the term. Some people face a shortfall because their investment has underperformed, while others never set anything up. In 2013 the FCA revealed that about 1.3 million homeowners faced an average shortfall of more than £71,000. However, the situation may have improved or worsened since then.This year alone, an estimated 85,000 interest-only mortgages are due to mature, and Lloyd said: “I am sure there are tens of thousands of other families potentially facing the same desperate situation [as the couple] in the coming years, which is unacceptable.” So what are the options? When someone with a maturing interest-only mortgage is unable to repay the capital but doesn’t want to sell their home, their lender will sometimes agree to extend the term of the mortgage while switching the loan to a repayment basis. But for many people, the maths on this won’t work because, as they will be paying back capital each month as well as interest, their repayments will be a lot higher. The FCA gives the example of someone whose 25-year, £125,000 interest-only mortgage is about to mature. They have been paying £313 a month, but even if their lender allows the term to be extended by 10 years and switched to repayment, they may find they can’t afford the new monthly payment, which in this example would be £1,208, assuming a 3% interest rate. Also, as is the case with the Fitzgeralds, the borrower’s age may be a big factor. One in nine of all interest-only mortgage-holders are 65-plus. Some lenders have a maximum age at the end of the term – for example, NatWest’s is 70. David Hollingworth at mortgage broker London &amp; Country says that if a homeowner is coming up against their lender’s age limit, this may shorten the mortgage term to such a degree that it means the payments would be unaffordable. However, he adds that some lenders have upped their maximum age, while others will consider lending into retirement. For example, in July 2016, Nationwide increased its maximum age for mortgage maturity from 75 to 85. But there are limits on its largesse: only retirement income can be used when calculating affordability, the maximum loan is £150,000, and the loan must be no more than 60% of the value of the borrower’s home. That and other restrictions mean that deals of this type won’t be open to everyone. Could equity release help? For those in a similar situation to the Fitzgeralds, equity release might be a solution. This is a way to get cash out of a property without the need to move home. Typically there are no monthly repayments. Leading providers include Aviva, Legal &amp; General, More 2 Life and Just. The number of people raiding the equity in their home to pay off their interest-only mortgage is thought to have gone up sharply. Specialist firm Key Retirement says it is finding that 21% of people signing up for equity release are using at least some of the cash to clear a home loan. The most common equity release schemes are mortgage-based products secured against your home and repaid when you die or go into long-term care. These are known as “lifetime mortgages”. Dean Mirfin at Key Retirement says: “Typically, the most a homeowner can raise via equity release is 55% of the value of their property, but this would naturally depend on factors such as the type of property, their age and health.” Some people with maturing interest-only mortgages won’t be eligible because their loan-to-value – the size of the mortgage in relation to its worth – will be too high. This is likely to be the case with the Fitzgeralds, whose Santander mortgage appears to be around 70% of their property’s value. Other options The good news is that there are a growing number of specialist products aimed at older people, including those coming to the end of an interest-only mortgage deal. There is the 55+ Mortgage from retirement specialist Hodge Lifetime, which, as the name suggests, is exclusively for over-55s, and is a standard mortgage where you pay the interest on the loan each month and retain 100% ownership of your property. Notably, the maximum term is up to the youngest borrower’s 95th birthday. The maximum loan-to-value on this deal is 60%. Similarly, Shawbrook Bank has the 55 Plus Interest-Only Mortgage. With this, the main income earner must be aged between 55-75 at the outset and have a minimum income of £16,500 a year, and must not be older than 85 at the end of the term, and there are minimum property value and minimum equity requirements. Family building society has a deal called Retirement Lifestyle Booster, a 10-year interest-only mortgage repaid with a lump sum at the end. With this, you can borrow up to 25% of the value of your property and use it, for example, to repay your existing mortgage. The youngest borrower must be at least 60 at the time of the application. ‘It’s a hell of a situation to be in’ The Fitzgeralds are in a bad position after remortgaging on to an eight-year interest-only mortgage in late 2007. Santander said the parties had originally agreed that when the loan ended the couple would sell the property to pay back the capital - but shortly before that date they decided they wanted to extend the term. Santander says that once a customer reaches 75 it is unable to lend beyond that point. Len Fitzgerald, 77, told his local paper he and his wife had called on Santander to extend the mortgage until they were 85, adding: “We hardly sleep. It’s a hell of a situation to be in.” The couple are said to owe around £180,000 (their remortgage was for £178,500) on a property estimated to be worth between £250,000 and worth up to £260,000. So if they sold the house, that would leave them with only £80,000, which would not be enough to buy another home in the area. It would arguably give them a decent pot of cash that they could use to rent a property. It’s not clear yet what will happen to the couple: a court date was set for the end of April, but Santander said it had agreed to a six-month breathing space to allow discussions to continue.
7||Fish and chip shops battered by soaring costs and freak weatherAnyone wanting to understand the economic problems facing Britain in the early 21st century need only consider its national dish. Chippies are confronting a long list of issues that threaten to send the price of their product rocketing as the holiday season approaches. Brexit, the popularity of online delivery services, freakish weather and concerns about the pollution caused by plastic are all putting pressure on the nation’s 10,500 fish and chip shops. “I’ve had to hold price increases back so I’m taking quite a hit on things because rival shops are undercutting,” said Andrew Crook, president of the National Federation of Fish Friers. At the moment, a cod and chips at Crook’s chippy in Lancashire costs £5.90, but he intends to put his prices up in the summer. “I think summer’s a good time to put prices up. People go on holiday, buy fish and chips and see that some areas are more expensive than back home so that does help.” The drop in the value of the pound since the Brexit referendum means that over the past 12 months it has become 15% to 20% more expensive to import frozen white fish. Higher demand in China, the US and the Middle East for white fish together with cuts in fishing quotas in the North Sea are also contributing factors. Six months ago a kilo of haddock or cod frozen at sea cost around £4 and £5.20 respectively. Today haddock costs about £5.60 a kilo and cod almost £5.80. There is little respite closer to home. Costs of cooking oil, rent and rates and labour are rising. Now there is a growing fear that potato prices could soon go the same way. The wet start to the year has delayed the potato planting season. According to Rob Clayton, strategy director for potatoes at the Agriculture &amp; Horticulture Development Board, farmers are between two and four weeks behind where they should be. This could bode ill for the future if the summer turns out to be a damp squib like the spring. “The holy grail for potato growers is to get the maximum possible leaf cover by the longest day of the year,” Clayton said. “If we were to get a couple of months of warm and sunny weather the problem would go away. If what we end up with is something that’s dull and cool over the next few months then that would retard the development. That is the scenario when you would start to worry about the volume of the crop.” The good news is that there are considerable supplies of potatoes in storage – but these cannot last for ever. “Once you get into August, September that is where those stocks will have run out and the new crop won’t necessarily be as speedy as we thought it was going to be,” Clayton said. “If you’re going to Blackpool in August that’s when you might be expecting a bit of a pinch around chip shop prices.” Another issue is packaging. Crook said there was pressure on the industry to do away with its polystyrene cartons, which cost around 2p each, and introduce compostable alternatives, made in China, that cost five times as much. “We don’t think it’s a solution,” Crook said. “It’s been dictated by Blue Planet and the government’s reaction to it. As an industry we try to do the right thing but people don’t know what the right thing is.” In the 1920s, there were about 35,000 fish and chip shops in Britain. But the number has fallen by two thirds as a huge variety of new cuisines has arrived on the high street. “We’ve been worried for the last 30 years because we’ve had McDonald’s come in and lots of ethnic cuisines and I think people have been scared to put up their prices,” Crook said. Now the popularity of online delivery services like Deliveroo and Just Eat poses another conundrum. “It’s naive to think deliveries aren’t the way to go,” Crook conceded. “But I don’t think the perfect packaging is there for it right now. With fish and chips you’ve got to keep it crisp. You can’t do five deliveries and come back to base. You’ve got to do each one individually and the margins are not there for that.”
8||Liverpool’s Mohamed Salah, an Egyptian hero for the 21st centuryThe village where Mohamed Salah grew up is a cluster of red-brick houses threaded together by dusty unpaved streets and surrounded by a shimmering sea of green fields. In its centre, Ahmed al-Masery sits in an empty coffee shop watching highlights on a tiny, wall-hung TV of his old friend playing for Liverpool against Roma. “I used to play football games on PlayStation with him back in the day,” says the 35-year-old, gesturing at the screen. Back then, Salah would pick Liverpool to play video games with his friend. Now the player is the Merseyside club’s favourite adopted son, a striker whose goals have inspired his team into the Champions League final later this month. Fans are devoted to their “Egyptian king” – one song includes the line “if he scores another few, I’ll be Muslim too”. For the people of Nagrig, a small farming community two buses and a train-ride north of Cairo, Salah’s rise is scarcely believable. The 25-year-old comes back to the village about once a year, al-Masery says, but he’s been totally unspoilt by fame. “He doesn’t even drive when he comes here,” he says. “He walks around the streets like everyone else, speaking to anyone who wants to talk to him.” In Britain, Salah is an emerging phenomenon. In Egypt, his progress has been watched and charted for years. It’s difficult to overemphasise his popularity – his face is everywhere. Every coffee shop has a Salah poster. Murals featuring him alongside other icons of Egyptian culture, such as singer Umm Kulthum and novelist Naguib Mahfouz, have appeared around the capital. He beams out from billboards, selling everything from chocolate bars to soft drinks, mobile-phone tariffs and bank accounts. Such is the power of the Mo Salah brand, that when he lent his name to a government-sponsored anti-drugs campaign, they reported a 400% increase in calls to their hotline. Much has been made in the Egyptian press of Salah’s charity work. It’s been widely reported that he regularly helps newlyweds furnish their new homes with everything they need for marriage, although the recipients of these gifts have never come out publicly. Newspaper columnists and talk-show hosts delight in sharing examples like these of Salah’s good nature, but al-Masery is one of many Nagrig residents who are sceptical. “Most of these stories are just hearsay,” he says. One particularly popular Salah story came after LE 30,000 (£1,250) was stolen from Salah’s father. The thief was caught and in act of forgiveness, Salah’s family did not press charges. Retellings of the story in the press, however, have Salah intervening personally to help the man find work. One version even has Salah giving the man a wad of cash. “The media just wants to talk about Salah, Salah, Salah,” al-Masery says. “He’s a nice guy, and very respectful, but not everything written about him is true.” Not everybody shares al-Masery’s scepticism about the Salah story. In Cairo, where 200 punters crammed onto the pavement at an outdoor coffee shop to watch Liverpool secure their place in the Champion’s League final, 29-year-old football fan Omar Salem says he “doesn’t care” if certain details about the striker are false. “People want to believe these things about him,” he says. “At this point he’s so loved that nobody would ever deny them.” Before last July, you’d be hard pressed to find anyone here supporting the Merseyside club. That’s all changed this season, though, with football fans regularly turning out in force, for every Liverpool game. “It would just be amazing to have an Egyptian player win the Champion’s League,” Salem says. Salem says it was Egypt’s match against Congo in October that marked the beginning of his status as a national icon. Salah’s penalty, four minutes into injury time, put Egypt ahead at the 11th hour, securing the team a place in its first World Cup in 28 years. “When he celebrated that goal,” says Salem, “that’s the image people will remember from that match.” Salem calls Salah the first big Egyptian player “that people can actually relate to”. “We don’t even know what car he drives,” says Salem. Instead, Salah’s story is that of a humble teenager, who through sheer grit and determination earned the chance to represent his country in the big leagues of Europe. For the kids of Nagrig, at least, the legend of Mohamed Salah is very real. His former school was renamed in his honour, and to talk to pupils here, you’d think his story was part of the curriculum. One such pupil, 13-year-old Osama Eid, tells the story of Salah’s rise to fame as if reciting his 12-times-tables. “He’s very respectful and kind,” he says, “and well-mannered and does a lot of work to help the poor.” According to Eid’s friends, he’s the best footballer of their gang. When asked if he’d like to be like Salah one day, he doesn’t skip a beat: “Inshallah.”
9||Nature lovers warm to Kew Gardens' green cathedralIt would have been very difficult to find a more glorious corner of England than Kew Gardens on Saturday. Under a perfect blue sky that banished all memories of the sodden start to the year, pilgrims were paying homage at the botanists’ equivalent of Valhalla. They had returned to their gleaming cathedral to perform a very secular form of worship. After five years of renovations the Temperate House, home to more than 10,000 plants from the world’s “Goldilocks zones” where temperatures are not too hot or too cold, was open again. The £41m project to return the 1863 triumph of Victorian engineering – the size of three jumbo jets – to its original design, but using modern materials, had already garnered lavish praise from the architecture critics at a private opening last week. But, given that it has absorbed nearly £15m of lottery money, the more important question was what would the public make of Decimus Burton’s metal-and-glass paean to biodiversity after its comprehensive overhaul? The answer is politically important. For Kew wants the Temperate House to convey an urgent message: that plants are the foundation of all life on Earth, and they are in trouble. Its cathedral needs to wow if that message is to reach beyond the converted. As the temperature outside what Kew is now billing as “the greatest glasshouse in the world” rose into the mid-20s Centigrade, the pilgrims were emphatic in their response. Christine Bacani, 28, from Canada, saw the house as a refuge from modernity. “It’s so different from social media. You are right here. It’s green in Canada, too. But it’s a different kind. Standing here to be able to see the life around us, it’s cool.” Steve Ketley, 65, was a little emotional as he examined a Chilean wine palm. Ketley worked at Kew for 40 years until he retired in January and helped grow many of the plants now on display in the house from seed. “I have a soft spot for the Temperate House because the plants are more familiar to the hardy gardener,” he said. “People will recognise many of the plants here, unlike, say, tropical plants.” Ketley was particularly taken with the thought that had gone into the planting, ensuring that all the species on display had room to grow for a century or more. “Plants are ruthless,” he said. “Anything vigorous will swamp its neighbours.” Emma Ford and her husband, Grzegorz, from Barnes in south-west London, were taking their daughters Lili, three, and Amee, nine, to see the house. The couple met when Grzegorz came to fix her kitchen. “Today I was telling him to look at the garden and the lighting more closely. It’s time he fixed my garden,” she laughed. “The light and the sun are so special to us in London. To be able to be in a house which captures it enough for life is beautiful.” Many visitors were flocking to take selfies with the star of the show, the Encephalartos woodii, a type of cycad that looks a bit like a palm, described as the loneliest plant in the world. Only male specimens – cloned from one found in the wild in 1895 – now exist, making the hunt to find a female one of botany’s great quests. Boran Djokic, 51, originally from Serbia, was visiting with his daughter Mia, 13, and his mother, Sasha. “For us, the gardens are like relief and now this reopened glass house will be another addition,” he said. “I have been in London for 25 years and today when I walked in I saw it in a different way. I have always seen it underneath big canopies and lush green vegetation. Today they all look small, and this is how it must have been years ago when it was first opened. It was like walking into a whole new perspective.” Helen Smith, 37, came with her partner, Chris. As the sun streamed through the house’s 15,000 panes of glass, Chris made shadow puppets with his hands and produced a bewildering array of tiny kaleidoscopes from a bracelet on his wrist. Viewed through them, the Temperate House was reduced to endless patterns in which people, plants and the building were all magically fused together. For Helen, the trinity of house, plants and people offered a connection to something half lost. “I was four when my parents took me here first. It’s all coming back now. They are no more. So this visit is special.”
10||Donald Trump and Theresa May 'looking forward to UK visit'Donald Trump and Theresa May have held talks by telephone on a range of international issues, the White House has said. A White House statement said that both leaders “reiterated they are looking forward to the president’s visit to the United Kingdom in July”. They also discussed Iran, where the UK is seeking to persuade Trump not to abandon the nuclear deal, and the situation in North Korea. The statement added: “President Donald J Trump spoke today with Prime Minister Theresa May of the United Kingdom. The two leaders discussed the promotion of fair and reciprocal trade, particularly with regard to China. “As planning continues for his upcoming meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, President Trump emphasised his goal of a denuclearised North Korea. He also underscored his commitment to ensure that Iran never acquires a nuclear weapon. Both leaders reiterated they are looking forward to the president’s visit to the United Kingdom in July.” It is understood that the discussion between the two leaders took place before the president made his remarks to the NRA about knife crime, comparing a London hospital to a “warzone”.
11||Azed crossword 2,395Click here for a printable version. The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. It gives one answer as an abbreviation. Prize rules: Send correct solution (one only) and clue to replace definition asterisked (on separate sheet also bearing name and address, securely attached) to Azed No. 2,395, PO Box 518, Oxford, OX2 6WX. Entries should be postmarked no later than Saturday. Please add a brief explanation of your clue (one entry only). £35, £30, £25 prizes and Azed bookplates for the three clues judged best. The Azed slip, containing details of successful competition entries and Azed’s comments, is available on subscription at £16 a year. Cheques payable to the Azed Slip, should be sent to The Azed Slip, Coombe Farm, Awbridge, Romsey SO51 0HN.
4||Observer killer sudokuClick here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
11||Everyman crossword No 3,734
11||Speedy crossword No 1,179
4||Observer sudokuClick here to access the print version Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
0||Tony Bellew stops David Haye in fifth round for emotional triumph in rematchThere will be no more false dawns, no more bragging or bruises, no victory speeches either, for David Haye. Knocked down and out of boxing in five rounds by Tony Bellew, the former world champion at cruiser and heavyweight can leave now at 37 knowing, on balance, he has taken as much from the fight game as he has given. “Take nothing away from David Haye,” the winner said in the ring. “He just got into a slug-fest tonight. The speed and timing go with age. I’ve done it, that’s all. Style makes fights, I’ve always said it.” As he had conceded in their first fight, Haye said: “He was the better boxer tonight, a great champion.” Bellew did not signal the definitive end to Haye’s career, but there is diminishing hunger to watch someone who was once one of the biggest and most exciting hitters in the division. The whistles and boos that greeted his entrance for this rematch were replaced by predictable if subdued rumbles of sympathy and maybe appreciation of his bravery at the end. Down three times in all, he probably would have carried on had there been no referee – or paying customers. The fighters’ antipathy was genuine, although it melded into mutual respect afterwards. Bellew was a brutally magnificent finisher, biding his time, taking the odd hard head shot and pouncing like a cat when the openings came as Haye’s legs slowed. Haye admitted in his dressing room beforehand he needed to be “a lot better” than he was here 14 months ago, when his achilles snapped in round six and he did well to reach the 11th, his corner throwing in the towel as he struggled to right himself from a tangle on the ring apron. It is not quite right that a former world champion should be booed by sections of a 20,000 crowd just a few miles from where he was born but Haye feeds off any sort of energy, good or dark, and ignored the crowd in a lively opening. Bellew looked to land his chopping right over Haye’s jab but his opponent was similarly disposed as they shared the second. Haye’s jab, once his spear of choice, was cocked more than delivered in the third and Bellew seized the moment with a cracking right that sent him to the floor, followed by another that had him over again and up on wobbly legs. This time there was no injury to blame – just his own intemperance, as well as the weight of the years that had gone before. The fourth descended into a thrash but Bellew was in total control, stalking and firing bombs. Haye, hurt and disoriented but still there to have the argument, looked as if he could go at any moment, his head a dart-board now. Haye needed to make a statement even to get past halfway but the narrative was out of his hands. Bellew, so emotional outside the ring, had turned into a cold-eyed predator, wary of his wounded foe but ready to strike again. There was a lull in the fifth, then another teeth-rattling left hook to put Haye down in the centre of the ring. As proud as any British fighter of recent years, the Bermondsey man knew the end was near but he did not want it, surely, to be at the intervention of the referee while he was still standing with his back to the ropes. Then again, very few boxers get to choose the manner and time of their leaving. This had to be Haye’s. The Olympic silver-medallist Joe Joyce, who is in Haye’s stable and shares his new Cuban trainer, Ismael Salas, stepped up a few levels in just his fourth professional bout earlier to win the Commonwealth heavyweight title by stopping the seasoned but bewildered Jamaican champion, Lenroy Thomas in two rounds. Joyce, still learning his trade at 32, had the champion down three times and was landing at will. A left hook to the jaw finished the job. He will harder nights than this from now on. Rio bronze medal light-heavy Joshua Buatsi – one of the few pros with a university degree - racked up his sixth paid win, stopping the Frenchman Stephane Cuevas in the fifth of six. There was woe for the fancied Martin J Ward, who was beaten and stopped for the first time in his 22-bout career, when he found the heavy hands of the Belfast super-feather James Tennyson too much to cope with in the fifth round of their Commonwealth, European and WBA International title fight. He had Tennyson on the floor in the second but was drawn into a brawl and sank to the ropes twice at the end, dazed and hurt. Paul Butler, who lost a challenge for the world super-fly title three years ago, overshot the bantamweight limit by more than 3lbs on Friday, and had nothing to fight for but a pay cheque and pride. The latter was dented in the first round when the unbeaten Puerto Rican, Emmanuel Rodríguez, felled him with a wicked left. Butler, 29, regrouped and had his moments but not enough to dominate a round and the visitor was a convincing winner of the vacant IBF title, by two cards of 120-106 and one of 118-108.
5||From The Americans to The Handmaid's Tale: what's streaming in Australia in MayNetflix Lost City of Z (US, 2017) by James Grey – film, out 29 May One of the loveliest big-budget films of last year: a grand and tragic tale, shot with romance and longing, of a 20th century British explorer’s many attempts to find an Amazonian megacity, a hidden and complex civilisation, deep in South America. Percy Fawcett (Charlie Hunnam) is scoffed at by his contemporaries: how could an Indigenous society ever produce an advanced society shielded from the West? Undeterred and obsessed, Fawcett risks all – his wife (Sienna Miller), his children, and his reputation. Director James Grey’s previous films have been emotionally restrained art house dramas, but the dynamism of the action-adventure genre allows him to reach for the sublime. In his hands, you feel you are really swatting away emerald green branches in the jungle, gliding down the river toward someplace ancient and hidden, and maybe out of reach. Psychokinesis (South Korea, 2018) by Yeon Sang-ho – film, out now From the director of the unusually profound and radical zombie apocalypse film Train to Busan (reviewed in this column last year), comes another genre experiment uniting supernatural themes with corporate conspiracy, spiritual epiphany, and familial love. Writer-director Yeon Sang-ho riffs on the idea of the everyday superhero: a bad father, Suk-Hun, gets a shot at redemption with his estranged daughter, Roo-Mi, after drinking mystically polluted spring water. Through his new telekinetic powers, the film threads together the idea of an everyday champion battling capitalist malice (a little like last year’s Okja, also from a South Korean director). It’s an imperfect, slowly plotted genre film – but also weird and heartfelt and goofy enough to warrant a look. Honourable mentions: The Bourne Identity (film, out now), Dear White People Volume 2 (series, 4 May), The Simpsons Movie (film, 5 May), Mulholland Drive (film, 11 May), Terrace House: Opening New Doors: Part 2 (series, 22 May), Jason Bourne (film, 23 May) Stan Frances Ha (US, 2012) by Noah Baumbach – film, out now “I’m so embarrassed, I’m not a real person yet!” These words are the anti-manifesto at the centre of Noah Baumbach and Greta Gerwig’s wonderful distillation of growing up, tripping over, and living imperfectly. Here, actor Gerwig shrugs off the mantle of muse (long before her brilliant directorial debut Lady Bird), fully asserting herself as a collaborator in a comedic drama that, for all its whimsy, never feels slight, as it flutters around the life of its heroine Frances, a dancer trying to make something – anything – of herself in New York City. The Bling Ring (US, 2013) by Sofia Coppola – film, out now “The suspects wore Louboutins”: in Sofia Coppola’s hands, a Vanity Fair article on the vanity of a gang of rich kids in Los Angeles – who stole $3m worth of consumer goods from the homes of the ultra-rich stars, such as Paris Hilton and Lindsay Lohan – becomes an ironic portrait of teen celeb worship and girlish entrapment. Coppola’s films have always been tuned to the female psyche within various social prisons, but here the material is explicitly satirical. A teen movie turned true-crime tale, The Bling Ring isn’t just a takedown of privileged girls in the Hollywood Hills, but an acerbic indictment of a society that values youth, beauty, wealth and fame as its highest accomplishments. Honourable mentions: Tangerine (film, out now), Adventure Time (series, new episodes from 4 May), Blue is the Warmest Colour (film, 9 May). Foxtel Now Barry (US, 2018) by Bill Hader and Alec Berg – series, new episodes on Mondays If most comedies hinge on what critic Manohla Dargis calls “the clueless, often beleaguered yet fundamentally decent and finally (of course) triumphant character”, Barry uncomfortably, bravely, removes the certainty of triumph. It’s the latest in a spate of anti-aspirational comedies of people who are lost in the system, in the vein of Search Party and Atlanta. Writer, director and producer Bill Hader plays a low-level, disillusioned hitman, who decides to try his luck at acting, bringing him into the orbit of all manner of LA scammers (such as his acting coach Henry Winkler) and deluded hopefuls. Success in the entertainment biz is a goal he’s never likely to achieve, which makes the possible trajectory of this already dark program even darker. What’s more, Barry’s trauma is founded in his past as a marine in Afghanistan, grounding the show’s gags in a merciless view of the US as a country of wandering souls. Barry might be shadowy but it’s never grim, and it is unexpectedly insightful. The Americans season six (US, 2018) by Joe Weisberg – series, new episodes on Wednesdays The dramatic vortex of former CIA officer Joe Weisberg’s spy drama has never really been Cold War politics. No, The Americans’ wonderfully gloomy Reaganite setting, and the premise of deep-cover KGB agents in arranged marriages in suburban Washington, has always functioned as a grand metaphor for the mysteries of long-term relationships. This final season’s plotlines cleave closer than ever to the most jagged, obsessive edges of the relationship between Soviet spies Elizabeth and Philip Jennings. Having resigned from most of his duties at the KGB, Philip is re-recruited to spy on ever-loyal Elizabeth, who is training their daughter as an agent and working on undermining Gorbachev’s Perestroika process. It’s 1987, and they have no inkling of the political chaos that awaits: the dramatic and psychological stakes are higher than ever before. The series has always invested itself in the bonds of family and partnership, yet season six feels gloomier and more doom-laden than its precedents. Picnic at Hanging Rock (Australia, 2018) by – series, all episodes 6 May Pegged by Foxtel as a darker, sexier look at the Australian classic, it remains debatable whether a remake of Picnic At Hanging Rock needs to exist. But the new series is a departure from the norms of Australian television, bringing campy fun to the hypnotic tone of Peter Weir’s original, in which three girls and their teacher are swallowed by the Australian bush on Valentine’s Day in 1900. Based on a viewing of the first episode, the remake is a fresh reimagining in the vein of 21st century, #MeToo feminism. Natalie Dormer (best known for Game of Thrones) plays a governess who brings her own hauntings to the narrative. The show is energetic and aesthetically bold, going way beyond the boilerplate quality of much “prestige” TV. Worth exploring. Honourable mentions: The Talented Mr Ripley, The Breakfast Club, Wolf Children (films, out now), Westworld season two (new episodes on Mondays), The Perfect Storm (film, 8 May). ABC iView Art Bites: Lessons from a Middle-Class Artist (Australia, 2018) – series, out now Anthony from Adelaide, disenchanted by his musical failures, travels to Danvers, Massachusetts, to meet Matt Farley, to learn how to become a middle-class artist. Farley is a spam songwriter – his strategy is to go for bulk, writing and uploading 18,000 comedy songs to streaming services to earn half a penny for each listen. The songs are slight and silly, but it is genuinely heartening to see a little guy make music streaming systems work for him. Farley’s blueprint for doing just that is fascinating. Honourable mentions: The Checkout (new episodes on Tuesdays), Rage (new episodes on Sundays). SBS On Demand The Handmaid’s Tale (US, 2018) by Bruce Miller – series, new episodes on Thursdays The Handmaid’s Tale has never been an easy watch, but the second season of the dystopian drama – set in a future where a religious order of male power has enslaved fertile women – is somehow grislier than the first. By the end of episode one, June (Elisabeth Moss), five weeks pregnant, has reconnected with the Resistance and stolen away to freedom, but not without the show moving toward full horror in its aesthetic conventions. The Handmaid’s Tale is not subtle storytelling: the violence is always at fever-pitch, the dramatic stakes are unmodulated. And that can mean that its other themes – solidarity, resistance against tyranny, the concept of “gender treason” – slide by unnoticed. For many, the anguish of watching won’t be worth it. But the vision of a totalitarian society is realised so fully that the story remains gripping and its message vital. Frog Dreaming (Australia, 1986) by Brian Trenchard-Smith – film, until 20 May This gorgeous film from a lost chapter of local cinema history is back in the SBS catalogue for a brief spell. Last year for this publication, I wrote about Frog Dreaming: “a strange and rather wonderful should-be Australian classic: a children’s adventure film from 1986, which plays like a lost tradition of politically incorrect kids’ cinema. Its boy hero is a 15-year-old American called Cody (played by Henry Thomas, the star of ET) who lives in an idyllic Australian valley town. In Devil’s Knob national park full of ‘frog dreamings, like sacred sites,’ he stumbles on a pond haunted by a monster alluded to in local Indigenous stories. Every frame of this film is suffused with madness and love. A very fine, overlooked piece of fantasy film-making”. Honourable mentions: Lost Highway, The Player, Dead Ringers, Margin Call (films, out now), Eurovision Song Contest 2018: Semi Final 2 (NITV, 13 May), If You Are The One (new episodes on Sundays), Sons of Namatjira (NITV, 14 May), Redfern Now (NITV, 17 May), Guy Fieri (collection, 24 May). • This article was edited on Tuesday 8 May to correct the location of the Art Bites documentary subject
12||'The biggest scandal ever': fraud campaigner hopes for banking justiceIn the 90s Denise Brailey, a single mother who was beginning to make her name as a tenacious consumer rights advocate, enrolled in a criminology course. To her surprise she was told by her professor that there was no white-collar crime in Australia so she would be looking into murders and other assorted wrongdoing. How things change. Over the past two weeks the banking royal commission has exposed the shocking extent of misconduct and possibly criminal behaviour by the financial sector in a system driven by greed. Sign up to receive the top stories every morning The revelations have stunned the nation but not Brailey. She has campaigned on behalf of the victims of misconduct for more than two decades, helping hundreds of people to claim redress in a variety of cases such as the finance brokers scandal, and the collapse of the finance companies Storm Financial and Westpoint. But the current royal commission, which has pointed towards the type of systematic fraud she has been denouncing for years, still represents a kind of crowning glory after years of hard slog for Brailey, who founded and single-handedly runs the Banking and Finance Consumers Support Association from a cottage in the Western Australian bush. “I’ve lobbied for two royal commissions and 23 parliamentary inquiries in my career but this is the biggest scandal I have ever uncovered,” she says of what she calls the “black box” fraud carried out by lenders. “I’m a little weary and a bit worn out. I’m 71 now and I’ve often wondered how long I can keep it up. But it’s something I started doing because people would come to me saying, ‘I’m about to lose my house and all my savings.’ “My parents understood decency and I think that’s where I get this from. I love digging into these kind of problems and and I love using my skills to help everyone else.” Brailey, who has completed three degrees to help in her fight, is nevertheless frustrated that the commission’s terms were drawn so narrowly by a government that tried from the beginning to do whatever it could to limit the impact of the inquiry on the big banks. “I feel vindicated by what’s been revealed at the commission so far, although it’s not what we really want,” Brailey says. “The terms have been written by the banks’ lawyers and steered by Asic. “We need a proper royal commission – this is not a proper royal commission. Kenneth Hayne is doing a good job, he has a high intellect and is very clever. Rowena Orr is also very impressive. But the problem is that he is only as good as the material put in front of him for political purposes.” The current commission is just scratching the surface, she says, and should be extended to examine the “mechanics” of the loan industry that have so enraged Brailey and given her the motivation to keep digging. In a 20-page submission to the royal commission, she details the experiences of borrowers who have come to her for help after being crushed at the hands of the mortgage industry. They are typically people towards the end of their working lives, she says, who have paid off their mortgage but are tempted by sales people into taking out a large interest-only loan to buy an investment property. (The lenders even have an acronym for them: Arip, which stands for asset-rich, income-poor.) These loans require low documentation and are often approved with little proper regard for how much the borrower can afford. In many cases seen by Brailey, the income is actually exaggerated by the lenders – so-called “liar loans”. In addition, borrowers often discover that the size of the loan is much bigger than they thought. “The banks devised a product, the interest-only loan. They wanted people to think it was a normal loan so they called it a low-doc loan because it only needed a low amount of documentation,” Brailey says. “They had to fudge the income to make unaffordable loans look affordable by use of a bank-engineered calculator, which could then be processed by a computer. “The banks were doing all this – the business development managers, the middle managers, the brokers. They were told they wouldn’t make any money if they didn’t do it. When they asked why they had to enter an income of $150,000 when it was $50,000, they were told that lawyers had checked it out and it was all fine. They were told that the inflated incomes on the loan application forms were projected incomes. The borrowers didn’t have the money but they were approved because it meant the brokers and other staff would meet lending targets and earn their percentage as a bonus.” This kind of scenario was brought shockingly to life in the royal commission, such as in the cases of Jacqueline McDowall and her husband. They were guided into selling their home with disastrous consequences, by a Westpac adviser who nevertheless made thousands of dollars in commission. “While all this evidence keeps coming out, you’ll never have trust or confidence in the banks ever again. It’s notable that all the people giving evidence are middle managers. “A proper royal commission would have to look at the mechanics of the loan business and how the chiefs at the top of the banking sector are acting as a cartel. You’ll never clear it up unless you do that.”
13||Sir Alex Ferguson: true to Clydeside and certainly no average pensionerThe news about Sir Alex Ferguson will have come as a shock to anyone who saw him on the pitch at Old Trafford last Sunday, presenting Arsène Wenger with an award in recognition of his 22 years as Arsenal manager. Though 76, the former Manchester United manager looked in good health and high spirits, as he has done throughout his retirement since standing down five years ago. Ferguson retired from football management in 2013 though in practice he has been far busier than the average pensioner, putting his name to books on leadership, frequently visiting the United States where he has been lucratively in demand as a lecturer and motivational speaker, indulging his love of horse racing and, not least, attending United games. Though careful not to overshadow any of the three managers who have succeeded him at Old Trafford, and tactfully reticent on the media front, Ferguson occupies a seat in the stand at most United matches. This time last year Ferguson even made an appearance in the Old Trafford press room, something he had not been doing in the later years of his managerial reign, turning up to present another long-service award, this time to a reporter from the Manchester Evening News. Typically, he swore a little and made a few jokes about the reporter’s footballing allegiances. He did not seem to have changed at all from the Ferguson who grew to a position of immense power and control in 26 successful years at United. Perhaps because of all the success he achieved, Ferguson avoided the usual pitfalls that bedevil football managers in retirement. He was not bitter at being forced out or replaced, because he had made the decision himself. He did not feel he had left too early or had work still undone, because he had lasted longer than anyone imagined possible and produced at least three different title-winning teams – teams that all played with the same character and shared the same work ethic as the man who grew up in the Clydeside shipbuilding community and never failed to remind anyone that that was where he learned his values. He seemed to be both enjoying his version of retirement and doing well out of his leisure time, and not many ex-football managers get to say that. One of his former players, Mark Hughes, was busy earning his relegation-threatened Southampton side a point at Everton when the news broke. “I have only heard a couple of rumours,” the Southampton manager said. “I was hoping it wasn’t true.” Sam Allardyce, the Everton manager and a close personal friend of Ferguson, described the news as tragic. “I am going to try and find out how serious it is as soon as I can,” Allardyce said. “It is obviously a brain haemorrhage or a brain bleed. I hope he is in good hands and I hope he can make a full recovery.”
0||Bellew stops Haye in fifth round: heavyweight boxing – as it happenedDavid Haye speaks: “Tony boxed a great fight, he did some really clever stuff in there. He boxed good, and I didn’t, it’s that simple.” “I thought I was fit enough to beat him, it turns out I wasn’t, but he’s a great champion. Is this the end? It didn’t feel great in there tonight, but I don’t know. I lost to the better man, so congratulations to Tony.” An emotional Tony Bellew speaks: “I lost my brother-in-law in August – his dad’s here tonight, and I swear he was with me too. Ashley, I love you, mate. He’s been on my mind the whole time, I miss him so much. I’m broke, la. I’m just broke.” “David Haye is an amazing fighter, we just got into a slugfest. Age is a factor with his style. He goes down as a better fighter than me. But I won, against all the odds. I was willing to be finished off in this ring tonight, I’m struggling bad but I’ve done it, and that’s all that matters.” Well, well. Tony Bellew is in tears, with David Haye quick to offer his congratulations. It’s not particularly nice to see a once-great fighter go out in the manner Haye surely has, but full credit to Bellew, who was by far the quicker, smarter fighter and was ruthless in getting the job done. Round 5 of 12: After two minutes of cagey shadow boxing, Bellew picks his moment and puts Haye down a third time! It’s a heavy, awkward fall for Haye in the centre of the ring. The referee lets the fight go on, but not for long – Bellew stops Haye in the fifth! Round 4 of 12: It looks like Haye may have damaged his ankle again – he’s off balance, totally unable to repel Bellew’s quickfire combinations. This is a little sad to see from a former world champion, but he’s clinging on and hoping for one last Hayemaker. He digs deep and momentarily halts Bellew’s charge, but he still looks in big trouble. Unofficial scorecard: Haye 37-38 Bellew Round 3 of 12: Haye has nicked the first two rounds, but Bellew looks fresher – can he get one on the board? He keeps Haye moving and working hard, and almost connects with a jab. Haye launches a late offensive, swings and misses, and Bellew’s one-two on the counter puts Haye down against the ropes! He gets up, but another combination sends him down again! He’s saved by the bell... Unofficial scorecard: Haye 27-28 Bellew Round 2 of 12: Haye looks a little cumbersome in the middle of the ring, but lands a sloppy combination and a body shot. Haye then lands a decent right, with Bellew throwing his gloves up, asking if that’s all he’s got. Haye takes the round, but is leaning heavily on his front foot – he won’t want this to go the distance. Guardian unofficial scorecard: Haye 20-18 Bellew Round 1 of 12: There’s a weird Brexit vibe to the two fighters’ trunks, with Haye sporting a Union Jack and Bellew in EU blue with yellow stars. Bellew finds some joy with his jabs but loses balance, while Haye struggles to find any rhythm in a patchy first round, but lands the bigger blows, including a big right at the bell. Guardian unofficial scorecard: Haye 10-9 Bellew After both fighters are given a hearty booing by the crowd, they touch gloves and it’s officially on. We’re moments away. This will be Haye’s 32nd fight – he has a 28-3 record. It’s Bellew’s 33rd – he’s won 29, lost two and drawn one. Let’s get ready to rumble, then. Here comes Tony Bellew, cutting a moodier figure with the hood up on his robe as Haye waits in the ring wearing headphones. They’re certainly going big on the theatrics. David Haye is striding out to this slice of disco magnificence, grinning from ear to ear... Michael Buffer’s in the ring, ‘Sweet Caroline’ is blaring out – it can only mean one thing... ring walks are imminent. Predictions? AJ says Haye is the more talented fighter, but “you can’t deny Bellew’s heart”. Personally, I think Haye is battling his own body as much as his tenacious opponent – but if he can hold himself together, revenge should be his. While you’re here, why not sign up for The Recap, our weekly round-up of our best sporting coverage? Campbell gets the job done against an outmatched opponent, and says he is now lining up a rematch with Yvan Mendy, the only other man to defeat him. Eddie Hearn, never knowingly absent from ringside for these PPV occasions, confirms they’re set to fight a title eliminator, with the winner facing Mikey Garcia. In fine MBM tradition, you’re lining up to have a dig at tonight’s gladiators. “I don’t really mind who wins between Haye and Bellew, but every time I see a clip of Haye doing something he’s got the worst music on,” says David Jerome. “For that reason alone, I hope Bellew wins.” Nathan Fisher comes armed with heavy sarcasm: “I’m just wondering if you can shed any light on the rumours that Bellew has a wife and kids? He’s a pretty coy interviewee and I’d like to know a little more about that aspect of his life.” John ‘The Gorilla’ Ryder has stopped Jamie Cox in the second round, and is now targeting a super-middleweight world title shot. 2012 gold medallist Luke Campbell, who lost his WBA lightweight title bout to the exceptional Jorge Linares last year, is now in action against Troy James. There was a surprise earlier on at the O2 Arena, as Belfast’s James Tennyson inflicted a first ever defeat on Martin Joseph Ward in their super-featherweight bout. Olympic silver medallist Joe Joyce defeated Lenroy Thomas by second-round KO in his fourth professional fight, and Emmanuel Rodríguez became IBF world bantamweight champion after beating Paul Butler on points. Haye has tweeted – or possibly his PR, seeing as his hands have been wrapped. He’s trying his best to look relaxed: Anthony Joshua is ringside as a Sky pundit, and thinks Bellew has a chance of a repeat win tonight. On Bellew’s pre-fight aggro, he says “I do believe mind games are a big part of the build-up. They are listening – you’ve got to keep poking away.” Very few sequels live up to the original. For every Empire Strikes Back, there are several hundred Speed 2: Cruise Controls. Tonight’s sophomore meeting between David Haye and Tony Bellew has the potential to join that select club. After a long, drawn-out build-up packed with bluster and bile, Haye v Bellew I proved to be an absurd if absorbing experience. A promising contest fell apart when Haye snapped his Achilles in the sixth round. Barely able to throw a punch, Haye was at the mercy of his underpowered opponent, who laboured to a late knockout win. It was a case of the stoppable force against the unmoving object. Haye’s career seemed finished on that miserable night but he returns 14 months later cutting a very different figure. There is less swagger in his step this time, only a quiet confidence that a new coach has revived his pugilistic power. It’s been left to the abrasive, outspoken Bellew to supply the necessary pre-fight needle, with Haye swerving the verbal blows. Whether the former world heavyweight champion is waiting patiently until his fists can do the talking, or is still bruised from that first encounter, only time will tell. Bellew has also stayed away from the ring until this rematch, and will be motivated by Haye being made an odds-on favourite. Here’s hoping for all the thrills of the first fight, with none of the farce. Niall will be here shortly. In the meantime, here’s Kevin Mitchell’s big fight preview: The conversation with Tony Bellew was idling towards an emotional conclusion as he reflected on what mattered to him in life: family, home, friends, Everton Football Club. And then the fighter detailed in a chilling blast of invective what he was going to do to David Haye at the O2 Arena in London on Saturday night. “I want to cause havoc,” he said, eyes on fire. “I want to cause mayhem – and I mean the worst mayhem you can see. Something happens to me [in the ring]. I’m gonna flick a switch. I want to do damage. I swear when I get him on Saturday, he’s going to pay for every word. I’m going to smash him. And I’m not going to stop. He’s finished. He has no idea what’s coming.”
14||Trump's knife crime comments are ridiculous, says London surgeonThe suggestion by Donald Trump that guns are part of the solution to knife crime in London is ridiculous, a trauma surgeon in the capital has said. The US president told the National Rifle Association convention in Dallas on Friday that a “once very prestigious hospital” in London was like a “warzone”. He appeared to be referring to reported comments by Martin Griffiths, a lead trauma surgeon at the Royal London hospital in Whitechapel, who likened the spate of stabbing victims coming through the doors to scenes in a military hospital. Prof Karim Brohi, another surgeon at the hospital and the director of London’s major trauma system, said knife violence was a serious issue for London. “We are proud of the excellent trauma care we provide and of our violence reduction programmes,” he said in a statement on Saturday. “The Royal London hospital has cut the number of our young patients returning after further knife attacks from 45% to 1%. “There is more we can all do to combat this violence, but to suggest guns are part of the solution is ridiculous. Gunshot wounds are at least twice as lethal as knife injuries and more difficult to repair. We are proud of our world-leading service and to serve the people of London.” In response to comments on Twitter, Griffiths wrote: In his speech, Trump used a familiar argument to defend gun ownership, asking whether vans, trucks and cars, which have also been used by terrorists, should be banned. Then he turned to knives. “I recently read a story that in London, which has unbelievably tough gun laws, a once very prestigious hospital, right in the middle, is like a warzone for horrible stabbing wounds,” he said. “Yes, that’s right, they don’t have guns, they have knives, and instead there’s blood all over the floors of this hospital. They say it’s as bad as a military warzone hospital.” Trump stabbed the air several times with an imaginary knife and muttered: “Knives, knives, knives. “London hasn’t been used to that. They’re getting used to it. Pretty tough. We’re here today because we recognise a simple fact. The one thing that has always stood between the American people and the elimination of our second amendment rights has been conservatives in Congress willing to fight for those rights. We’re fighting.” The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, who has previously clashed with Trump over terrorist attacks in the capital, declined to respond to the president’s latest remarks. Charlie Falconer, a former justice secretary, said: “Trump makes Londoners dislike him more, and the US dislike London more. Mutual dislike is not good as the UK leaves the EU. Trump gives the impression he couldn’t give a fig.” The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, set Trump’s comments in the context of Conservative cuts to policing resources and the influence that has had on the rise in violent crime. The most recent complete set of official data on crime in the US, the 2016 uniform crime report published by the FBI, showed that there were 5.3 murders and non-negligent manslaughters per 100,000 people, equal to 53 per million. Police-recorded crime in England and Wales for the same period, published by the Office for National Statistics, showed 10 homicides – murder and manslaughter – per million. It was not immediately clear which story Trump had read about London, but it was possibly a Mail Online article published last month, which had the headline: “Surgeon says he is regularly treating children in school uniform for gun and knife wounds in London hospital which is ‘like Afghan war zone’.” The article quoted a BBC Radio 4 interview with Griffiths and said the Royal London had treated a record 702 stabbing victims in 2017. “Griffiths said colleagues who served in the military likened their work at the London hospital to being back at Camp Bastion, the British forces base in war-torn Afghanistan,” Mail Online reported. Trump is due to make a “working visit” to the UK on 13 July, for which mass protests are expected. Khan tweeted last month: “If he comes to London, President Trump will experience an open and diverse city that has always chosen unity over division and hope over fear. He will also no doubt see that Londoners hold their liberal values of freedom of speech very dear.” It emerged late on Saturday that Trump and Theresa May had held talks amid the controversy but there was no indication in a White House statement that the leaders had discussed the issue of knife violence or the president’s remarks about the London hospital.
15||Budget will show how shallow Liberal party's 'debt and deficit disaster' really wasThis budget looks set not only to be replete with spending commitments and tax cuts, but also to be the final nail in the coffin of the Liberal party’s scare mongering about the evils of debt and deficit. A few weeks ago, I suggested that because of unexpected increases in taxation revenue and with an election due in the next 12 months, the budget would see the treasurer “doling out the pork”. Two days later, the leader of the National party rather confirmed this by referring to the treasurer in an interview with the Daily Telegraph as “Scott Santa Claus Morrison”. Morrison quickly tried to dampen these expectations but the cat was well and truly out of the bag, and since then all the pre-budget drops have been about new spending or tax cuts with little sense of the need for restraint. Sign up to receive the latest Australian opinion pieces every weekday This has actually brought with it some problems for the government as they discard what they once told us were sacredly held beliefs. Last year, Morrison for example, was adamant that the NDIS needed to be fully funded, and could only be done so by raising the Medicare levy a half a per cent. He did this, he told the nation, because “it’s time ... we give disabled Australians and their families the guarantee they deserve”. But now? Guarantees? Pfft. That’s so 2017, we have a strong economy, don’t you know! Morrison told the Today Show’s Karl Stefanovic this week that, “I’m pleased as punch for people with disabilities that we can guarantee them those funds from a stronger economy”. You would have to be as dumb as Punch to believe a strong economy is guaranteed. The point of the Medicare levy increase was that the NDIS is not some one-off project. It is ongoing – when the economy is doing well and when it is not. Now Morrison would have us believe the economy will always be doing well. The only reason the government has dumped the Medicare levy increase is because back in 2016 it had imposed a dopey cap on tax revenue of 23.9% of GDP. So great is the influx of revenue coming via improved export prices and employment growth that it looked set to break through this cap in the next few years – and thus they needed to reduce the tax take. But why not just bank that money and reduce the deficit and government debt?After all, that was what Morrison said he would do in last year’s budget. Now, instead, extra revenue will be spent – or foregone as is the case with the rescinding Medicare levy increase. This is what happens when your budget policy is framed more by politics than economics. There is not one iota of evidence that the economy suffers if tax revenue goes above 23.9% of GDP. When tax revenue rises it does so for pretty much one reason only – the economy is doing well. That is why in 2004-05 and 2005-06 at the height of the mining boom, tax revenue was equivalent to 24.3% of GDP. And that is why when you do get an unexpected influx of revenue, blowing it on tax cuts is about the dumbest thing you can do, because while you might be able to afford it while things are unexpectedly doing well, you cannot when things are unexpectedly doing poorly. And no one ever expects the economy to do poorly. In Peter Costello’s last budget in 2007, the Treasury predicted that “the world economy is expected to continue to expand at a strong rate” and that “growth in the United States is expected to ease in 2007, before strengthening in 2008”. Instead it went backwards into the deepest recession since the second world war. Morrison’s position also highlights just how hollow is the Liberal party’s talk on debt and deficit. During the Rudd-Gillard years the cries about rising government debt were unending. And yet government net debt is now higher than it has ever been and five years into government, the Liberal party are yet to deliver a budget deficit smaller than it was in 2012-13. Now that isn’t to say the government should have been reducing the deficit or debt faster than they have – it just highlights how stupid it is to make debt and deficits your key measures. The reality is both are important but are subject to the requirements of the economy. When the economy is weak and tax revenue is low, cutting spending to get back to surplus is a fool’s errand that is only good if you believe the country should experience a recession. Morrison, like Joe Hockey (and Costello) before him, has discovered that the path to a budget surplus is paved with revenue growth, not spending cuts. But now that he has the revenue of which Wayne Swan could have only dreamed, the desire for a surplus, or to reduce debt, has become less important. In the 2014-15 budget, the government planned for a budget surplus of “at least 1% of GDP by 2023‑24”. That was a bit too specific for Morrison, who last year watered-down the commitment to “as soon as possible”. Now that “as soon as possible” is, as Morrison told reporters this week, “conditioned by ensuring taxes do not rise more than 23.9% of the economy.” You could argue given the current low inflation and income growth that the economy is not actually strong enough for a faster return to surplus than previously planned. But Morrison is not making that case. For him the economy is strong – and will ever be so. He is just using the 23.9% line as an excuse for dolling out tax cuts because an election is coming. It’s about politics, not economics. And it reveals just how disingenuous the Liberal party’s decade-long preaching on the evil of debt and deficit has been. And that should never be forgotten. Greg Jericho is a Guardian Australia columnist
13||Jürgen Klopp seeks top-four slot and end to stupid questions at ChelseaLiverpool need to take a point or more from their visit to Stamford Bridge this afternoon in order to secure their place in the top four, leave the rest of the season free to concentrate on the Champions League final and give Jürgen Klopp a break from answering stupid questions. The German has become adept at either widening his eyes or letting his jaw drop in response to some of the inanities that come his way during media duties, though to his credit he usually manages a reasoned answer. “Yes of course it is important to this club to play in the Champions League next season,” he said slowly, as if examining the query for a catch it did not contain. “We are strong enough to compete against the very best teams in Europe so that is what we want to do. We are ready for this challenge.” Clearly it is not only Sybil Fawlty who specialises in the bleedin’ obvious, though Klopp was not being flippant and neither should his reply be dismissed lightly. How many other English clubs could currently say the same? In under three seasons at Anfield Klopp has turned the club into a force in Europe to such an extent that clubs with bigger budgets and more experienced squads – Chelsea and the two Manchester sides, say – ought to be vaguely embarrassed. Since he was last in the Champions League final, with Borussia Dortmund in 2013, no Premier League side has gone as far, and now he is back with a club that managed qualification only twice in the previous eight seasons. Klopp’s Liverpool are strong in a way that few sides from this country have been in Europe since Manchester United were in their pomp. When Chelsea became the last English winners of the Champions League in 2012 they were a fading force, not really hitting the heights they threatened under José Mourinho or (briefly) Guus Hiddink. United went to the 2009 and 2011 finals as clear underdogs and were duly humbled twice by Barcelona. Those versions of Chelsea and United were certainly not sides others were hoping to avoid in the draw, which is what Liverpool have just become. After seeing what they managed against the English champions and the last Italian side in the contest, even a team of Real Madrid’s pedigree and experience will be careful not to make any assumptions. Klopp has turned Mohamed Salah into a Ballon d’Or candidate, made Manchester City think twice about the wisdom of letting James Milner go, reinvigorated his back-line options with Trent Alexander-Arnold, Virgil van Dijk and Andy Robertson and, perhaps most impressively of all, compensated for the loss of Philippe Coutinho by making the team revolve around the outstanding Roberto Firmino. Klopp has bought well, built a side that can hurt just about anyone and he has not yet finished. Naby Keïta arrives from RB Leipzig in the summer – Liverpool might even take him as a guest to the Champions League final in Kiev – and Klopp expects to make one or two more signings before the start of next season. “Naby has the quality to have a big effect on the team immediately he arrives,” the manager said of the Guinea midfielder. “He is not playing the World Cup so he will have a full pre-season with us, which will help him a lot. We will probably sign a couple more players in summer because we need more depth in the squad. “To bring in players who are 200% better than what we have will be difficult but we had a problem when Coutinho left and Adam Lallana and then Emre Can became injured. You can never remove all injury risk and the boys still did brilliantly, but of course we will try to strengthen the squad because that’s how it is.” Klopp is refusing all invitations to get carried away by the achievement of taking Liverpool to an eighth European Cup final – “I am not interested in reaching finals, I am more interested in winning them” – though he will admit that one of the reasons he would prefer to strengthen rather than stand still is because the English league is so tough. “I do think this is the hardest league,” he said. “The intensity is hard, the fixture schedule is hard. In England every team fights for everything every week. “If there is a reason why English teams have not been doing so well in Europe I would say that is the most important one. I have spoken about this before and I am not looking to complain or make excuses but I think we all know that the schedule you give to your teams is not made for being successful in summer.”
13||Neil Warnock: ‘I’m not saying Cardiff would stay up but I’d enjoy every minute’Neil Warnock has been talking about just how much he loves the way that Fulham play, which leads the conversation into comparisons with his own team’s far more direct approach and whether he thinks the Premier League will embrace Cardiff and the 69-year-old Yorkshireman who is on the verge of winning promotion for a record eighth time. “I’ve no idea, really. I’ll probably answer these questions as and when we get there,” Warnock says with a glint in his eye. “I once went for an interview at Norwich. The first question around the board table was: ‘Do you think Norwich fans would like a Neil Warnock team?’ So I looked every one of them in the eye around the table, and said: ‘Yeah, I think they’d love to win games.’” Warnock pauses for a moment before adding: “I knew I hadn’t got the fucking job.” Warnock is not everyone’s cup of tea but good luck with trying to find a Cardiff supporter that says a bad word about him now. To provide a bit of context, Cardiff were second bottom in the Championship when Warnock was appointed 19 months ago, they had won two of their opening 11 matches and it took time for Paul Trollope’s replacement to discover that the problems at the club transcended what was going on out on the pitch. “The place was fragmented all over,” Warnock says. The turnaround has been astonishing. Warnock has galvanised and united a club, not just a team, by winning 42 of his 80 league games in charge, propelling Cardiff from one end of the table to the other. One more victory at home against Reading , in front of what promises to be the biggest league crowd in Wales for the best 40 years, and Cardiff and Warnock, who turns 70 in December, will be back in the Premier League. Warnock looks remarkably relaxed in the circumstances and also fresh-faced compared with some of his contemporaries. “I’m like I am because of our fans,” he says. “I don’t know any [Cardiff] fans that don’t like me. And I tell you now, you look at some of the managers in the Premier League and the Championship, the fans [at their clubs] don’t like them. It’s horrible, that. And I don’t need that, not at my age. If ever fans chanted my name ‘out’, they wouldn’t have to wait long.” Looking back, Warnock shakes his head at how things have changed since he started out in management with Gainsborough Trinity in 1981. “There were no phone-ins when I was first managing. The first one that came in was called Football Heaven at Radio Sheffield and I’ll never forget the first caller that I listened to. He said: ‘Well, Warnock’s got to go, hasn’t he? How can he stay in the job after that?’ And then the host said: ‘So you went to the game this afternoon, did you?’ The guy replied: ‘Well, no, I didn’t. But I listened to it on the radio.’ I thought: ‘Oh my God, a new era beckons’.” Sheffield United are one of four clubs that Warnock has managed in the top flight, with Notts County, Queens Park Rangers and Crystal Palace the others, yet none of those experiences are recalled with any real fondness. Notts County and Sheffield United were relegated after a season, Palace sacked him after four months and he was dismissed by QPR in the January after winning promotion, leading some to question whether Warnock is cut out for management at the highest level. In many ways it feels as though Warnock enjoys trying to get to the Premier League far more than actually being there. “I would have said that in the past,” Warnock says, nodding. “But if Cardiff got to the Premier League it would be a different ball game. We are quite well organised now as a club. I’m not saying we would stay up. But I just think that I would want to go into the Premier League enjoying it – enjoying every minute of it – and I think I could at this club. “If you look at my past in the Premier League, without going into too many details, I don’t think I had much of a chance at any of them, for different reasons. At QPR, they sold the club and it meant I couldn’t sign a player from the day we went up in April until the last week of August. You can’t do that. Sheffield was also disappointing when we got promotion. It was the same at Notts County.” Whatever anyone says about Warnock, he has a knack of going into struggling clubs and turning things around, often without spending much. Man-management is arguably his biggest strength when it comes to working with players – “It’s my only strength,” Warnock says – although at Cardiff there was a job to do outside as well as inside the dressing room. Warnock explains how he set about “sorting the whole club out” by going to speak to all the departments to find out what problems they had. “I know it’s not my business but I made it my business because I wanted to get everybody together and that was the best way of doing it I felt.” On the pitch, Warnock gave some players a fresh start, vastly improved others and made a few astute and experienced signings, in particular Junior Hoilett and Sol Bamba, both of whom were without a club when he took over. Hoilett has started all but two of Cardiff’s league games this season and been directly involved in 20 goals. As for Bamba, the centre-back has excelled after heeding the advice that he needed to become more of a “Neil Warnock player”. Asked to explain that comment, Warnock says: “He thought he was Beckenbauer, strutting around, passing the ball, dribbling – you name it. And that’s why he was looking for work when I came to see him, because no club wanted to take him on board because he was an accident waiting to happen, if you listen to the Leeds fans. Bamba is never going to be a [Virgil] Van Dijk with the ball and neither is [Sean] Morrison. But defensively they can become very good players.” Cardiff feel like a team that is far greater than the sum of its parts, which is testament to the belief, camaraderie and organisation that Warnock has instilled in his players. None of that will change the way that he is perceived by plenty of supporters elsewhere, but winning promotion, not popularity contests, has always been his thing. “Everyone wants to be loved and liked – but you can’t be as a manager,” he says. “As a manager, you know you’re going to take the brickbats from other clubs and their fans. But I do enjoy making my own fans happy. When I came here, the biggest compliment was when I heard fans say: ‘Well, I’ve never liked him. But I’ve always wanted him to manage us.’”
16||Local elections: something for everyone, but politics deadlockedIn last year’s general election everything changed, but no one won. In this year’s local elections everyone won something but nothing changed. The Conservatives, Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Greens all had vote and seat gains to cheer about, as all parties took a share of the electoral windfall from the dramatic collapse in Ukip. The Conservatives went into Thursday night hoping to avoid the traditional anti-incumbent swing endured by most governments in midterm local elections, but instead came away with morale-boosting seat gains across England. Voters seemed more focused on Brexit than bin collection in this year’s local contest, with strong links between Brexit-voting and Conservative performance, just as were seen in last year’s general election. The Conservatives advanced by an average of 13 percentage points in authorities that recorded a 60%-plus vote for Leave in 2016 – and all of the four Tory council gains came in strong Leave areas. The Conservatives also gained most from Ukip’s collapse, with larger advances in areas where Ukip did best in 2014. However, there was a lot of variation in how the purple cookie crumbled. Labour gained relatively more from the Ukip collapse in places where they were stronger prior to Ukip’s surge, resulting in the restoration of the status quo ante, taking Ukip seats in councils such as Basildon. While the collapse of Ukip and the Brexit realignment both benefited the Conservatives, it is the Liberal Democrats who will be happiest with these results overall. The party picked up more than 50 council seats, recovered control of its erstwhile London strongholds of Richmond and Kingston on large swings away from the Conservatives, and rebuilt a significant presence on many other local authorities. The party did best in areas that favoured both the Conservatives and Remain in past elections – epitomised by their dramatic takeover in South Cambridgeshire – but this was not a straightforward “Remainer revolt”. The party also enjoyed major surges in support in Leave-voting traditional Labour strongholds such as Hull and Sunderland. The Lib Dems may have recovered some of their chameleon-like capacity to mobilise local opposition regardless of the overall political climate. Labour will be more disappointed, as despite making over 60 seat gains, taking control of Plymouth and Kirklees and ending nearly 15 years of Conservative dominance in Trafford, the party finished the count in charge of fewer councils than before. Despite significant seat gains in the capital, predictions of big breakthroughs in traditionally Tory inner-London redoubts such as Wandsworth and Westminster proved wide of the mark. Outside the capital there was a small overall swing away from Labour, costing it control of Derby, Redditch and Nuneaton councils. There were signs that both parties have been hurt by scandals that have made headlines lately. The Conservatives did particularly poorly in areas where the last census recorded a large black community, which may hint at a Windrush backlash. They also fell back somewhat in Kensington and Chelsea, although the swing against them after last year’s Grenfell Tower fire was smaller than some anticipated, and the party suffered a net loss of just one seat. Meanwhile, Labour’s performance was noticeably poor in wards with large Jewish populations, which was particularly costly for the party in Barnet, a marginal London borough the party hoped to gain. Labour’s vote fell in the five Barnet wards with the largest Jewish populations, even as the party advanced strongly elsewhere.The recent antisemitism scandal thus looks to have hurt Labour at the polls this year, and to have played a significant role in the party’s failure to gain control of London’s most marginal council. The results also suggest that neither the government nor the opposition has yet found a way to bridge the deep demographic and geographical divisions revealed in the EU referendum and last year’s general election. Labour registered its strongest gains in areas with many migrants and ethnic minorities, in areas with many students and young people and in the big cities – trends which have been evident since Ed Miliband’s tenure as leader. Nearly all Labour’s seat gains came from advances in London. Yet the party already controls most local and Westminster seats in such areas, limiting the capacity for further gains. Labour cannot hope to achieve a majority if it continues to underperform in areas with key marginal constituencies such as Bolton, Derby and Southampton. The Conservatives have solidified their grip on Leave-voting rural and small-town parts of England with large numbers of older white voters with low education levels. Class politics was again turned upside down: the Tory vote share increased by over 10 points in the wards with the highest share of people doing routine manual work, or who left school with no qualifications, but flatlined in places with the most middle-class professionals and fell in the places with the most graduates. The steep age gradient in party support that emerged in last year’s general election was once again in evidence last week – the Conservatives advanced by up to 10 points in areas with the most pensioners, but there was a substantial swing to Labour in areas with the most voters under 35. The Conservatives remain on the wrong side of demographic trends – doing best with shrinking groups and worst with growing ones. They will struggle to achieve a parliamentary majority unless they can find a way to appeal to graduates, younger voters and ethnic minorities. As the final votes were tallied on Friday afternoon the BBC’s projected national share showed a dead heat, with both Conservatives and Labour on 35 points. Both parties improved on the showing in 2014 by recruiting Ukip voters and advancing in their areas of strength, but both trod water outside their strongholds. These local elections have thus entrenched the polarised, evenly divided status quo. Both the Conservatives and Labour now dominate large parts of England, yet neither party can hope to win a general election majority with support from “home territory” alone. Ukip’s collapse has not fundamentally changed the even balance of power between the two, and the Liberal Democrats, though they showed signs of life, remain too weak and marginal to challenge two party dominance. A resolution to Brexit Britain’s political deadlock remains elusive. Dr Robert Ford is a professor of politics at the University of Manchester. He is the co-author, with Matthew Goodwin, of Revolt on the Right: Explaining Public Support for the Radical Right in Britain. He tweets @robfordmancs
10||Parkland victim's father: 'I haven't heard Trump mention the name of my son'The father of a teenager killed in the Parkland high school shooting challenged Donald Trump to return to Florida and “spend five minutes of [his] time in Joaquin’s empty room”. Manuel Oliver, whose 17-year-old son was shot dead at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school less than three months ago, was speaking near the NRA convention in Dallas. “I’m impressed with the support that the NRA got from our president yesterday,” he said. “I haven’t heard from President Trump the name of my son, not even once.” Trump and Mike Pence, the vice-president, addressed NRA members on Friday, pledging their support for gun rights and asking for help in electing Republicans to Congress. The president said he had been advised that “going to the NRA convention and speaking today, that will be very controversial. It might not be popular.” “You know what I said?” he added. “‘Bye-bye, gotta get on the plane.’” Oliver and his family have founded a nonprofit, Change the Ref, to protest against the influence of gun lobby money in the gun law debate. On Saturday, about a block away from the convention hall, Oliver addressed more than 200 protesters who had gathered to push for stricter gun laws and highlight the toll of gun violence, from school shootings to gun suicides. “I don’t know who advises our president,’” Oliver said. The protest was organized by StudentsMarch.org, a Dallas-based group, and Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, a national gun control group founded after the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting in 2012. With his wife Patricia watching alongside youth activists and gun violence survivors from Texas and across the country, Oliver created a fifth protest mural. He has created similar images in Miami, Los Angeles, New York and Springfield, Massachusetts, near the headquarters of Smith &amp; Wesson, the company that made the weapon used to kill Joaquin. The Dallas mural depicted a student wearing a backpack in the crosshairs of a gun, flanked by Trump, shown as a “circus festival host”, and NRA spokeswoman Dana Loesch, dressed as a clown holding an AR-15 rifle. “We demand a fair game,” Oliver painted across the large canvas, which he festooned with dangling tickets to America’s “carnival of violence” and a chain of red-white-and-blue balloons in the shapes of guns. Using art as a form of protest has proved to be a kind of therapy, Oliver said. The first time he made a mural to honor Joaquin, he said, on the wall of a Miami art gallery, he impulsively hit the wall with a hammer. He then hit it again and again, 17 times in all. Some of his son’s classmates were watching, he said, and he saw how the sound affected them – how it reminded them of gunshots. On Saturday, he told his audience: “Let’s feel how it feels.” Then he slammed a hammer into the mural 17 times, hitting each of the 17 tiny figures he had painted. He hit the boy in the center of the mural twice. Then he put down the hammer and picked up a bunch of flowers, placing a sunflower in each of the gaping holes. Oliver said his most emotional moment had come as he painted the mural earlier, when a song came on: Moon River, which he listened to many times with Joaquin. He paused, suddenly breathing hard. “I wasn’t expecting that,” he said.
16||Labour peers accuse Corbyn of Brexit cowardiceLabour peers launched an attack on the party leadership last night, accusing it of “paralysis” and “cowardice” over Brexit policy, as bitter recriminations over disappointing local election results burst into the open. The row exploded as calls grew for a full post-mortem into why Labour failed to make more decisive progress in key council battlegrounds and lost control in others, despite the Conservatives being mired in crises over immigration, Brexit and the NHS. Although the party performed better in London than at any time since 1971, it was unable to take Tory strongholds in the capital, including Wandsworth, and fell short in several councils where it hoped to make gains, failing to win in Nuneaton, Derby and Basildon. With Jeremy Corbyn increasingly under pressure from Remainers to develop a more distinct and robust pro-EU policy, Labour peers said they were outraged that the party appeared to be trying to block their efforts in the Lords to achieve a soft Brexit that would allow the UK to remain involved in the EU’s internal market, and provide a solution to the Irish border problem. The Observer understands that more than 40 Labour peers are ready to back a cross-party amendment to Brexit legislation that would instruct the government to begin negotiating future UK membership of the European Economic Area (EEA). This would mean that the UK would leave the EU and not be part of the common agricultural policy, common fisheries policy or be subject to the European Court of Justice. It would also be able to strike its own deal on freedom of movement, while being inside the EU internal market. But the peers have reacted furiously after being told that the leadership is instructing peers who take the Labour whip to abstain in the vote on Tuesday, meaning it will not be passed. The peers say the majority of party members back a soft Brexit including single market membership and the measure would stand a good chance of being passed in the Commons if it were voted through the Lords. The businessman and Labour peer Lord Waheed Alli, who has put his name to the amendment, accused the leadership last night of being “paralysed by indecision”. “This is complete cowardice. There is no point in being in politics to abstain, If you stand in the middle of the road someone is going to knock you over.” he said. His fellow Labour peer Lord Cashman said it was essential to look at a solution that would allow membership of the EEA, as it would not only be good for UK business but also solve the Irish border problem which is now threatening to torpedo a Brexit deal. “Why the frontbench will not accept that as a negotiating position I completely fail to understand.” The party and Momentum said the local elections represented progress. Laura Parker, Momentum’s national coordinator, said: “We’re very pleased to see healthy gains in areas where Momentum campaigned hardest. This just shows how important it is to have an engaged, enthusiastic movement – people who will get out into the community and spread Labour’s message. “The untold story of the night is Labour’s advance on last year’s snap election result. If this result were played out at a general election, the Tories would lose 12 parliamentary seats and be unable to form a government.” But Labour MPs said there were urgent questions the party needed to address that explained why Labour had not performed in line with expectations. Angela Smith, MP for Penistone and Stocksbridge and a member of the parliamentary committee that relays backbench views to the leader, said the row over antisemitism had to be addressed. So too did concerns in many local parties about centralisation, and resentment over attempts to purge moderates from positions in the party. “We are increasingly being seen as a party that is ugly and unpleasant. Voters do not like the total control mentality. They don’t like bullying and they don’t appreciate attempts to shut out alternative views and debate.” Yesterday party moderates launched a new campaign to hold a vote over the party’s Brexit position at its autumn conference, in an attempt to shift it towards a soft Brexit. Tony Blair’s former director of communications, Alastair Campbell, said there was a “dreadful complacency about what it takes to win” at the top of the party and called for leadership on Brexit. “Frankly, if we cannot beat this shambles of a Tory party, we don’t deserve to be in the game,” he said. “All my doubts relate to the course now being followed and, because it is such a huge issue that will determine so much of our kids’ futures, the approach being taken to Brexit … We in my generation have to do what we can to stop the madness of Brexit.” Ben Bradshaw, the former Labour cabinet minister, said: “I think we can stop Brexit and we must stop Brexit, but if we don’t do that we must make sure we stay inside the single market and customs union. Theresa May lost her majority for a hard Brexit in the election last year.” After the Tories averted a meltdown of their vote as many former Ukip voters turned to them, pro-Brexit Conservatives were calling yesterday for Theresa May to honour the will of the people and get out of the customs unions or any version of it. Pro-Brexit ministers are already warning that May could end up causing an electoral “disaster” for the party if she keeps insisting that she wants a “customs partnership” with the EU. Some cabinet ministers are said to be among those who fear that the plan, which was rejected by the Brexit cabinet sub-committee last week, would stop Britain making a clean break from the EU by the time of the next election, due in 2022. May is being warned that anything other than a proper exit from the customs union will see the party punished by pro-Brexit voters. Writing on theguardian.com, Barry Rawlings, leader of Barnet Labour group, said the party had failed to win the borough because “so many of our neighbours believe we tolerate antisemitism”. He called on the party to reveal what action it was taking in relation to complaints of antisemitic behaviour, to demonstrate it is taking the issue seriously. “It is agonisingly difficult to describe the feeling of standing as a Labour candidate in a political environment that has turned toxic,” he writes. “Some members didn’t want to put up posters for fear that neighbours might think they didn’t care about antisemitism. A lifelong member broke down in tears on the doorstep because this would be the first election when she didn’t vote. Doors were slammed in our faces and leaflets were taken out of our hands and torn up in front of us. “We have lost trust with our Jewish brothers and sisters, and it will be a long road back to regaining it. But it’s a road we must travel if we want to claim to be a political movement that can represent any and every community in Britain.”
17||Shock figures from top thinktank reveal extent of NHS crisisThe NHS has among the lowest per capita numbers of doctors, nurses and hospital beds in the western world, a new study of international health spending has revealed. The stark findings come from a new King’s Fund analysis of health data from 21 countries, collected by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. They reveal that only Poland has fewer doctors and nurses than the UK, while only Canada, Denmark and Sweden have fewer hospital beds, and that Britain also falls short when it comes to scanners. “If the 21 countries were a football league then the UK would be in the relegation zone in terms of the resources we put into our healthcare system, as measured by staff, equipment and beds in which to care for patients,” said Siva Anandaciva, the King’s Fund’s chief analyst. “If you look across all these indicators – beds, staffing, scanners – the UK is consistently below the average in the resources we give the NHS relative to countries such as France and Germany. Overall, the NHS does not have the level of resources it needs to do the job we all expect it to do, given our ageing and growing population, and the OECD data confirms that,” he added. The report concludes that, given the dramatic differences between Britain and other countries: “A general picture emerges that suggests the NHS is under-resourced.” The thinktank’s research found that the UK has the third-lowest number of doctors among the 21 nations, with just 2.8 per 1,000 people, barely half the number in Austria, which has 5.1 doctors per 1,000 of population. Similarly, the UK has the sixth-smallest number of nurses for its population: just 7.9 per 1,000 people – way behind Switzerland, which has the most: 18 nurses, more than twice as many. With hospital beds, the UK has just 2.6 for every 1,000 people, just over a third of the number in Germany, which has the most – 8.1 beds – and which places the UK 18th overall out of the 21 countries which the OECD gathered figures for. The number of hospital beds in England has halved over the last 30 years and now stands at about 100,000, though the NHS added about 4,000 more as an emergency measure in December, January and February to help it cope with the spike in patient numbers caused by the long, cold winter. Doctors’ leaders said the report showed that the NHS is “chronically underfunded” and is receiving £10bn less per year than it needs. “These statistics show that the UK has fewer beds per head compared to virtually all other EU nations, fewer doctors and nurses, reduced access to investigations such as MRI scans, and is spending less on medications,” said Dr Chaand Nagpaul, leader of the British Medical Association, which represents most of the NHS’s 240,000 doctors. “Taken together, these numbers translate into the painful reality afflicting the NHS daily, of a system under pressure with inadequate capacity to meet the health needs of the population. This is directly resulting in delays and is adversely affecting quality of care for patients. It is also causing unsustainable workload burdens on NHS staff, causing stress and burnout and affecting recruitment and retention.” The National Audit Office said in March that the NHS’s finances were “in a perilous state” and that the service was being hampered by having vacancies for 100,000 staff. Lord Darzi, a former Labour health minister, said last month that the NHS needed to receive a £50bn boost to its budget by 2020, taking it to £173bn. The Department of Health and Social Care said that the Commonwealth Fund, a global health thinktank, had ranked the NHS as the world’s best and most efficient health service. “As this analysis shows, spending on the NHS is in line with other European countries but it fails to acknowledge that funding is actually at record levels – £1.6bn is being invested in 2018-19, on top of a planned £10bn-a-year increase in its budget by 2020-21, with an extra £2bn and a further £150m for social care this year,” a spokeswoman said.
10||Trump’s dirty ops attack on Obama legacy shows pure hatred for Iran dealThe use of an Israeli private security firm to dig for dirt on senior members of the Obama administration linked to the Iran nuclear deal, as revealed in today’s Observer, shows how far President Donald Trump and the hawks around him are willing to go to destroy the agreement. The 2015 deal is the last major element of Barack Obama’s foreign policy legacy left standing, after nearly 16 months of the Trump era. The drive to unravel the agreement is both deeply personal – driven by Trump’s animus towards his predecessor – and global in its implications for international peace and security. The bid to discredit the deal – the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) – with compromising information on two of its fiercest advocates from the Obama administration came to nothing. Instead, Trump’s campaign against it has relied on the simple repetition of derogatory phrases about it being the “worst deal ever” and “a major embarrassment”. It has remained a fixed point in Trump’s universe. The struggle over JCPOA’s fate comes to a head at the end of this week, when Trump must choose whether to keep a set of sanctions suspended, or violate the deal by reviving them. Trump has reminded the world repeatedly that only he knows what he is going to do when the sanctions waivers fall due on Saturday, while hinting heavily that he will refuse to sign them. If that happens, JCPOA could collapse quickly, or more likely stumble on wounded and weakened a while longer before crashing. Either way, the prospect of a new conflict in the Middle East will draw closer. In view of these high stakes, European capitals are desperately seeking a compromise to satisfy Trump and salvage JCPOA by addressing the president’s complaints about the deal: that it does not address ballistic missile development or Iran’s role in conflicts across the region, and that some of the restrictions on Iran’s nuclear activities expire in the coming years. White House visits by France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, and German chancellor Angela Merkel failed to achieve a breakthrough, but UK foreign secretary Boris Johnson is due in Washington today to try his luck. Meanwhile, diplomats in London, Paris, Berlin and Washington (all parties to JCPOA) continue to exchange ideas on possible compromises. There is agreed text on tougher action towards Iran’s missiles and containing its regional expansion, but not so far on JCPOA’s “sunset clauses”. In any case there is no guarantee that the US officials involved in these exchanges have any sway with Trump himself. He promised to kill the deal and seems bent on delivering. And his resolve has scrambled global alignments. The Europeans find themselves in agreement with Russia, China and Iran, as well as much of the rest of the international community. The US, meanwhile, finds common cause with Israel, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. As the struggle has sharpened in the run-up to Trump’s day of judgment, the gambits on both sides have grown bolder. By flying, one by one, to Trump’s court in a bid to appease him, the Europeans risk exposing their impotence. For his part, Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, showed a sure feel for his audience of one on Monday with an extraordinary stunt, displaying an Israeli intelligence trove on Iran – which in normal times would be quietly shared with allied agencies – in the style of a Las Vegas show. With a showman’s flourish, Netanyahu ripped black sheets off bookcases of files and panels emblazoned with CD-roms, while screens displayed the message “Iran lied” in 3ft-high letters. The substance underlying the show did appear to be a remarkable intelligence coup – Iran’s nuclear weapons archive reportedly swiped from a Tehran warehouse in the middle of the night in January – but has so far only confirmed what was already known to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA): that Iran began a concerted weapons design project in 2002, but shelved it a year later, then continued some theoretical feasibility studies until 2009. It is not clear whether Netanyahu’s performance was intended to sway Trump, a counter-balance to Macron and Merkel, or to do the US president a favour by providing political cover for a decision he has already taken. Trump has set 12 May as a grand season finale, with himself at centre stage. However, even if he reimposes sanctions by refusing to sign a waiver it will not necessarily spell the end for JCPOA. The sanctions legislation in play is targeted at foreign countries and companies dealing with Iran’s central bank but contains exemptions for states that significantly reduce their purchases of Iranian oil. As preparations have been made, the US would have to give other countries some months to comply before targeting them, which could offer breathing space for more diplomacy. Another raft of sanctions waivers come up for renewal in mid-July, however, affecting shipping and a broad range of trade and investment. It would then be up to Europe and Iran to decide how to respond. Europe could comply or try to fight US sanctions, but big European companies, reliant on raising finance on the New York money markets, are likely to take fright and avoid dealings with Iran. Anger is already mounting in Iran over the absence of the promised economic benefits from the deal, and the disappearance of European companies can only make that worse. Hardliners who opposed any external constraints on the country’s nuclear ambitions are waiting in the wings. “The US looks like the non-compliant party now, so it doesn’t make much sense to shift the focus back to Iran,” said Ariane Tabatabai, an Iran expert at Georgetown University in Washington DC. “But there will be more and more pressure to loosely implement the deal as time goes by.” One of the first likely flashpoints is likely to be the IAEA inspections. The Israeli trove of documents is likely to prompt demands for visits to newly identified sites at a time when Iranian incentives to comply are at a minimum. In that scenario, European states might go along with US sanctions, but the rest of the world, including the big Asian markets for Iranian oil, would make their own decisions. “The Trump administration will find it harder than it expects to get countries to reduce their oil purchases,” said Peter Harrell, a former senior state department official who helped craft some of the Iran sanctions. For the Iran nuclear deal, Harrell added: “It is going to be a slow and messy end.”
3||The Observer view on Trump’s folly in risking not just peace in the Middle EastUnless he experiences a sudden, unexpected change of heart, Donald Trump will reactivate US sanctions on Iran next week and, by doing so, attempt to wreck the west’s landmark 2015 nuclear agreement with Tehran. The likely negative consequences of Trump’s decision, if confirmed, are wide-ranging and extremely serious. The full or partial restoration of two sets of unilateral, pre-2015 American banking, financial and other sanctions would significantly undermine the moderate leadership of Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani. Before his landslide re-election victory last year, Rouhani promised voters much-needed economic renewal in exchange for maintaining the nuclear-related curbs. Now his hardline opponents are poised to strike. The destabilising of Iran, consequent on what would be seen there as an overt act of American aggression, could trigger a broader destabilisation of the Middle East. Predominantly Shia, Persian Iran is engaged in a fierce contest for power and influence with the Sunni Arab world, led by Saudi Arabia. If Trump, allied with Riyadh and Cairo, goes on the offensive, this rivalry may escalate as Iran inevitably reacts – with unforeseeable ramifications in places such as Yemen and Bahrain. One concern is that Iran’s clerical establishment, led by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, will revive a nuclear weapons research programme that, according to the Bush administration and the UN’s International Atomic Energy Agency, ceased in 2003. This would produce the very result Trump ostensibly seeks to avoid. This, in turn, could spark a regional nuclear weapons race with the Saudis and others. Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has long been lobbying Trump to end US adherence to the deal. Last week, he attempted to show that Iran was lying by unveiling a cache of stolen documents. Independent experts found nothing new in Netanyahu’s presentation. The IAEA, which has broad inspection rights, has verified 10 times, most recently in February, that Iran is in full compliance. But Trump hailed his ally’s PR stunt, with suspicious speed, as “proof” of Iranian cheating. As we reveal today, there have also been shockingly underhand efforts in the US to discredit key public officials associated with forging the deal. The alleged involvement of Trump aides in a privately run, Israeli-linked “dirty ops campaign” warrants immediate investigation. It recalls claims that Trump associates colluded with Russia to “dig up dirt” on Hillary Clinton before the 2016 presidential election. Leading figures in Israeli intelligence have warned Netanyahu that his aggressive stance does not serve his country’s best interests. Last week, Israeli forces again reportedly bombed Iranian targets inside Syria. Such confrontations are becoming regular occurrences. There is a clear danger, if tensions escalate further, that Israel could be sucked into an unwinnable, three-front war with Iranian Revolutionary Guards and Shia militias, the Assad regime, Lebanon’s Hezbollah and Hamas in Palestine. At the same time, it is surely not to Israel’s advantage to continue to exaggerate the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran when Israel itself possesses an estimated 200 nuclear warheads, has never subscribed (unlike Iran) to the non-proliferation treaty, and does not allow IAEA inspections. Sooner or later, Israel will be called to account for this double standard. For its part, Iran says the US has failed to keep faith with the spirit and letter of the 2015 agreement, arguing that promised economic and financial relief has not materialised. Leading European banks still refuse to do business there, chilled by fear of American displeasure. Trump’s Muslim travel ban, targeting Iran, is another case in point. All this illuminates a larger problem: Trump’s lack of respect for international law and multilateral conventions in general, such as the Paris climate change agreement. The Iran deal, signed by all five permanent members of the UN security council, plus Germany, was incorporated into international law by the UN. It is to all intents and purposes an international treaty. Yet Trump is poised unilaterally to abrogate it, to the lasting detriment of America’s standing in the world. The harm a Trump decision to scupper the Iran deal would do to US relations with its European partners, all of whom are adamant in its defence, is incalculable. Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, made a personal appeal to Trump during his recent Washington visit and was crudely rebuffed. The same fate befell Germany’s Angela Merkel. There is scant reason to believe any last-minute British intervention will fare better. A permanent rift is opening. There is no doubt that Iran’s actions in Syria, Yemen and elsewhere are cause for legitimate western concern, as is its expanding ballistic missile programme. Its human rights record is dreadful – witness its inexcusable treatment of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and other dual citizenship British nationals. But these are separate problems. There is no evidence that Iran is cheating on the nuclear deal. It remains a notable diplomatic achievement. It is essential that it is preserved intact – and built upon. Ultimately, this is about much more than nuclear proliferation. It is about the credibility, unity – and common sense – of the western democracies in jointly managing the challenges thrown up by a dangerous world.
10||Revealed: Trump team hired spy firm for ‘dirty ops’ on Iran arms dealAides to Donald Trump, the US president, hired an Israeli private intelligence agency to orchestrate a “dirty ops” campaign against key individuals from the Obama administration who helped negotiate the Iran nuclear deal, the Observer can reveal. People in the Trump camp contacted private investigators in May last year to “get dirt” on Ben Rhodes, who had been one of Barack Obama’s top national security advisers, and Colin Kahl, deputy assistant to Obama, as part of an elaborate attempt to discredit the deal. The extraordinary revelations come days before Trump’s 12 May deadline to either scrap or continue to abide by the international deal limiting Iran’s nuclear programme. Jack Straw, who as foreign secretary was involved in earlier efforts to restrict Iranian weapons, said: “These are extraordinary and appalling allegations but which also illustrate a high level of desperation by Trump and [the Israeli prime minister] Benjamin Netanyahu, not so much to discredit the deal but to undermine those around it.” One former high-ranking British diplomat with wide experience of negotiating international peace agreements, requesting anonymity, said: “It’s bloody outrageous to do this. The whole point of negotiations is to not play dirty tricks like this.” Sources said that officials linked to Trump’s team contacted investigators days after Trump visited Tel Aviv a year ago, his first foreign tour as US president. Trump promised Netanyahu that Iran would never have nuclear weapons and suggested that the Iranians thought they could “do what they want” since negotiating the nuclear deal in 2015. A source with details of the “dirty tricks campaign” said: “The idea was that people acting for Trump would discredit those who were pivotal in selling the deal, making it easier to pull out of it.” According to incendiary documents seen by the Observer, investigators contracted by the private intelligence agency were told to dig into the personal lives and political careers of Rhodes, a former deputy national security adviser for strategic communications, and Kahl, a national security adviser to the former vice-president Joe Biden. Among other things they were looking at personal relationships, any involvement with Iran-friendly lobbyists, and if they had benefited personally or politically from the peace deal. Investigators were also apparently told to contact prominent Iranian Americans as well as pro-deal journalists – from the New York Times, MSNBC television, the Atlantic, Vox website and Haaretz, the Israeli newspaper among others – who had frequent contact with Rhodes and Kahl in an attempt to establish whether they had violated any protocols by sharing sensitive intelligence. They are believed to have looked at comments made by Rhodes in a 2016 New York Times profile in which he admitted relying on inexperienced reporters to create an “echo chamber” that helped sway public opinion to secure the deal. It is also understood that the smear campaign wanted to establish if Rhodes was among those who backed a request by Susan Rice, Obama’s final national security adviser, to unmask the identities of Trump transition officials caught up in the surveillance of foreign targets. Although sources have confirmed that contact and an initial plan of attack was provided to private investigators by representatives of Trump, it is not clear how much work was actually undertaken, for how long or what became of any material unearthed. Neither is it known if the black ops constituted only a strand of a wider Trump-Netanyahu collaboration to undermine the deal or if investigators targeted other individuals such as John Kerry, the lead American signatory to the deal. Both Rhodes and Kahl said they had no idea of the campaign against them. Rhodes said: “I was not aware, though sadly am not surprised. I would say that digging up dirt on someone for carrying out their professional responsibilities in their positions as White House officials is a chillingly authoritarian thing to do.” A spokesman for the White House’s national security council offered “no comment” when approached. However, the revelations are not the first time that claims of “dirty tricks” have been aimed at the Trump camp. Special counsel Robert Mueller is leading an investigation into apparent attempts by Trump’s inner-circle to dig up damaging information on Hillary Clinton during the 2016 presidential campaign. Of particular interest is a meeting involving the US president’s eldest son, Donald Trump Jr, his brother-in-law Jared Kushner and then-campaign chair Paul Manafort and a Kremlin-connected Russian lawyer who had promised damaging information about Clinton. Trump has repeatedly signalled his intention to scrap the Iran deal, denouncing it as “the worst deal ever.” In a January speech the US president accused his predecessor of having “curried favour with the Iranian regime in order to push through the disastrously flawed Iran nuclear deal.” Last Monday, Netanyahu, accused Iran of continuing to hide and expand its nuclear weapons know-how after the 2015 deal, presenting what he claimed was “new and conclusive proof” of violations. However, European powers including Britain responded by saying the Israeli prime minister’s claims reinforced the need to keep the deal. On Thursday the UN secretary general Antonio Guterres urged Trump not to walk away from the deal, warning that there was a real risk of war if the 2015 agreement was not preserved. The following day details emerged of some unusual shadow diplomacy by Kerry, meeting a top-ranking Iranian official in New York to discuss how to preserve the deal. It was the second time in around two months that Kerry had met foreign minister Javad Zarif to apparently strategise over rescuing a pact they spent years negotiating during the Obama administration. On Sunday Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, will arrive in Washington, hoping to persuade Trump to keep the deal, known as the joint comprehensive plan of action (JCPOA). Straw, who was foreign secretary between 2001 and 2006, said: “The campaign against the JCPOA has been characterised by abuse and misinformation. It is the best chance of ensuring Iran never develops a nuclear weapons programme, and it is insane to suggest abandoning the deal could do anything but endanger international security.”
8||Israel fears ‘explosion of violence’ as US prepares to open embassy in JerusalemPolice in Israel have started patrols and security sweeps of a southern Jerusalem neighbourhood, anxiously preparing for a US embassy inauguration that Israelis and Palestinians fear may launch a week of violence. The move on 14 May will mark the start of a potentially volatile week when Israel will celebrate its 70th anniversary and Palestinians mark the “catastrophe”, or Nakba, of their displacement on the 15th. Nakba day has previously seen violence as the Israeli army responds to demonstrations in the occupied territories. This year, tensions are far higher than usual. Six weeks of protests along the Gaza border, during which Israeli soldiers have shot dead nearly 40 people and wounded hundreds, will culminate that week. There are fears that those attending the rallies may attempt to breach the perimeter, a move that could lead to mass casualties as Israeli snipers are operating under rules of engagement that permit live fire. “The situation between Israelis and Palestinians could not be more delicate,” wrote Ilan Goldenberg, who served as part of the US team during the 2013-14 Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, in an opinion piece for the Israeli paper Haaretz. The embassy move, he said, may pass without significant violence, pointing to the lack of anticipated instability following Donald Trump’s December announcement to relocate the embassy. “Or it could explode – and we could find ourselves in the middle of a new war between Israel and Hamas in Gaza. Nobody knows, but it is irresponsible for the US to be dumping gasoline on this potential fire,” he said. Israel’s police spokesman, Micky Rosenfeld, said officers were assessing the level of security needed for theopening, including deploying CCTV cameras and guards in the Jerusalem neighbourhood of Arnona, where the current US consulate is being retrofitted to become the embassy. “We’re still waiting to see if the US president will come here for the opening move. The level of security will be raised accordingly,” he said. Trump has hinted he may attend, while Israeli media have speculated he will send his daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law Jared Kushner. Israeli police had not received information of any specific warnings, Rosenfeld said, but security forces were “taking into consideration the period we’re going to be in and other events, including Jerusalem celebrations and Nakba day. There are implications around the Gaza strip area, and of course the move with the American embassy as well. We’re talking about an intensive week,” he said. Jerusalem’s status has been a critical obstacle in peace negotiations, and international consensus is that sovereignty over the city should be agreed between the two sides. Palestinians claim East Jerusalem as a capital of a future independent state, but Israel captured it in 1967. It later annexed the city and claims the entire area as its “eternal and undivided” capital. On the weekend ahead of the embassy opening, thousands of Israelis are expected to mark what they say is the city’s reunification in a Jerusalem Day rally. Often made up of religious settlers, tThese marches pass through Muslim district of the Old City and in previous years groups have chanted anti-Arab insults. In the south, demonstrations in Gaza have been supported by Hamas, which rules the enclave and has fought three wars with Israel. With two-thirds of Gaza’s 2 million people being refugees or their descendants, protesters are demanding a “right to return” to their ancestral homes. “The intensity of these marches will reach its zenith on 14 May,” said Mkhaimar Abusada, a political scientist at Gaza’s Al-Azhar University. He said opening the embassy in a week in which Palestinians remember what they see as their defining tragedy is misguided. “It’s like the US is insisting on making the Palestinians remember this day as a very sad day in their history and in their struggle against the Israeli occupation,” he said. A week ago, a crowd of people moved towards the frontier, attempting to rip away barbed wire and set sections of the security fence on fire with burning tyres. Israel, which has rejected UN and EU calls for investigations into its use of live ammunition, accuses Hamas of exploiting civilians to break into its territory. “When you have tens of thousands of people around the border there is no control over them,” said Abusada. “It would be my assumption that some protesters will try to breach the fence, will try to infiltrate into Israel. ” The US embassy move will be preceded by the 12 May deadline for Trump to decide whether to walk away from the 2015 Iran nuclear agreement and reinstate sanctions on Tehran. Pulling out of the deal would add pressure on the Iranian leadership at a time when Israel has warned of open war and engaged in direct confrontation, targeting Iranian military sites in neighbouring Syria. Goldenberg said the “flood of huge events” could be overwhelming: “A toxic witches’ brew of political instability and further potential violence is stewing in the Middle East.”
13||Mike Summerbee credits Pep Guardiola with revolutionising English footballMike Summerbee has praised Manchester City’s total football style under Pep Guardiola, in which every player from goalkeeper to striker is technically astute. Summerbee was a key part of the City team that were champions 50 years ago under the management team of Joe Mercer and Malcolm Allison. The 75-year-old, now a club ambassador, believes that while the 1967-68 title winners had only a handful of star turns, Guardiola’s Premier League champions are filled with them. “Pep has a certain way,” said Summerbee. “I watch them train occasionally and I think he has revolutionised football in this country. He has a group of people who think and play [his] way – they all have great skills on the ball, first touches, and know what to do with the ball. “They play in a small area where you have to think on your feet. They do that until they see a gap, and then it’s like opening the lock on a safe. Every player is so skilful. In our day you probably had four players who were really top-notch, who could open the game up, but nowadays, everyone can play. All can control and pass the ball. “It’s rare you see a misplaced pass. But conditions today suit the way it’s played. You cannot compare the side I played in with the side playing now – it’s impossible.” While Summerbee does not like comparisons, he believes some from his era could play under Guardiola. “You could put certain players in this era and they could play – you could put George Best in it, or Colin Bell, or Francis Lee. They could play that way as they had that first touch.” The latter two were team-mates in the side that pipped Best’s Manchester United to the title on the final day. “If you want to compare, they look alike and they play similarly: Colin Bell and [Kevin] De Bruyne. Two big engines, they can pass the ball, have pace. If any players out of this side and my side compare, it’s those two.” Allison was, like Guardiola, an innovator. “He could change the way you played,” said Summerbee. “At Swindon I played as an extra full-back – but in my first game [for City] against Middlesbrough, I laid on the equaliser for Jimmy Murray to score. “On the coach Malcolm told me: ‘We’ve just spent £35,000 on you and we didn’t buy a full-back. We bought a winger. Don’t come back past the halfway line because you can’t defend.’ “He told me that beating my man and crossing it was all he wanted me to do – he put it into my brain. He had the same idea as Pep, that the best form of defence is attack. We had some good defenders – Tony Book, Alan Oakes, Glyn Pardoe until he broke his leg, and Mike Doyle, all top-flight players.” Summerbee also pointed to Guardiola’s common touch that has helped build spirit within the club. “I’d like to see him stay for ever,” said Summerbee. “He’s a nice man; he knows everybody from the cleaners by their name. I always find in life, whether it’s a cricketer, footballer, manager or whatever – Pep Guardiola, Bill Nicholson, Sir Gareth Edwards, Pelé, the late, great Sir Bobby Moore – people that I’ve mixed with, the more famous and great they are, the more humble they are. The ones who think they are great can be difficult. “You talk to him and [he knows I’m] Mike Summerbee: who’s Mike Summerbee? He’s worked with people like Lionel Messi. The current team have got a great atmosphere. You get on the plane with them and you see coaches, kit-men and players all together, playing music. There’s a great atmosphere. There’s no difference in atmosphere from my day to this day.” Summerbee was close friends with Best, which is illustrated by what occurred despite the Northern Irishman’s disappointment at United’s failure to retain the title in 1967-68. “I’d agreed to meet George Best about one o’clock in the morning in the Cabaret Club [in Manchester],” said Summerbee. “I got there about quarter past one and he was there. He could have bottled it but he was there and we went out. People don’t understand what a nice person he was.”
10||Trump White House accuses China of 'Orwellian nonsense'The White House on Saturday condemned Chinese efforts to control how US airlines refer to Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau as “Orwellian nonsense”. The harshly worded statement came as a high-level trade delegation led by the treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin returned from negotiations in China. The carriers were told to remove references on their websites or in other material that suggests Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau are part of countries independent from China, US and airline officials said. Taiwan is China’s most sensitive territorial issue. Beijing considers the self-ruled, democratic island a wayward province. Hong Kong and Macau are former European colonies that are now part of China but run largely autonomously. A spokesman for Airlines for America, a trade group representing United Airlines, American Airlines and other major carriers, said the group was “continuing to work with US government officials as we determine next steps”. In January, Delta Air Lines, following a demand from China over listing Taiwan and Tibet as countries on its website, apologized for making “an inadvertent error with no business or political intention” and said it had taken steps to resolve the issue. Also in January, China suspended Marriott International’s Chinese website for a week, punishing the world’s biggest hotel chain for listing Tibet, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau as separate countries in a customer questionnaire. On Saturday, White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said in a statement that Donald Trump “ran against political correctness in the United States” and as president would “stand up for Americans resisting efforts by the Chinese Communist party to impose Chinese political correctness on American companies and citizens”. China’s Civil Aviation Administration has demanded the change from 36 foreign carriers, including some American carriers, the White House said. “This is Orwellian nonsense and part of a growing trend by the Chinese Communist party to impose its political views on American citizens and private companies,” Sanders said, adding that the Trump administration is calling on China “to stop threatening and coercing American carriers and citizens”. In trade talks this week, the Trump administration demanded a $200bn cut in China’s trade surplus with the US by 2020, sharply lower tariffs and a halt to subsidies for advanced technology, people familiar with the talks said on Friday. Trump tweeted on Friday that he would meet with US trade officials once they returned. “It is hard for China in that they have become very spoiled with US trade wins!” Trump wrote. On Saturday, speaking at a Republican event in Cleveland, Trump said: “My group just got back from China. We’re going to have to rework China because that’s been a one-way street for decades.” “We can’t go on that way,” he said, although he also said he has a lot respect for Chinese president Xi Jinping. Also on Saturday, the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, spoke with a member of the Communist party leadership. Pompeo and Politburo member Yang Jiechi “affirmed the importance of a constructive, results-oriented bilateral relationship”, state department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said in a statement.
13||Everton 1-1 Southampton: Premier League – as it happenedOk, that concludes that. Thanks for joining us. Here’s the match report from Paul Wilson. Sam Allardyce speaks. The only highlight today for us [the goal]. It was an anguishing performance. It was very disappointing. We had a blip and we nicked something we didn’t deserve. We haven’t entertained the fans at home. The lads that stepped in didn’t step up to the mark. As hard as they tried, we were not a great attacking force...we went to the last whistle. At the end of the day it was our passing that let us down. If we are going to get better we are going to need change. [On his future] One never knows in this game. Angry Mark Hughes speaks. Very angry Mark Hughes. We clearly haven’t got what we deserve. I put that at the door of the referee. He’s given them a free-kick and allowed it to be taken from a false position. He’s given free-kicks when out guys haven’t been touched. To say we are aggrieved is an understatement. I thought we were magnificent today. It’s a huge game with Swansea and that will probably decide who goes down. We have done everything right apart from the last moment. I am really upset with the officials. Come Tuesday, we’ll go again. Nathan Redmond, man of the match speaks, and is complaining about the free-kick he conceded and led to the equaliser. “He’s got to slow the game down, we tried to catch them on the break... It’s been taken out of our hand....It’s my first goal this season. I couldn’t care less as long as we are staying in the Premier League...the gaffer told me to try and take us forward. [Swansea is a] big game, as i said. We need to take this point, and pick up as many points as we can.” Matters at Wembley were a little more clearcut. So, it’s all on Southampton v Swansea on Tuesday. Three points at Goodison would have bought breathing space. Not now, and Hughes has to lift the spirits of a team denied at the death in the most demoralising way possible. Mark Hughes had a word with Jon Moss about his timekeeping, a stern word, in fact. Meanwhile, Everton’s lap of appreciation will take place in front of an empty stadium. Perhaps they can clap each other. Southampton did what they did last week against Bournemouth and panicked as they tried to hold on to their lead. This time, they were unlucky, but paid for their caution and some rash decisions. Yoshida’s dismissal put them on the back foot, and somehow Everton got something from a game they barely competed in for much of the game. Boos from the home fans, despair for the Saints fans and a full minute after the allotted time added on. West Brom, meanwhile, are still breathing. Amazing stuff. Oh my! Tom Davies’ shot took an awful deflection off Hoedt. Saints failed to clear their lines and paid the price. 94 mins: Into the last knockings now. McCarthy flaps at the ball. 94 mins: Pandemonium mounts but Hoedt bought time in the corner. 93 mins: A great free-kick and an even better save from Alex McCarthy. 92 mins: In the stands, the boos are beginning to coagulate into rebellion. Hoedt’s foul gives away a free-kick and Leighton Baines will hit it. 91 mins: A break in play as Cedric goes down injured gives Southampton chance to regroup. 90 mins: Klaassen takes the ball down and shoots. Illegally, says the referee. There will be four minutes of added time. 89 mins: Added time approaches. 88 mins: Southampton again smuggle the ball clear, and it’s Redmond who carries it. This time, though, Everton come forward. Klaassen is trying his best to get involved, but his team-mates’ movement is sluggish. 87 mins: Redmond is the man of this match, easily the best attacking player on show, and as the first half barely occurred, it doesn’t matter that he only came on at half-time. 85 mins: Nathan Redmond, on his own again, forces another Pickford save. A second yellow after a loose challenge. And Southampton will have to retreat even further back. 83 mins: Ward-Prowse takes on a free-kick. Pickford saves. 82 mins: Meanwhile, in the stands, Everton fans are asking Sam Allardyce to go forth and multiply. Hearts and minds not completely won over, then. 81 mins: Southampton get away a Baines free-kick and Redmond is on a solo mission. This time, he takes on the shot. It flies over. 80 mins: Substitution: On comes Klaassen to one hell of a cheer, and he arrives in place of Phil Jagielka. 79 mins: First, a Southampton corner, or a pair of them. James Ward-Prowse is taking his time over these. His second swung out of play. 78 mins: Davy Klaassen, who cost £24m, and has not played a league game since September, is coming on. 77 mins: Schneiderlin booked for a hacking foul. 76 mins: Substitution: Off comes Austin for Shane Long, perhaps the best defensive striker in the business. They used to say that about Ade Akinbiyi, another player who had problems in front of goal. 74 mins: Redmond, showing the attacking flair that Pep Guardiola demands of him, burst through there and looked to have a sight on goal. He checked back. Saints looking wobbly all of a certain, uncertain, in fact. 72 mins: Everton on the attack. Schneiderlin on the flank centres the ball and it’s panic stations as Southampton eventually get the ball clear. There could be plenty of that to come in the remaining minutes of this game. 71 mins: So, Southampton’s creative hub has departed the scene, and is replaced by a dead-ball specialist. Looks like Mark Hughes is trying to hang on here. 70 mins: Substitution for Saints: Tadic off for James Ward-Prowse. 69 mins: Jagielka has to take evasive action as another Southampton overload on the wing looked to have Bertrand in a scoring position, 68 mins: So, the minutes tick down on West Brom’s brave attempt to escape. Ten points from a possible 12 and it won’t be enough. 66 mins: Schneiderlin gets room to play a pass through, but he also plays it too hard. 65 mins: An actual Everton attack. Niasse controls the ball, carves out space and booms in a cross. Tosun is just too short to get there. 64 mins: Redmond was nearly in for another, but just lost the flight of the ball as it came in. 62 mins: Boos as Leighton Baines overhits a pass. This could get nasty. 61 mins: On the sidelines, Allardyce is chewing gum like a cow attacking some finest cud. Oddly, he seems less secure in his job than the man stood alongside him, Hughes. Both are adopting alpha male stances of the type favoured by those in the Conservative Party. 60 mins: So in going two up front, Big Sam has made his second tactical change in a matter of minutes. He had to do something. That lap of appreciation will be outnumbered by the taxi queue at Lime Street if this continues for Everton. 59 mins: What does it all mean? Southampton will climb to 16th and West Brom will go down if this stays the same. 57 mins: Everton substitution: Niasse comes on for Vlasic. 57 mins: Well, well. The first quality of the game and Southampton lead. Tadic ball out to Cedric, some quality at last and Nathan Redmond nods in on the back post. Boos from the home fans, roars of hope from the away contingent. Saints alive! 54 mins: Tadic takes that and Tosun gets a rare touch, though had to be back on his own goal-line to get it. The set piece play has been of the same standard as the open play. 53 mins: Bertrand wins a corner and the applause of Saints fans. 52 mins: Set pieces are the key to this game and Everton have one. Baines nine-irons it into the box. Coleman couldn’t get to it, and Hoedt clears. 51 mins: TV pictures show some very bored fans. Some are reduced to cheering a Pickford hack of a clearance. 50 mins: On the pitch? No, still nothing. Sorry about that. 48 mins: Let us remember that Southampton are in the bottom three and have won just two Premier League matches in 2018. And still Sam Allardyce puts on the belt and braces. 46 mins: That’s bringing on a centre-half for an attacking player by Sam Allardyce. At half-time. OK, it’s to amend his system to match Southampton’s but such things do not win over Everton fans craving entertainment. Half-time subs: Nathan Redmond on for Lamina for Southampton, and the utterly anonymous Bolasie has gone off for Ramiro Funes Mori. Another game in deadlock is being played at Wembley. It must be the weather. https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2018/may/05/arsenal-v-chelsea-womens-fa-cup-final-live Hey John, Big ups for the Flaming Lips reference! I used to see them in small clubs in the early 90’s. They were great. Haven’t listened to them much in the last 15 or so years. This game stinks. These teams stink. As a Baggies fan it’s probably too much to ask Everton to do a goal. They stink. Did I mention that already? -- J.R. in Illinois A Mr HMSH emails in: “The things I do to follow this football team, usually it means staying up late at night (with work following the morning), but I’ve got pure luxury this time, I can watch the game on a small, very dated TV and I have beer, and it’s only midnight! Shame the football still isn’t great, mind.” Good for you. Want some red-hot Euro action and involving someone on loan from Everton? Course you do. Paul, an Evertonian, emails in: “Staying up with Big Sam or relegation whilst retaining a modicum of entertainment..... I know where my money is.. Not in Sam’s pocket!” What can we conclude from that? If this is to be Allardyce’s final home game in charge of Everton it appears he wants to protect that record of having only lost to Manchester City at home; that appears the very apex of his ambition. And as for Southampton, their problems this season are laid a little bare by being really not very good, and especially in attack. It would seem to rely on Tadic coming up with something. 45 mins: And that’s it, a blessed relief. In terms of entertainment, utterly hopeless. And the boos are loud from the home fans. Everton have been, to put it politely, conservative. Southampton have had plenty of the ball but have been largely inept with it as soon as the Everton 18-yard box hoves into view. 45 mins: One minute of added time... 44 mins: Thank you to the anonymous caller who sent in a picture of their bottle of beer. 43 mins: Lamina leaves the field to come back on again. He will probably get until half-time. 41 mins: Lamina down with an injury again. Mark Hughes shows he hasn’t lost his ability to kill a ball stone dead with his chest when it flies to the sidelines. Perhaps the most entertaining moment of this drabness. 39 mins: A glint of an opening for Southampton is snuffed out by Baines cutting off Austin just as the striker was shaping for a shot. 38 mins: Tadic goes for power and hits the wall. A waste. Cedric Soares follows up with a garryowen hoof into the air. That’s about the size of this game. 38 mins: Another set-piece, this time for Saints. Long way out. What will Tadic try here? 37 mins: Leighton Baines’ ball is collected well by Alex McCarthy, who had to climb high to get to it. 36 mins: A bit of rage from the stands as the ball doesn’t go forward quick enough for Everton. They do, though, cheer a free-kick. 33 mins: How many will stay for Everton’s “lap of appreciation” afterwards? A guess at this stage will be that Goodison will be only half-full once Wayne and his lads take the stage. 32 mins: Again, Southampton dominant in possession but unable to find a final pass. Everton meanwhile showing very little in the way of ambition. 31 mins: Bertrand is down, Lamina is also carrying a knock. Perhaps that is the source of Hughes’ latest grimace. Both carry on for now. 30 mins: Mark Hughes looking unamused, though he is not one for the smiles, really, is he? 28 mins: Better now from Saints. Tadic is finding his men with passes. A couple of hurried clearances from Everton. Romeu’s shot was deflected and Pickford could only palm clear. 26 mins: Tadic takes a free-kick short and it finds Bertrand. Another cloven-hooved overhit of the ball. Memories of Nacho Monreal on Thursday, a left-back finding space and troubling Row Z (Cars). 25 mins: Yoshida and his pink robots bang into Davies, and there is a meek claim for an Everton penalty. Not that anyone actually cares that much. Or so it appears. 23 mins: Southampton keep getting forced back in their attempts to build attacks. Neither team have much in the way of flow. 21 mins: Free-kick chance for Everton. Tosun got bundled over. Tom Davies chips in, and it comes to naught as a foul was committed as the ball was being played. At times like this it is easy to sympathise with the disaffected at Goodison. 19 mins: Oooh, close. Michael Keane makes a mistake and Austin swings his boot at the loose ball. Neat, punched save from Pickford. Better play all round. 17 mins: This is bitty stuff. Can Southampton really be trying to play for a draw? That’s one hell of a risky strategy. 15 mins: Austin got away from Everton’s defence but offside called. He was onside but perhaps the official didn’t believe Austin could get so clear without being offside. Not good for Mark Hughes’ blood pressure, such decisions. 13 mins: TV pictures there showed Wayne Rooney with his brood of sons. All, of course, clad in Evertonian blue. 12 mins: Lamina dispossessed Gueye, but he was penalised for a foul. At the other end, Tosun nods over. First attempt at goal for Everton? 10 mins: Pressure now from Southampton. Plenty of possession, moving the ball just fine but without ever looking like they can open up Everton. 9 mins: Tadic had a chance to set up Austin but like Bertrand before, a heavy touch. Nerves there, perhaps? 7 mins: Not a lot happening on the pitch at the moment, not much urgency from Southampton. It is a mark of Allardyce teams to start slow, keep shape and then launch later on. Or, as can often happen, to stay slow and in shape. 5 mins: A reminder of how Tom Davies togs up when out on the town. 4 mins: Ryan Bertrand, one of those players who will surely be playing Premier League football next season whatever happens, booms a cross a little too high. He had time and space, too. 3 mins: Goodison not exactly brimming with end of season fervour, though Tom Davies’ shot, just wide of the post, lifts the noise level up a tad. 2 mins: Southampton start with some early pressure. Everton begin with a couple of long balls, as is their manager’s wont. 1 min: Referee Jon Moss, from the Church of the Poisoned Mind, gets the game underway. Wayne Rooney, it seems, injured his knee in training yesterday, which sounds a little ominous. Everton wait on a scan, which may not be good news for those who would want him gone from the club. The sound of Z Cars’ theme tune means that we are away at Goodison Park. They also play it at Watford’s Vicarage Road, though for reasons I am not aware of. Z Cars was based in Merseyside. Sam Allardyce speaks: “It’s the last home game, full house, all sold out and we’ll try to keep the home record up. Our problem is the injuries. It’s left us a little light on the front end. The situation is we have to contain Southampton. We want to be the first to score. That puts them under more pressure. It’s a little different than a normal game. They have a different system to us and we’ll have to see how it pans out.” Mark Hughes speaks: “It’s a huge game. We’ve put ourselves in a position where we have got a fighting chance. We just have to get on with our own business, and affect our own future. Everton are a team in decent form and it’s not going to to be easy.” What does relegation feel like? Ask Paul Lambert. Also in this tea-time slot is the Women’s FA Cup final from Wembley. Join Scott Murray for that. It was Jake Livermore with that fateful goal and it’s full-time and three points for West Brom at the Hawthorns. It might not be enough for the Baggies, but that’s serious pressure on Southampton. And West Brom have scored. They are still alive! That means Saints have to win to terminate Darren Moore’s Red Adair act. Mark Hughes, meanwhile, has stayed with the Southampton team that beat Bournemouth last week. Charlie Austin over Shane Long it is. After all, Saints need to score. And on the bench, it’s the rarely spotted Davy Klaassen, he who could have joined Napoli in January but decided to stay. The news there is no Wayne Rooney or Theo Walcott for Everton. Both are out with injury. Yannick Bolasie and Tom Davies come in for the former stars of the future. Everton: Pickford, Coleman, Jagielka, Keane, Baines, Gueye, Schneiderlin, Vlasic, Davies, Bolasie, Tosun. Subs: Martina, Niasse, Klaassen, Funes Mori, Robles, Kenny, Baningime. Southampton: McCarthy, Bednarek, Yoshida, Hoedt, Cedric, Romeu, Lemina, Bertrand, Tadic, Austin, Hojbjerg. Subs: Stephens, Long, Ward-Prowse, Gabbiadini, Redmond, McQueen, Forster. Referee: Jonathan Moss (County Durham) As it stands, results are pretty going Southampton’s way, with West Brom being held by Spurs and Swansea losing at Bournemouth. West Ham winning at Leicester is not so good news, but with Saints still to play Swans matters are their hands, to coin the relegation cliche. Anyway, Rob Smyth is on clockwatch duty. With Stoke going down, Mark Hughes has one hand on a disastrous entry on his CV. Should he be unable to arrest Southampton’s sink to the Championship, he would become the first manager to manage two relegated teams in one Premier League season. It had been done before in the sepia, pre-1992 football age, and twice. Ron Saunders suffered it with Birmingham City in 1985-6 and Billy McNeill followed up the next year with Manchester City and Aston Villa. So, a select band to join/avoid. Of course, Hughes and Saints fans may be heartened by news from elsewhere with both Swansea and West Brom skirting the trapdoor and playing earlier. But should Saints need to get a win to add to their scratchy, nervous defeat of Bournemouth last week, then they have Sam Allardyce in their way. Hughes has been notably complimentary to Big Sam this week, since Big Sam on a trolling mission is someone to be avoided. Just ask those Everton fans who his every media appearance appears to be delivered with a smirk. “It’s an entertainment game, you’re trying to capture hearts and minds, and certainly I think, particularly from a home point of view, we’ve achieved that,” he said this week. A sizeable group of Evertonians disagree, though as ever, Sam points to the figures - 14 points from seven games. He’s never been relegated from the Premier League, either. Mark Hughes would love to be able to say the same.
0||Harry Brook outshines big names to give Yorkshire hope against EssexJonny Bairstow, Alastair Cook and Joe Root are all on show here at one of the more extraordinary Championship matches in recent memory. But it is a star in the making, the teenager Harry Brook, who shone brightest with his maiden century as Yorkshire kept their hopes of a remarkable comeback win alive by setting Essex a target of 238 on day two and restricting them to 97 for four. England’s under-19s captain had posted a top score of 38 in seven previous first-class appearances, though he had shown enough in every one to suggest a much better return was close. And, in many ways, this was the perfect time to prove that correct with 124 off 187 balls. After being bowled out for 50 in the first innings on Friday – Yorkshire’s lowest total since 1973 – and conceding a lead of 92, they were up against it in testing batting conditions again yesterday. Brook was even replaced as opener by Bairstow as the visitors aimed to put the pressure back on to the champions. He arrived at the crease midway through the first evening and played superbly from No 3, taking a particular liking to Simon Harmer’s off-spin, regularly advancing down the pitch and lofting him over cover. It suggested a supreme confidence against spin, something that should take him a long way. He started day two unbeaten on 57 with Yorkshire at 161 for two and leading by 69 and advanced towards three figures – off 129 balls – for the first time with some comfort. A former Sedbergh School pupil, Brook moved from 90 to 98 by crunching Harmer twice through the covers for four. By this time he was in unison with the England Test captain, Root, who avoided his second duck in the match and made 35. Root must have been mighty impressed by a 19-year-old who has often spoken of the simplest of game plans: “It’s just see ball, hit ball,” he has been heard to say on more than one occasion. The pair hugged in celebration. Yorkshire will be frustrated, however, at not making the most of Brook’s work given they were very much on top midway through the afternoon at 276 for three, leading by 184. Either side of the second new ball their last seven wickets fell for 53, the first of which was Root bowled off the inside edge as he drove at Ravi Bopara’s medium pacers. Brook was then caught at long-on having miscued Harmer. In falling to spin in this instance, his strength proved to be his downfall. Peter Siddle finished with four wickets and eight in the match before Essex’s chase got off to a stuttering start, with Cook dropped on 20 in the slips before being bowled as he attempted to play Steve Patterson to leg for 26. Later in the 10th over, Patterson trapped Tom Westley lbw for his third straight duck, leaving the score at 34 for two. The metronomic seamer then struck twice more shortly afterwards before Dan Lawrence and Ryan ten Doeschate steadied. The Surrey captain, Rory Burns, having started day two on 137, fell seven short of a second career double century as his side posted a first-innings 434 against Worcestershire at the Oval before the visitors started their reply strongly. It was a similar story for Somerset, who scored 429 against Lancashire at Old Trafford. Keaton Jennings then reached 91 not out in a reply of 217 for two. In Division Two the South Africa Test opener Aiden Markram scored his third duck in three innings as Durham struggled against Leicestershire at the Riverside. Warwickshire are closing in on a home win over Derbyshire.
0||Saracens step up a gear to cruise past Gloucester as Alex Goode excelsSaracens sauntered to the play-offs after yet another second-half siege laid Gloucester to waste. They have now not conceded a second-half point in four matches – it was 40 unanswered here – and are hell-bent on returning to Twickenham later this month. Wasps will be the visitors in the semi-finals but after another nine-try showing, Mark McCall’s side are coming to the boil perfectly. Their day in the sun was tempered by concerning injuries to Liam Williams (shoulder) and Schalk Burger (hamstring) but they demonstrated an ability to race through the gears in the second half. “The lesson we got at Leinster [in the Champions Cup] was that against really top teams in semi- and quarter-finals there are no second chances,” said the Saracens director of rugby, Mark McCall. Gloucester’s bright points were restricted to an excellent opening 40 minutes from their New Zealand-born, England-qualified full-back, Jason Woodward, in front of the watching Paul Gustard, and a blistering start to first-team rugby from Tom Seabrook. Gustard will surely have noted Alex Goode’s excellence, too. Both he and Woodward are the form full-backs in the Premiership this season yet neither have registered recently on England’s radar. While those wearing the No15 jerseys shone, it was the wingers making their mark on the scoreboard and that all four scored tries within the opening 17 minutes revealed everything about the laissez-faire attitude of both sides. It was hardly surprising as Saracens were already guaranteed to finish second and, while Gloucester had the chance to cement a top-six spot, 11 changes were evidence that Friday’s Challenge Cup final is the priority. Nonetheless they were first on the scoreboard through their 19-year-old Seabrook, who dotted down less than a minute into his first-team debut after a fine break from Woodward. Saracens responded after a bit of magic from Schalk Brits led to Sean Maitland over in the left corner but Gloucester were ahead again with Woodward once more the architect, breaking free of two tackles down the left before feeding David Halaifonua inside. Two minutes later Williams stepped inside and plunged through a pile of bodies for 12-12. An Owen Farrell penalty gave Saracens a three-point lead and, when the England playmaker cruised under the posts on the stroke of half-time,, after Alex Lozowski’s break, Gloucester’s goose seemed cooked. Juan Figallo barrelled over within seconds of the restart before Maro Itoje and Chris Wyles went over in quick succession towards the right. This led to a raft of substitutions – Saracens were caused such disruption that Ben Spencer and Ben Earl ended up on the wings and Goode at fly-half – but a penalty try ended the mini-drought in points before Ben Spencer’s late double. Gloucester finish the season in seventh but already assured of a place in next season’s Champions Cup and they can end a promising campaign with silverware in Friday’s showdown with Cardiff Blues in Bilbao. “We must come in with a positive frame of mind on Monday,” said the Gloucester head coach, Johan Ackermann. “It’s a massive challenge but it’s a must that we perform for 80 minutes.” Premiership roundup: Banahan treble helps Bath run riot Matt Banahan scored three of Bath’s nine tries on his farewell appearance as the home side sneaked into next season’s European Champions Cup after a 63-19 win over London Irish at the Rec. Since Sale and Gloucester lost without a losing bonus point, Bath leapfrogged both to clinch sixth place in the table having been all but written off only a couple of weeks ago. It took them three minutes to open the scoring through Taulupe Faletau, who signed a new contract last week. Banahan combined on the right with Cooper Vuna, who found the Wales No 8 with an inside pass. No one would have begrudged the visitors a try and it came just short of the hour as their flanker Josh McNally stretched over the line. Greig Tonks hit the post with his conversion attempt to leave the score at 49-5 before Bath ran up the score. Northampton finished a difficult season with a rousing bonus point victory over Worcester at Franklin’s Gardens. Tries from No 8 Mitch Eadie, centre Nafi Tuitavake, full-back Ben Foden and wing Tom Collins ensured a 32-24 victory that means Saints end the campaign ninth. Their fly-half, James Grayson, kicked three conversions and a penalty and Stephen Myler added another penalty. The Worcester centres Will Butler (2) and Ben Te’o grabbed their side’s tries, with fly-half Dorian Jones converting all three and adding a second-half penalty.
13||Arsenal 1-3 Chelsea: 2018 Women's FA Cup final, as it happenedAnyway, that’s your lot for this MBM, because Suzanne Wrack was at Wembley ... and her big verdict is in! Enjoy, enjoy. Congratulations to Chelsea, commiserations to Arsenal, and good evening to you all. Gabby Logan has just made a magnificent Bachmann-Kirby Overdrive pun on the BBC. That knocks Gary Lineker’s wordplay into a cocked hat. It’s got to be worth some sort of award. Is there not a Pulitzer category for this sort of thing? The prize-giving ceremony. Arsenal go up to collect their runner-up medals. Grim faces, understandably. And then it’s the turn of Chelsea, led by their captain Katie Chapman, who has now won this competition an astonishing ten times! The entire squad congregates. Chapman hoists the silverware, with the help of Maren Mjelde! These remarkable women celebrate, and Wembley erupts! Fran Kirby speaks! “We were disappointed that we let them get the goal, so luckily I managed to score straight after. I had a feeling that we were going to win. Individual awards were great, but the main ones are what you win with your team. That’s more important to me.” The brilliant Bachmann, the official player of the match, is beside herself with joy. “It’s an amazing feeling. Every footballer dreams to one day play at Wembley, and to win feels amazing! I haven’t scored that much this year: it’s not important when you have Fran to your side, who scores all the time! It doesn’t matter who scores, though it was an amazing feeling to score in front of so many people!” Chelsea race to their fans, in full-on Cavort Mode! They’ve won their club’s second FA Cup; Arsenal are stuck on 14. Ramona Bachmann scored two wonderful goals after the break; then Fran Kirby added a brilliant third, just when it looked as though Arsenal might hustle their way back into the match thanks to Vivianne Miedema’s strike. They were by far the better side today ... and they’re applauded by a deflated but sporting Arsenal. Chelsea deservedly win the 2018 FA Women’s Cup! The Ramona Bachmann final. What a second-half performance! 90 min +4: Kirby, who has been quite superb this evening, second only to her team-mate Bachmann, dribbles to the corner and earns another time-management corner. 90 min +3: Chelsea pin Arsenal back in their final third. Time marches on. 90 min +2: Kirby slaloms in from the left, evading three challenges in ball-glued-to-boot style. That’s a showstopping display of skill. Shame about the following overhit pass to Cuthbert, who would have been free down the middle otherwise. Instead she’s pushed out to the right, where the attack fizzles out, not that it really matters now. 90 min +1: The resulting corner comes to nothing, as the first of five extra minutes elapses. 90 min: Aluko flashes down the right and sends a rising shot towards the top right. It’s a fine effort, tipped around the post in slightly uncertain fashion by van Veenendaal. 89 min: O’Reilly curls a ball into the Chelsea box from the right, but nobody in red can get anywhere near. Kirby goes up the other end, but over-elaborates with Aluko down the right. A highly entertaining second half is petering out. By way of illustration, on the BBC, Jonathan Pearce is riffing on vegetable soup. 87 min: It’s all scrappy. Chelsea are more than happy with this state of affairs. Arsenal can’t get anything going in attack, and time is not their friend. 85 min: Bachmann, the two-goal Chelsea hero, is replaced by Aluko. Cuthbert sends a screamer inches wide of the left-hand post from 25 yards. 84 min: A double switch for Arsenal, as Mitchell and Evans are replaced by Carter and McCabe. 82 min: Cuthbert runs hard at Mitchell, who has been targeted relentlessly by Chelsea down the right today. Cuthbert spins adroitly and breaks clear into the box, but the angle she faces is tight and she can’t find a team-mate with a cross. 80 min: O’Reilly scraps with Eriksson as she tries to make her way into the Chelsea box from the right. She tumbles to the ground and claims a penalty, but it looked like a 50-50 challenge that was outside the box anyway. The referee waves play on. 78 min: Arsenal look visibly deflated. No wonder, having fought their way back into the match. Kirby simply wasn’t having any of it. What a response! ... Kirby comes again, picking up a pass from Blundell on the right. She cuts inside, nips past a flailing Quinn, and curls hard into the bottom left! Chelsea’s star has restored her team’s two goal lead within three minutes! 76 min: Chelsea try to respond through Kirby, who dribbles hard down the inside-left channel. But Arsenal slam the door shut. Never mind, though, because ... 75 min: Spence, spent, is replaced by Cuthbert. Mead dribbles brilliantly along the byline to the left of the Chelsea goal. She pulls the ball back for Miedema, who whips a first-time shot into the bottom right! That came out of nothing, and this isn’t over yet! 72 min: Spence strips Nobbs in the centre circle and races towards the Arsenal box. For a second, this looks dangerous, but Spence seems to lose a little confidence as she nears the box, and instead of shooting - it would have been a glorious solo goal - she hesitates and loses possession. 71 min: A period of possession for Arsenal in the midfield. But there’s a sense that Chelsea are happy to let them have it. Arsenal aren’t doing anything to launch an attack. 70 min: Chelsea make their first swap. Andersson is replaced by Thorisdottir. 69 min: Bright strokes a glorious ball down the right to release Spence. But the flag goes up for offside, and Arsenal breathe again. 67 min: Kirby and Ji are close to opening up Arsenal down the left, but the final pass goes wrong. Arsenal look defeated at the moment. Can the 14-time winners find the extra gear they need to mount a comeback? 65 min: Today’s attendance at Wembley is a very impressive 45,423. That’s a record for a Women’s FA Cup final! This is a sport finally getting the credit and respect it deserves. Ramona Bachmann has delivered a performance to match. 63 min: Arsenal make the first change of the evening. Janssen is replaced by the more attack-minded O’Reilly. 62 min: Williamson brings down Spence, to the left of the Arsenal box. Eriksson whips the free kick high and hard to the far post. Mjelde rises and plants a header towards the top right. Van Veenendaal claims well. Arsenal are seriously rocking here. This is sensational. Bachmann, floating on air, drops a shoulder to lay waste Mitchell down the right. She regally enters the box, and curls towards the top left. The ball takes a deflection off Quinn en route to the corner, but take nothing away from the run and shot. The Matthews cup final ... the Gerrard cup final ... the Bachmann cup final. 59 min: Space for Spence down the right. She hooks into the Chelsea box, looking for Kirby, but Williamson clears. This is a crucial period for Arsenal: another goal for Chelsea now, and cup number 15 might begin to look like a pipe dream. 58 min: Bachmann looks positively buoyed by her goal. She floats down the right imperiously, exchanging passes with Kirby and nearly breaking into the Arsenal box. Not quite this time. 56 min: A burst of quality here, though, as Little dribbles down the inside-right channel before slipping a pass inside for Miedema. She’s got time and space, but opts not to hit with her left, checking inside instead. Chapman slides in and blocks the danger. For the first time in the match, Chelsea looked seriously open at the back there. 54 min: Chapman swings one in from the right, forcing Arsenal to concede a corner. The set piece doesn’t lead to much. The game’s got a little scrappy since the goal, with both teams reassessing their positions. A lot of loose passes. 53 min: Chapman and van de Donk get involved in a shoving match out on the Chelsea right. Chapman’s boot looked a bit high, and Mitchell gets involved as well. It’s all something and nothing, and tempers soon cool. 52 min: But Arsenal aren’t taking this lying down. Mead works herself a little space down the inside-right channel, and gets her side’s first shot on target. Low and hard, towards the bottom right. Lindahl saves, but makes a meal of it, forcing Bright to knock the rebound out for a corner. The set piece is easily dealt with by Chelsea, but that’s much better from Arsenal. 50 min: It’s fair to say Chelsea have upped the tempo, then. Kirby and Bachmann have been buzzing relentlessly since the restart. This is a brilliant goal! Ji, deep on the right, slips a ball inside for Bachmann, who one-twos crisply with Kirby and enters the box. Then she pearls an unstoppable rising shot into the top-right corner. What a finish! Van Veenendaal got a fingertip to it, but could do nothing to stop the shot, such was its vicious power. That’s some finish! 47 min: Bachmann slides a pass down the middle of the park, to see if Kirby can beat Mitchell in a foot race. Mitchell wins that one, and she had to because Arsenal were light at the back. And we’re off again! Arsenal get the ball rolling once more. There have been no half-time substitutions. According to Karen Carney, Chelsea’s injured winger, the Blues have been told in no uncertain terms to up the tempo. Let’s see. Half-time scores: Away from Wembley, Everton and Southampton are playing in the men’s Premier League. That game’s goalless at the break too, but those desirous of more detail could do worse than clicking here: The pre-match favourites Chelsea have been the better side. But van Veenendaal hasn’t had too much serious work to do. Both sides will be relatively content, if not deliriously happy. 44 min: Ji has woken up, though. The hero of 2015 sends a rasping shot inches over the bar from 20 yards, having been set up by Bachmann. 43 min: Ji batters the free kick witlessly into the wall. She picks up the rebound, and her second attempt is much better, a curler towards the bottom right. But there’s no pace on the shot, and van Veenendaal is able to smother it easily enough. 42 min: Kirby jolts the game into life with the bolt of electricity it surely needs. She embarks on a George Best-style left-to-right dribble, at great speed. She nearly breaks into the box, but is forced to check and lay off to Ji. Chelsea suddenly appear to be going nowhere, so it’s pretty daft of Janssen to clatter into Ji. Free kick, just to the right of the D, and a booking for the Arsenal midfielder. 40 min: Williamson tries to release Nobbs down the right, but that long pass flies out for a goal kick too. The teams are beginning to cancel each other out. 38 min: Bright, sitting deep on the right, looks to release Kirby down the left with a quarterback rake. Too far. Goal kick. “Is BBC commentator Jonathan Pearce always as bad as this?” wonders Charles Antaki. “This is not so much a description of the game as a series of ruminations about his travel arrangements, the amusing idiosyncrasies of his fellow-commentator, and, occasionally, a meditation on a player’s history touched off by something that has actually happened on the pitch.” He’s just spent a couple of minutes reminiscing about a visit to Wembley for a Schoolboy international during the early 1970s. I quite like meandering jazz pieces like that, but each to their own I guess. 36 min: See 34 min. Arsenal are struggling to hold onto possession and offering next to nothing in attack. Chelsea are hogging the ball ... and offering next to nothing in attack. It’s a very strange way for the game to have suddenly settled, given the entertaining opening exchanges. 34 min: More Chelsea dominance in the middle of the park. Still nothing much doing up front. The game has settled into a pattern of defence versus sort-of-attack. 32 min: Chelsea continue to dominate the midfield. But they’ve yet to make van Veenendaal work. Chapman drives down the left then pulls back for Kirby, who nearly executes a cute one-two with Blundell. If the return pass had been any good, Kirby would have been one on one with the Arsenal keeper. But van Veenendaal remains untested. 30 min: Chelsea knock it around the middle of the park awhile, then burst quickly down the right. Blundell races into space, and floats what momentarily looks like a dangerous cross into the middle, but eventually settles on the roof of the net. 28 min: A brief pause followed by a slight lull, the result of Spence having taken a whack. She’s good to continue. The crowd entertain themselves with a Mexican wave. Hey, if it was good enough for the Azteca locals at the 1986 World Cup, it’s good enough for us. 26 min: Kirby dances down the inside-left channel and smacks goalwards from the edge of the box. It’s another fantastic run, with the Arsenal back line retreating in panic and confusion, but the shot’s straight at van Veenendaal, who snaffles. 25 min: Eriksson hoicks it long. Bright tries to rise at the far post, but the delivery is overcooked. Goal kick. 24 min: Bachmann goes into overdrive down the right. She’s cynically tugged back by Mitchell, who really should be booked. Two hands pulling away at her arm! But the referee stops at a stern talking-to. Lucky Mitchell. But it’s a free kick in a very dangerous position, to the right of the Arsenal box. 22 min: ... and Chelsea finally clear their lines. This is a good response by Arsenal to that period of Chelsea pressure. This looks to be a nicely balanced final: both teams have had their chances to open the scoring. 21 min: ... Arsenal nearly score. Cutting in from the left, Miedema jinks her way past Spence and looks for the top right. The ball’s deflected off Blundell and threatens to fly into the top left. Not quite: another corner. And Chelsea can’t get out. A third corner comes along soon enough ... 20 min: Nobbs races down the right into space. Her cross doesn’t find a team-mate, but Little picks up possession on the other flank, cuts inside, and nearly floats a cross onto Miedema’s head. It’s eyebrowed out for a corner, from which ... 19 min: The first lull of the match. The players have earned it: it’s been a high-octane start. 17 min: This is very open, and there’s a sense that a goal might be along sooner rather than later. It nearly comes here, as Andersson curls a ball into the Arsenal box from the left. Nobody in red deals with it, allowing Kirby to take it down, 12 yards out, a little to the right. Kirby drops a shoulder to shift the ball left, but can’t get a shot away as Arsenal finally close her down. That’s a good chance to bother van Veenendaal spurned. 16 min: A free kick for Arsenal wide on the left. Nobbs floats it diagonally into the mixer. Quinn rises highest at the far post, but can’t keep her header on target. It flies harmlessly over. 14 min: Bright makes a misjudgement under a long pass down the Arsenal left and allows Mead to skitter down the flank. Fortunately for Chelsea, Mjelde comes across to cover and put a stop to Mead’s gallop. 13 min: Mitchell looks much more confident in attack. She powers up the left and drifts inside, but that thin Chelsea blue line is strung across the pitch, and there’s nobody in red offering themselves. No pass on, she’s forced to turn back. But if nothing else, it’s a release from that period of Chelsea pressure. 11 min: Chelsea are beginning to push Arsenal back. Kirby has another run down the left, though she can’t quite make it through the back line. Never mind, she has another go, chasing after a long ball down the same flank. Williamson should get to it first, but Kirby is persistent ... and very fast. She nips in ahead, but can’t quite sort her feet out to shoot, and Williamson recovers to usher her away. 9 min: Ki slips a pass down the inside-right channel for Bachmann, who spins around Mitchell and breaks free into the box. She’s one on one with van Veenendaal, albeit facing a tight angle, and drags her shot across the face of goal and out for a goal kick. What a turn, though! That sent Mitchell spinning. 8 min: The in-form Kirby goes on a Garrinchaesque run down the inside-left channel. She makes it into the Arsenal area but finds herself surrounded by red shirts. She attempts to shoot through the thicket of players but the ball balloons out for a corner, which comes to nothing. The first sight of Kirby in full flight. It’ll give Arsenal pause. 7 min: Miedema gegenpresses Blundell and very nearly exposes Chelsea down the left. The final ball’s again lacking as Chelsea, playing five across the back, regroup quickly enough. 5 min: Spence probes down the Chelsea left a couple of times. Once again, a busy run ends with a cross that flies straight to the opposition. But both teams have come out of the blocks with attacking intent. It’s been a brisk start to the final. 3 min: Mead zips down the Arsenal left with extreme prejudice. She turns Blundell and Bright this way and that, and enters the box, a dexterous and determined dribble. But her cross inside is aimless and hacked clear by Chelsea. And we’re off! Chelsea get the party started. A huge roar as the match gets underway. Chelsea stroke it about the back for a while, then Bright launches it forward. Arsenal return it quickly; Bright knocks it out of play with Miedema and Mead buzzing around. A busy but undramatic start for the Chelsea defender. The teams are out! Arsenal are in their famous red shirts with white sleeves, while Chelsea play in their storied blue. A cracking atmosphere at Wembley as the pre-match pleasantries take place. Plenty of wide smiles as the excitement ratchets up. The heavily pregnant Emma Hayes has asked her assistant Paul Green to lead the team out, while she sits on the bench. Green sports an orange rose, grown in Hayes’ own garden. All of her players were gifted one today, as a gesture of love and solidarity. Arsenal have some nice red ones going on, so everyone’s happy. Time for motivational huddles. “I’ve really become a tremendous fan of women’s football, particularly after reading Carrie Dunn’s fine book The Roar of the Lionesses,” writes Hubert O’Hearn, who can speak for me on this subject. “Anyone who finds the men jaded, a bit spoiled or so forth should read Carrie’s book. All athletes everywhere say that they compete for the love of the game. The women footballers really mean it. Very, very few of their associated men’s clubs (Arsenal and Chelsea being two exceptions) treat their women’s sides at all well. I applaud these players’ devotion, skill and attitude. Let’s hope for a cracking great final!” Yep. And anyone yet to read Carrie’s superb book should get on it immediately, if not sooner. Anyway, we’ll be off in a minute! Arsenal boss Joe Montemurro talks! “Obviously our tradition as cup specialists is there - thanks for the pressure! - but cup finals are cup finals, and it’s on the day. We’ve been part of many fantastic events, and hopefully this is another one. Chelsea are a very good side, with cover and power all over the pitch, and whatever starting XI they put out is very strong. Some of the best players in the world are out there on show, and it’s going to be an amazing event.” Chelsea manager Emma Hayes - expecting twins this month, so she won’t be leading her team out - speaks! “This is what we work hard for, when you’re freezing cold in January and you don’t want to come out training. I’m proud of the players, and equally to think we’re playing in front of a record crowd, which importantly shows the growth of the game. Our side is experienced and accustomed to high-level games on a regular basis, both internationally and at club level. But it counts for nothing in a single game. It’s whoever shows up on the day.” Arsenal have a couple of erstwhile final goalscorers in their ranks too. Jordan Nobbs found the net in their 2013 victory over Bristol Academy, and is the heartbeat of the side today. Danielle Carter scored the winner against Chelsea three years later, though she’s only on the bench this afternoon, with Vivianne Miedema and Beth Mead getting the nod up front. Anyway, here we are 12 months down the line, and Chelsea build their midfield around Katie Chapman, who is making her 11th appearance in an FA Cup final. She’s alongside the South Korean international Ji So-yun, who scored the winner in the 2015 final against Notts County. For those of you who need reminding, here’s what happened this time last year. The 2017 final between Manchester City and Birmingham City was highly memorable - the Citizens became the first club to hold all of English football’s major trophies, the WSL, League Cup and FA Cup, at the same time - if not particularly dramatic. The game was as good as over after 32 minutes, thanks in no small part to the force of nature that is Lucy Bronze. She was outstanding. You can relive how Bronze and Manchester City stormed Wembley here: A 40,000-plus crowd is expected at Wembley this afternoon, while the game is the subject of a live telecast on the British Broadcasting Corporation’s flagship channel, BBC One. This is arguably the highest profile the Women’s FA Cup final has had to date, and the big game has been previewed by our own Louise Taylor: Arsenal: Van Veenendaal, Evans, Williamson, Quinn, Mitchell, Janssen, Van de Donk, Little, Nobbs, Mead, Miedema. Subs: Moorhouse, Samuelsson, McCabe, O’Reilly, Carter. Chelsea: Lindahl, Bright, Mjelde, Eriksson, Blundell, Ji, Chapman, Andersson, Spence, Kirby, Bachmann. Subs: Telford, Thorisdottir, Flaherty, Aluko, Cuthbert. Referee: Lindsey Robinson (Durham). Arsenal are synonymous with the Women’s FA Cup. More so than Southampton, who monopolised the tournament during its Seventies infancy; more so than Doncaster Belles, who took over as stars of the show in the Eighties. The Gunners only won their first FA Cup in 1993, but since then it’s been total domination: to date, they’ve lifted the trophy 14 times. Take a look at the roll of honour! 14: Arsenal 8: Southampton 6: Doncaster Belles 2: Everton, Croydon, Fulham, Millwall 1: Fodens, QPR, St Helens, Lowestoft, Howbury Grange, Friends of Fulham, Norwich, Charlton Athletic, Birmingham City, Chelsea, Manchester City They’re not favourites today, though. Chelsea might have just the one FA Cup to their name - a Ji So-Yun inspired triumph over Notts County in 2015 - but they’re the team of the moment. They’re the winners of last year’s Spring Series; neck and neck with Manchester City at the top of WSL1 at the moment; and knocked out City, last year’s winners, in the semis, Fran Kirby the two-goal hero. As well as Kirby - 22 goals in 31 matches this season! - Chelsea can also call on someone who is fairly synonymous with this competition herself. Their 35-year-old captain Katie Chapman has won this trophy nine times already: once with Millwall (as a 14-year-old), twice with Fulham, another time with Charlton, four times with Arsenal, and finally once with her current club. Ashley Cole and Arsene Wenger, seven-time winners with the men, have nothing on this. Arsenal will counter all this by pointing to ... Vivianne Miedema’s upsetting of Manchester City in the recent League Cup final; the sheer quality of Jordan Nobbs, England’s star midfielder in last year’s Euros; and the small fact of their 2016 final win against Chelsea, Danielle Carter doing the business back then. So this is set up delightfully, not least because it’s a huge London derby. Last year’s final was memorable enough - Manchester City swatting aside Birmingham City, with Keira Walsh, Carli Lloyd and especially Lucy Bronze nothing short of sensational - though drama was in short supply. This one could be more of a nerve-jangler, a fingernail-botherer, an in-the-balance classic. Here’s hoping, anyway. It’s Chelsea and Arsenal! It’s English football’s showpiece! It’s on! Kick off: 5.30pm BST.
13||Jake Livermore’s late winner keeps alive West Brom hopes of staying upA sensational last-gasp escape from relegation remains possible for West Brom thanks to Jake Livermore’s stoppage time winner. If other results go in their favour – they need Swansea and Southampton to draw on Tuesday for a start – then victory at Crystal Palace next Sunday could secure their survival. That outcome seemed utterly implausible when Darren Moore stepped into the vacancy left by the dismissal of Alan Pardew last month but Moore has transformed the team’s fortunes, inspiring a run of three wins and two draws from his five matches at the helm. No wonder the crowd clamoured here for him to be appointed on a permanent basis. As the clock ticked past 90 minutes West Brom were on course to prolong Moore’s unbeaten record but his team knew anything less than a win would lead to demotion on the spot. So there was an explosion of joy all around the Hawthorns when Livermore forced the ball over Spurs’ line from close range following an almighty scramble after a corner by Matt Phillips. All around the ground except in the visiting dugout, that is, as Mauricio Pochettino was left to lament the “lack of ambition” shown by his team throughout a match from which they seemed to expect a comfortable win. No such criticism could be directed at Moore’s side. Spurs, aiming to consolidate their place in the top four and maintain their notional chance of leapfrogging Manchester United into second place, began as if their victory was as inevitable as the hosts’ relegation was supposed to be. They set up camp in West Brom’s half and waited for an opening to present itself, hogged possession but were ponderous. Unable to create early on, Tottenham seemed in need of unwitting assistance from their opponents. But, unlike during most of the campaign, West Brom did not oblige. They defended steadfastly. Not until the 24th minute did Spurs even attempt a shot. It was a good one, Victor Wanyama’s curling effort from 20 yards forcing Ben Foster to tip over the bar. Danny Rose tried something similar one minute later but sent the ball into the stands. Kieran Trippier produced the first really incisive pass of the game, sliding in Harry Kane on the half-hour. Foster rushed off his line and diverted the striker’s shot from eight yards behind for a corner. From the set piece Spurs worked the ball to Christian Eriksen, whose cross from the left found Kane. But the striker could not steer a header on target. West Brom’s rope-a-dope strategy nearly paid off before the break. Chris Brunt’s long free-kick into the box in the 41st minute ran all the way to Jay Rodriguez, who dabbed the ball across the face of goal. Toby Alderweireld headed it out for a corner before any home player could pounce. But three minutes later West Brom almost took the lead from another corner, only for Ahmed Hegazi to nod wide from six yards. Spurs were nearly caught out within moments of the resumption after half-time, as Phillips glided down the right and crossed for Salomón Rondón but the striker missed his kick from close range. West Brom grew bolder as the finale drew closer. “We knew we had to contain them early on and the pendulum started to swing around the 60th minute,” said Moore. “We just had the trust and belief that we would get a goal.” As West Brom applied more pressure Kane became so spooked that he almost slicked a cross into his own net. Hugo Lloris had to make a brilliant save to prevent the England striker from being credited with a goal that he would not have wanted to claim. The one West Brom craved came in stoppage time, Livermore stabbing the ball into the net from inches out after Lloris parried a close-range header by Craig Dawson. When the final whistle went, players who have been booed off many times this season were acclaimed by the Hawthorns crowd. Fans made it clear they want Moore to remain at the helm for next season no matter the league they play in. “There’s been some pride restored,” said Moore. “The feelgood factor is back around the community and club. I feel from the support that there is a real good energy in the club again and that’s all anybody would really want.”
13||Tom Davies strikes late for Everton to dent Southampton hopes of staying upSouthampton were denied a huge step towards Premier League survival when Everton prevented a second successive league victory under Mark Hughes through a last-gasp equaliser from Tom Davies. The visitors must have thought they had done enough to win, with Nathan Redmond even bringing a late save from Jordan Pickford when Southampton had been reduced to 10 men, but when Ryan Bertrand gave the ball away with just seconds remaining Davies crashed in a shot from Idrissa Gueye’s square ball via a deflection off Wesley Hoedt. The only consolation for Southampton is that they still managed to move out of the bottom three and above Swansea, going into the all-important meeting in South Wales on Tuesday. There was also another reprieve for West Brom, who would have been relegated by a Southampton victory, but little respite for Sam Allardyce. Though Everton have been safe for some time their manager’s position is looking increasingly precarious. Allardyce was hoping to use this game to leave Everton fans feeling positive over the summer, and it is doubtful whether Davies’s late rescue act will have quite that effect. Hughes was furious at the end because Jon Moss awarded a free-kick against Redmond for an offence no one else had seen, then allowed Everton to take it from the wrong place. Not what you need when you are shorthanded and trying to cling on for dear life. “Jon Moss was 30 yards behind the play, as he usually is,” the Southampton manager said. “He gave a free-kick that shouldn’t have been. At least we took something from the game. Everton had to change their shape to match us and we were still better at it than they were. We got everything right in the game until the final few moments, and we didn’t get any help from the officials.” Davies showed willing in the opening minutes with a shot from the edge of the area that was not too far off the target, though Everton failed to keep up anything like the same urgency. Cenk Tosun headed over the bar with a difficult chance from a Séamus Coleman cross but that was about it for home attempts on goal in the first half and Allardyce was soon in his technical area gesturing furiously for his side to get men further forward. Southampton were the first side to bring a save from a goalkeeper, and a very good one it was too from Pickford, whose reactions did not let him down when Charlie Austin sent in a volley on target with little warning after the ball came his way off Michael Keane. By the half-hour mark Southampton were looking the more likely to make a breakthrough and Everton were glad Phil Jagielka was in the right position to make a timely interception when the ball came through to Oriol Romeu in front of goal. To say the game was low on incident and excitement would be a considerable understatement. The home side departed to boos at half-time, though that has become par for the course in recent weeks. Even when Everton won at Huddersfield last week there was still dissatisfaction expressed at the style of football being played under Allardyce. Or perhaps just the continued presence of Allardyce. The school of science, it is being said by some unhappy supporters, is presently in special measures. Allardyce is impervious to that sort of background noise, of course, and as a half-time flourish to mark the end of his first season at Goodison he brought on Ramiro Funes Mori for Yannick Bolasie and switched to a back three. He does not exactly court popularity, though something needed to change and after an anonymous first half the winger could hardly complain. Southampton also made a change, Redmond replacing the ineffective Mario Lemina, and 10 minutes after the restart it was Hughes looking smug on the sideline. Dusan Tadic and Cédric Soares found space on the Everton left behind the now advanced Leighton Baines – always the drawback with wing-backs – and from the latter’s precise cross Redmond arrived in the area to beat Pickford with a firm downward header. Cue joy in the small corner of the Bullens Road stand that was red and white and more boos from the blue majority. The visitors were forced to see out the last five minutes with 10 men after Maya Yoshida picked up a second yellow for a foul on Oumar Niasse. Baines brought a brilliant fingertip save from Alex McCarthy with a stoppage-time free-kick but time was running out when Bertrand made his mistake and invited Everton to claim a point they barely merited. That may sound harsh but Allardyce himself admitted it. “We nicked a point we didn’t deserve,” the Everton manager said. “It’s disappointing but we have made overall progress.”
13||Ramona Bachmann at the double as Chelsea seal FA Cup win over ArsenalEmma Hayes hailed the in-form striker Fran Kirby and said her Chelsea side gave “some dominant performance” in their second FA Cup win. The manager, due to give birth to twins this month, said her side’s superiority meant it was the “most relaxed I’ve felt in a final in my entire career” and joked it was a “bonus” given her condition. A Ramona Bachmann double and a goal from Kirby gave Chelsea their first silverware of the season and exorcised the ghosts of two years ago. This was a rematch of the 2016 final, for which Hayes said the Blues “didn’t turn up”, when a curling Danielle Carter strike won Arsenal the trophy. This time Chelsea did show up and a goal from Vivianne Miedema to reduce the deficit to 2-1 after Bachmann’s double was not enough to turn the game for Arsenal. Joe Montemurro was full of praise for the forward line his team were up against. “We’re obviously disappointed but they’re a powerful team,” the Arsenal manager said. “There were a couple of structural things we need to work on but I don’t want to take away from them and what they are able to do to teams with the power they have up front.” The opening chances fell to the Gunners. Three minutes in Beth Mead was able to break free on the left but her teasing ball into the box was poked clear before it could reach a red shirt. Seconds later, Jordan Nobbs played an almost identical ball in, this time from the right, but Maren Mjelde got herself in front of a waiting Miedema. Both sides were nursing hangovers but neither seemed to be letting that get to them. Arsenal had suffered their first defeat in 14 games when they crumbled at Birmingham last Sunday – Ellen White’s hat-trick breaking a back line that had conceded only five goals since Montemurro took charge in October. Meanwhile Chelsea, still unbeaten in the league but having slipped behind Manchester City on goal difference, missed out on a first Champions League final after a 5-1 aggregate loss to Wolfsburg. The Blues’ first chances came through Kirby, the Professional Footballers’ Association and Football Writers’ Association player of the year. Twice in quick succession the England striker picked up the ball on the left and danced past three tight Arsenal players but her square passes were crowded out. Shortly after that Bachmann and Ji So-yun played a one-two on the edge of the box, the Swiss forward spinning beautifully but shooting wide of the far post. The chances did not stop for the Gunners, though, and the best of the half came as a delightful ball over the top put Mead in on goal with just Hedvig Lindahl to beat but a sprinting Mjelde chased her down before she could get a shot away. As the clock ticked towards half-time Chelsea began to ramp up the pressure and Ji and Bachmann continued to combine well on the right. Chelsea began the second period as they ended the first and it did not take long for them to break the deadlock. Bachmann and Ji linked up again, this time getting Kirby involved, who fed the ball back to Bachmann and the forward blasted high into Van Veenendaal’s net. Arsenal were undeterred by falling behind, Lindahl was forced to palm the ball away from Mead. Five minutes later the Gunners captain, Kim Little, who has won the cup three times with her club, played a pinpoint pass to Miedema, who perhaps should have shot first time but turned and gave the Blues time to rush back. The Gunners’ wastefulness in front of goal was then punished by Bachmann again. Her shot from the right looped in off the 21-year-old defender Leah Williamson to extend Chelsea’s lead. From then the game began to slow, Chelsea happy to sit back and Arsenal searching for a way to break through a defence that had not conceded in the competition. But the pressure eventually paid off, Mead’s cross into the box finding Miedema and this time the Euro 2017 winner did not wait, sweeping the ball past Lindahl to halve the deficit. But just three minutes later Kirby picked up the ball on the edge of the Arsenal area, stepped past Louise Quinn and fired home to deal a hammer-blow to the Gunners. It was her sixth FA Cup goal this season and it keeps Chelsea in the hunt for the double.
13||Mark Noble fires West Ham to win at Leicester and safetyThe chance to revel in another club’s misery must have felt unusual for West Ham. They have endured a traumatic season but this was a rare moment of gaiety. David Moyes strode on to the pitch to embrace his players at the end and even Andy Carroll, banished from training earlier in the week, could be seen lapping up the acclaim from the jubilant away fans. West Ham had delivered a passable impression of unity just when a collapse looked possible with Mark Noble’s spectacular effort in the second half securing the win that ensures their survival and all the discontent belonged to Leicester instead. The King Power Stadium was empty for the home team’s lap of appreciation, almost two years to the day since Leicester lifted the Premier League trophy, and it is impossible not to fear for Claude Puel’s job prospects. Leicester’s apathy strengthened the theory that they have stopped playing for Claude Puel. The Frenchman has overseen a run of four wins in 19 games and was subjected to mutinous chants from the home fans, who amused themselves with ironic cheers when Christian Fuchs roused Adrián, the visiting goalkeeper, with a shot from long range in the 86th minute. The harsh truth is that West Ham did not have to be spectacular to dominate, even if Moyes was delighted with his side’s response to last Sunday’s chastening defeat to Manchester City. “I’m really pleased with the performance,” West Ham’s manager said. “It was really good, especially in the first half. More importantly the result was what mattered. The sooner we got a win, the better. We are capable of that. What I’m trying to get is for us to be capable every week.” With Puel teetering on the brink, West Ham did not dare pass up the opportunity to move five points clear of the bottom three and, when Southampton conceded a late equaliser at Everton, the Hammers’ survival was confirmed. Moyes had complained before the game that a culture of leaks was making his job harder, but this was a time for togetherness and it soon became apparent that the visitors had nothing to fear from their unhappy opponents. Leicester, missing nine players, struggled to build any positive intent. They relinquished possession with alarming frequency, leaving Jamie Vardy isolated in attack, and they were fortunate when Manuel Lanzini failed to punish a poor clearance from Ben Hamer in the fifth minute. Hamer would soon be forced to race from his line to deny Marko Arnautovic, whose next contribution was to get in the way of Lanzini’s shot, and Leicester’s lethargy would have shamed a hungover teenager. Puel insisted that he is looking forward to next season but his bosses might have other ideas. West Ham had control in midfield and, despite starting without an orthodox striker again, the measure of Leicester’s defence. Lanzini and João Mário were full of mischief in their floating roles behind Arnautovic, who settled for creating the opening goal a minute after rattling the bar with a fierce effort. Arthur Masuaku, an effervescent presence on the left after returning to the starting lineup, swung a deep cross to the far post in the 34th minute and Arnautovic levered himself into position, making space with the slightest of pushes on Fuchs, and pulled the ball back for Mário to finish from close range. Leicester played with greater intensity at the start of the second half and were enraged when Aaron Cresswell escaped with a booking after stopping Vardy with an intentional handball. Yet they failed to stretch one of the league’s leakiest defences and West Ham should have profited on the break, only for Arnautovic to dither with Lanzini screaming for a pass. Sensing edginess, Puel replaced Hamza Choudhury and Fousseni Diabaté with Demarai Gray and Kelechi Iheanacho in the 61st minute and Leicester almost equalised when Harry Maguire whistled a shot over from 18 yards. Yet Arnautovic would soon be placing his hands on his head in disbelief as he watched Noble’s vicious volley from 25 yards swerve to Hamer’s right and nestle in the bottom corner. It was a stunning goal from the midfielder, who showed perfect technique when he met a loose clearance with his right foot, and an audacious way for West Ham to seal a precious victory.
3||Don’t laugh, but Scottish football really is on the rise after years in the doldrumsTo say that football supporters in Scotland are intrinsically pessimistic about the country’s football prospects is not entirely accurate – we have simply become fearful of optimism. In the 20 years that have elapsed since Scotland last qualified for a major international championship, we have grabbed at any small signals that might indicate we were about to reach the Promised Land. Perhaps we are being punished for making graven images of football and its princes and for allowing it to play a disproportionately important role in our existences. Thus, I’m fearful of the sense of hope that perhaps our two decades of wandering in the desert might be about to end. In other nations that embrace this capricious game, hope is seen as a positive force, something that sustains you during times of adversity. In Scotland, we have come to despise it because it always ends in disappointment. And yet… In Rome last week, we witnessed Andrew Robertson, a 24-year-old Glaswegian full-back play a vital role for Liverpool in Rome as they reached the final of the Champions League for the first time since 2007. On 26 May in Kiev, he will become the first Scot to play in one of the biggest sporting events on the planet since Paul Lambert helped Borussia Dortmund to a 3-1 win against Juventus in Munich in 1997. The year after Lambert’s feat, Scotland reached the World Cup finals in France. Could Robertson’s displays 21 years later presage our return from the international wilderness? Or is this merely another wretched symptom of the madness that has taken a hold of our souls? There have been other signs and wonders. One has been the emergence in the Manchester United midfield of Scott McTominay, who qualifies to play for Scotland by dint of having a Scottish father. This 21-year-old isn’t one of those Anglo-Scots who has grasped at the chance of international football under a flag of convenience in the knowledge that he’ll never play for England. McTominay is a thoroughbred who possesses the talents to become a future English international. Yet he chose Scotland because that’s what his heart was telling him. Is this another sign? In Scottish club football, something else has been happening that may contain the seeds of optimism. Celtic, which won the Scottish title by defeating Rangers 5-0, had seven Scots on the park at the end of the game. Three others were either injured or on the substitutes’ bench. This is generally regarded as the best Celtic team since the era of the Lisbon Lions in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The tribulations and self-inflicted wounds that led to the liquidation of Rangers in 2012 still beset this massive club. Their capitulation to Celtic last week followed a 4-0 defeat to them in the Scottish Cup two weeks earlier. Rangers have never been weaker. Steven Gerrard, whose only experience of coaching has been a few months in charge of Liverpool’s under-18s, is expected to halt Rangers’ second slide into the abyss. He will need upwards of £20m even to be in the same room as Celtic, a sum that Rangers cannot produce under their own steam. The downfall of Rangers has led many Scottish football pundits to express their dismay at the adverse effect this has had on the wider game. In the history of Scottish football, the statement “Scotland needs a strong Rangers” has been deployed as often as “hoof the ball up the park”. This is partly true, but not in the way its acolytes intend. Certainly, a strong Rangers is better than a weak one, in the same way that a strong Partick Thistle is better than a weak one. However, to suggest that Scottish football has been weakened by Rangers’ troubles is questionable. In the six seasons since Rangers went into liquidation, Aberdeen, Hibs, Hearts, St Mirren, Ross County, St Johnstone and Inverness Caledonian Thistle have all lifted silverware. Several of those clubs have either improved their stadiums or are in the process of doing so. They have used their success wisely by resisting the urge to take shortcuts to unsustainable success. In the Scottish Premiership, Aberdeen, Hibs, Motherwell and Kilmarnock have managed to assemble strong teams under young and modern managers and with a scattering of talented young Scots. Hibs were the first British club to compete in the European Cup in 1955-56 and progressed to the semi-finals. The current side, under the tutelage of Neil Lennon, is the best that Edinburgh has seen for almost 50 years. The week before Celtic annihilated Rangers they were cleanly beaten by a Hibs side in which the best players were all young Scots. They were fast, fit, skilful and better than Celtic. The worst nightmare for Rangers supporters is Celtic achieving a landmark 10 successive league titles, thus eclipsing the current record of nine jointly held by each. Nor would this say much that is positive about Scottish football’s competitiveness (though Bayern Munich are well on the way to making it 10 Bundesligas in a row). If the Hibs board can resist the urge of previous administrations and attempt to hang on to its brightest and best for another season or two, then Neil Lennon may become the unlikely slayer of Rangers fans’ scariest demons. Steven Gerrard may yet become the man to steer Rangers out of the doldrums but Lennon, who always flourishes in adversity, has everything they lack. • Kevin McKenna is an Observer columnist
3||Behind the literary lustre lie tales of power, secrecy and sexual abuseIt’s not a whodunnit, #MeToo – the most significant metric is not the severity of the shock each fresh revelation provokes. Whether or not you are aghast with surprise or invoke instinct or esoteric knowledge to declare that you suspected something all along is insignificant. Its only use is to help us calibrate how far entrenched are the social mechanisms that protect men from the consequences of their actions and deny women the support and care they need having suffered those actions. In short, it is not about you. You do not get points for having predicted the villain and your retroactive piecing together of the plot has no place here and borders on the ghoulish. The temporary suspension of the Nobel prize in literature while the Academy gets to grips with an abuse scandal is not some high-culture Scandi-drama, in which lurid violence is enacted against a backdrop of stylish interiors and scudding skies. The emergence of allegations of sexual aggression and misogyny against the writer Junot Díaz is not American Bitch, the episode of Girls in which Lena Dunham’s Hannah Horvath meets a manipulative male writer and finds herself both reluctantly fascinated and thoroughly repulsed. No. These stories are about real people who may have endured real harm at the hands of those more powerful than them and who have felt, often for many years, unable to voice those experiences. Not uncommonly, the price of their silence has extended beyond “pure” emotional damage to a clear impact on their professional, financial and creative lives; that price has been paid while watching their oppressor appear to flourish and to receive the world’s approbation. But, of course, these narratives are about you and about all of us. And when they involve those who tell stories for a living, they are also unavoidably about the weight that we accord different words, from different mouths. In the literary world, we have known since God was a lad that a woman writing about relationships, parenthood and the domestic sphere was a lady novelist more likely to provide consolation than controversy, while her male counterpart was creating a searing portrait of the power dynamics of intimacy. When Proust writes about a biscuit, a whole world of time, memory and mortality opens up and alters perception; when a woman does the same, a magazine rings her to ask for the recipe. (No shade on Proust, who is the absolute boy. But you know it’s true.) In fictional terms, the Nobel fiasco would not pass the verisimilitude test. A secretive organisation, whose inner workings may not be known but are yet powerful enough to transform anointed writers’ careers; a man accused of long-term sexual abuse, some of which is alleged to have occurred in venues part-funded by that same organisation; a wife – for the accused is not a judge of the literature prize, but his wife is – compelled to take responsibility for her husband’s actions. The result: a prize leaking authority by the minute, in a world where prizes are king. Leaving aside whether it is right or not to expel Katarina Frostenson from the Swedish Academy, one thing is striking: the members of Nobel committees are unchanging and, indeed, are not permitted to resign. It is, literally, a job for life. How, then, can change – of representation, of taste, of personality – ever come to pass? And why do we venerate the decisions of this immutable group of people whom we do not know. For veneration is the problem. Once we get beyond the hell of abusers behaving with impunity, of the networks that may enable and guard them, of the disbelieved women and of the unspeakable insanity of the abuse hierarchy – the immediate recourse to the exhausting, cyclical conversations that go “a patted knee is not verbal insult is not a sleazy gesture is not a rape” – then we come back to the issue of worship. Díaz, it has been asserted over the last couple of days, was the darling of the New Yorker, the trailblazer for Latinx writers, the creator of works that readers hold to their hearts. When, last month, he wrote of being raped at the age of eight and when he painstakingly elaborated on its after-effects – depression, thoughts of suicide, impotence – his openness and courage were widely hailed. Now it is being described as a pre-emptive bid for leniency and sympathy as the day of reckoning approached. But his experience exists either way. As people now focus on the way female characters are treated in Díaz’s fiction – tricky, because there is a strong argument for separating novels from their authors, but Díaz has spoken frequently about the autobiographical nature of his writing – a line from the essay comes to mind. It’s surprising, Díaz wrote, how easy it is “to rewrite the truth away”. Fiction, no matter how much it corresponds to reality, and no matter its author’s intent, is different, because it is created by and in language. There was an even more telling moment and it came when Díaz wrote of his “wine-dark sea of pain”. To deploy Homer is not a neutral act, even if it is unwitting. It is to summon a whole literary heritage and situate yourself in it, to make yourself part of the epic. If you have loved The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, you cannot unlove it. The art that affected us is in us: it is not a surplus or battered table we can leave out in the rain. What we have now to do is discuss how we separate reality from reputation; how we find a way to approach the impossibly painful story of an apparent victim turned alleged oppressor; how we centre the experiences of victims. And how we accept that age-old story: that Great Expectations are not always satisfied. • Alex Clark is an Observer columnist
8||Russia's Alexei Navalny arrested as 1,600 detained nationwideRussia’s opposition leader, Alexei Navalny, was one of about 1,600 of people detained by police during nationwide protests before Vladimir Putin’s inauguration for a fourth presidential term. Navalny, 41, was arrested by police shortly after joining thousands of protesters at Moscow’s Pushkin Square, a short distance from the Kremlin. Officers carried the government critic from the landmark square by his arms and legs as he struggled and angry opposition supporters jeered and shouted. A police helicopter circled low, almost drowning out chants of “Putin is a thief! and “Down with the tsar!” After the arrest, police said Navalny was arrested for disobeying police, an offence punishable by up to 15 days behind bars. He spent two months in prison last year on protest-related charges. Navalny had called for the protests on Saturday prior to Putin’s inauguration on 7 May, a ceremony to mark the start of a new six-year term of office that will keep the former KGB officer in power until 2024. “Putin is not our tsar,” Navalny said in an online video before the rallies. “He intends to manage Russia as his own personal property in the interests of his allies, his family, and a narrow ruling group that has seized power.” Police in Moscow appeared to be taken by surprise when hundreds of protesters surged from Pushkin Square on to Strastnoi Bulvar, a key road that leads to Tverskaya, the Russian capital’s main thoroughfare. Traffic police diverted vehicles before riot police, some lashing out with batons, made repeated attempts to try and clear the road. There were isolated clashes as some protesters attempted to hold their ground. Almost 600 people were taken into custody in Moscow, according to OVD.info, a rights organisation that monitors police detentions. One man wearing a red robe and a crown, an apparent mocking reference to “Tsar Putin”, was among those dragged from the crowd by riot police on one of the hottest days of the year so far in Moscow. “I spent 18 years of my life living under the rule of [Leonid] Brezhnev, and I’ve already spent 18 living under Putin,” said Alexander, 63, an opposition supporter in Moscow. “Two terms was enough. He has no right to rule for so long. He’s never won a genuine election.” Putin, who has now ruled Russia for longer than anyone since Joseph Stalin, the Soviet dictator, took 76% of the vote at presidential elections in March that some international observers and opposition figures said were marred by vote fraud and intimidation. Navalny was barred from standing over a fraud conviction that he says was trumped up to prevent him from challenging Putin at the ballot box. Russian authorities have also twice refused to allow the Kremlin critic to register a political party that could field candidates at parliamentary elections. Moscow’s protest was the biggest in the Russian capital since last year, when opposition supporters repeatedly took to the streets in large numbers over allegations of massive corruption against Dmitry Medvedev, the prime minister. Protesters also gathered on Saturday in scores of other towns and cities across Russia, including St Petersburg, where over 150 people were detained. About 160 people were also detained in Chelyabinsk, in central Russia, and 75 in Yakutsk, the capital of a diamond-mining region in north-east Russia. Many of those taken into custody were minors, reports said. Some opposition activists were reportedly beaten by police. Police were assisted in Moscow by hundreds of members of the pro-Kremlin Molodaya Gvardia youth movement, reports said. Nationalists and people who claimed to be Cossacks also confronted protesters in the Russian capital. Some attacked protesters with leather whips, OVD.info reported. “I’m here to protect my country from those people who want to stage a Maidan,” said Alexei, a pro-government activist, referring to the violent protests that toppled Ukraine’s pro-Moscow president in 2014. Denis Krivosheev, Amnesty International’s deputy director for eastern Europe and central Asia, said: “The forceful dispersal of today’s opposition demonstrations is outrageous. The Russian authorities once again refused to authorise protest rallies, and then used this ban to crackdown on those gathered in Moscow and elsewhere. “But what is worse is the total police inaction, which allowed the beating of protesters by unknown men in Moscow. On what grounds people in ‘Cossack’ uniforms were allowed to use force remains a question.” Although demonstrations will have made unpleasant viewing for Putin just two days before his inauguration and six weeks before the World Cup kicks off in Moscow, the protests were far from the scale and intensity of the 2014 revolt in neighbouring Ukraine or the massive demonstrations that forced Armenia’s prime minister, Serzh Sargsyan, from office last month. The protests were also far smaller than the rally that took place in central Moscow before Putin’s inauguration for a third term in May 2012. That was attended by tens of thousands of people and ended with violent clashes between riot police and protesters. Almost 500 people were arrested and it signalled the end of the Russian opposition’s anti-Putin coalition. “They ruined my big day. Now I’m going to ruin their lives,” Putin reportedly said after the 2012 protest, according to opposition figures citing Kremlin insiders. Saturday’s opposition protests proved once again that Navalny has the ability to bring relatively large numbers of people on to the streets, but they also underlined that he has not experienced a groundswell of popular support that makes him a serious threat to Putin’s long-term grip on power. His supporters say that is partly because he is banned from state television, which carries out regular smear campaigns against Kremlin critics. Navalny has been accused by national television of working with the United States and Britain to bring down Putin, a claim that he has laughed off.
14||Diane Abbott joins Windrush protest march on WhitehallMembers of the Windrush generation, their families and supporters have been joined by the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, at a rally outside Downing Street. The demonstration on Whitehall, which called for the end of the “hostile environment” deportation policy, was organised by campaign group Stand Up to Racism. Demonstrators, including women who spent months detained in Yarl’s Wood immigration removal centre, held placards that said “Solidarity with the Windrush generation” as some chanted that Theresa May should be deported. Demonstrations were also held in Birmingham and Coventry city centres. In London, Abbott pointed out that she was the first person to call for former home secretary Amber Rudd’s resignation. But she told the crowd of around 150 people: “When it comes to the Windrush scandal, all roads lead back to Theresa May.” Abbott said it was the prime minister who brought in the hostile environment policy. Asked if she thought the government was doing enough to rectify the injustices done, she said: “We will judge them by what they actually do.” Among the demonstrators was Weyman Bennett, 52, from Tottenham in North London, whose family travelled from Jamaica to Britain between 1958 and 1966. His mother came to work in the NHS and his father served in the British army. Bennett said he believed the Windrush generation had been “betrayed”: “Amber Rudd took the blame, but I believe that Theresa May is responsible for it, and she should go. I honestly think that she’s responsible for the inhuman treatment of people. “I’m talking about grandmothers kissing goodbye to their children,” he said. “I hope that Theresa May is held accountable for what she did, because the people’s voices have to be heard.” At the rally in Birmingham, people could be heard shouting, “England is our home” and, “Who built these streets? Our parents did.” Desmond Jaddoo, who organised the event, told Birmingham Live: “Families are still being affected by this, and a more strategic and extensive plan of action is needed from the government in order to address the major inequality and injustice this has created.” “In a year when we will be celebrating 70 years since the Windrush came to the UK, with British citizens who were invited to this country, to help rebuild Britain into what it is today, this is a slap in the face for them,” he said. He added that this is “not how things should be in 2018 Britain”.
0||Dazzling Danny Cipriani steers Wasps past Newcastle into third placeQuite where Danny Cipriani will be playing his rugby next season remains unclear but this was the latest glimpse of his rare talents as he prepares for the next chapter of his career. The enigmatic fly-half, who is leaving Wasps at the end of the campaign and is expected to move to France to join Stade Français or Racing 92, orchestrated a victory that secured third place for Dai Young’s team. A trip to Saracens in the play-off semi-finals now awaits on 19 May, while Newcastle must travel to the leaders and defending champions, Exeter, on the same day. Cipriani departed early in the second half with a minor ankle knock, although it will not curtail his involvement against Saracens, and by then it was job done. The 30-year-old took centre stage during a one-sided first half, laying on a try for the England wing Elliot Daly with a delightful long pass before showing impressive strength to touch down himself on the stroke of half-time. Three minutes after the interval Cipriani’s intelligent kick sent Josh Bassett over in the right corner before Newcastle roused themselves in a gallant second-half fightback, which harvested three tries in nine minutes during the final quarter. There will be a time to judge properly how good these sides actually are but it was not at a sun-kissed Kingston Park, which housed its second capacity crowd of the season. That test will come in the play-offs and Dai Young, not for the first time this season, could not hide his frustration after Wasps switched off when they appeared to be coasting to victory. “That has been our achilles heel and pretty much the story of our season since Christmas,” said Young. “I’ve just told the players that we aren’t going to win at Sarries with a 60-minute performance. It’s as simple as that.” Newcastle have breathed passion and romance into the Premiership this season and will recall key men such as Toby Flood, Vereniki Goneva and Sinoti Sinoti for the trip to Sandy Park, a ground where they have known only defeat. “We’ll learn from today and we’ve got almost two weeks to come up with a game plan to face Exeter,” said the director of rugby, Dean Richards. “We know we’re capable of winning away from home and going there doesn’t faze us. The season hasn’t finished,” he added. Wasps’ hooker, Tom Cruse, charged down Josh Matavesi’s kick to put the visitors in front and Cipriani sent Daly strolling over before he added a third himself on the stroke of half-time. Then came Cipriani’s assist for Bassett before he succumbed to injury – only for his replacement and former Newcastle favourite Jimmy Gopperth to finish off a fine break down the right flank for a fifth Wasps try. Yet Richards has fashioned a side with guts and Matavesi showed the Wasps defence a clean pair of heels to race clear down the left before the wing Zach Kibirige and lock Evan Olmstead added further home scores. The visiting flanker Thomas Young was sin-binned before Willie le Roux scarpered clear from distance for a sixth Wasps try after Gopperth set him free. For both these sides greater challenges lie ahead.
0||County cricket: Essex v Yorkshire, Lancashire v Somerset and more – as it happenedDivision One Surrey 434 v Worcestershire 135-1; Worcs trail by 299 Notts 302 &amp; 136-0, Hampshire 223; Notts lead by 215 Lancashire 217-2, Somerset 429; Lancs trail by 212 Essex 142 &amp; 97-4, Yorkshire 50, 329; Yorkshire lead by 141 Division Two Sussex 323, Middlesex 230 &amp; 64-2; Middlesex trail by 29 Glamorgan 94 &amp; 273-7, Kent 174; Glamorgan lead by 193 Durham 142-7, Leicestershire 440; Durham trail by 298 I think I used the phrase ‘the pendulum swings’ earlier in the day. Well, it’s a case of copy and paste. Yorkshire have wickets three and four courtesy of the evergreen Steve Patterson, who is playing his first match of the season following a broken finger. Patterson uprooted Nick Browne’s middle stump and had Ravi Bopara caught at backward point. Essex are 55 for four with plenty of work to do in pursuit of 238. We still have 15 overs to bowl tonight. Yorkshire are back in business. Steve Patterson has just struck twice in the 10th over, bowling Alastair Cook for 26 and Tom Westley for a duck - his second of the game and, like Aiden Markram at Durham, his third on the trot after one at Hampshire last week and here in the first innings. Essex are 34-2 in the 11th now. Durham, meanwhile, are 59-6 against Leicestershire at the Riverside in reply to 440. Plays and misses, yes, but it’s been a pretty steady start for Essex as they pursue 238 to win their second match of the season. They have advanced to 27 for 0 after seven overs of 32 to be bowled tonight, with Alastair Cook leading the way unbeaten on 20. Much like Joe Root, who also posted a duck in the first innings, he has looked comfortable. Hang on, as I type, there is a dropped catch at third slip. Jack Leaning at third slip off Ben Coad. Sharp catch at around neck high, but it should have been taken. Cook has a life. Aiden Markram: 0, 0 and 0 in his first three innings for Durham. He has just been bowled by Leicestershire’s Ben Raine to leave them at 10 for 3 in reply to the visitors’ 440. Essex need 238 to win having bowled Yorkshire out for 329 after they had been 276 for 3. Tea here. Three more wickets for Essex and two for Jamie Porter, who trapped Tim Bresnan lbw with one that kept low and has just bowled Steve Patterson. Yorkshire, at 305 for 9, lead by 213 with Jack Leaning and Ben Coad together as we approach tea. Some fall from 276 for 3. A fine effort from Glamorgan at Cardiff. They are 155-2 second time around having been bowled out for 94 and conceded an 80-run lead with it. Jack Murphy’s career best 53 not out is helping them along. The pendulum swings again. Yorkshire have lost three wickets for 14 runs, with Harry Brook and Gary Ballance joining Joe Root back in the hutch. Brook miscued Simon Harmer’s off-spin to long-on for 124 before Ballance was bowled as he played down the wrong line to Ravi Bopara for three, leaving Yorkshire at 290 for 6. They lead by 198. At the Oval, Rory Burns fell seven short of a double ton, with Surrey now 423-9 against Worcestershire. Joe Root has gone for 35, bowled by Ravi Bopara off the inside edge as he attempted to drive through the covers. Bopara celebrated his 33rd birthday yesterday and is playing his 200th first-class match. He ended an 86-run stand with Harry Brook, who is unbeaten on 118. Yorkshire are 281 for 4, leading by 189. Gary Ballance has come to the crease. Much like the morning, it has been a quiet start to the afternoon, with Yorkshire adding only the five runs in a couple of overs. They have moved to 265-3, a lead of 173. It’s amazing how this game has turned around. Essex hardly look like taking a wicket at the moment. Yorkshire have reached lunch at 260-3, leading by 168 with Harry Brook unbeaten on 108 and Joe Root looking nicely set on 25. Elsewhere, leaders Somerset have been bowled out for 429, with Lancashire having just started their first innings. Matt Parkinson chipped in with three late wickets for the hosts, who are opening the batting with Keaton Jennings and Alex Davies following the decision to drop Haseeb Hameed. Nottinghamshire are ahead against Hampshire at Trent Bridge, with the visitors losing Hashim Amla to an uncharacteristic heave this morning for 69. They are 154-6 replying to 302. Surrey still going strong at the Oval against Worcestershire at 377-6. Rory Burns is 182 not out. In Division Two, Derbyshire are already two down second time around against Warwickshire at 34-2 and trail by 87. In similar fashion to Surrey against Worcester, Leicestershire are causing Durham grief at the Riverside at 388-7. They look two cracking games at Cardiff and Hove. Glamorgan are 74-1 in their second innings against Kent and trail by just six, while Sussex are 154-6 in reply to Middlesex’s 230. Harry Finch is unbeaten on 67. Some lunchtime news to digest, from Ali Martin: Harry Brook has reached his maiden first-class century off 129 balls as Yorkshire turn the screw at Chelmsford. They are currently 255-3, leading by 163. Maybe a sign of things to come that his partner at the crease is Joe Root. I wouldn’t mind betting that they bat together a lot for England across the years. Warwickshire have been bowled out for 439 by Derbyshire at Edgbaston, losing four morning wickets, including Matt Lamb for 79 and short of a maiden first-class century. South African quick Duanne Olivier finished with four wickets, three this morning. The Bears’ lead is 121, so Derbyshire are not completely out of that one just yet. Here at Chelmsford, Joe Root is up and running following his first-innings golden duck. He punched a boundary through the covers off Sam Cook and has moved to 14, with the Yorkshire score at 211-3, a lead of 119. I would be worried if I was Essex, although batting has looked considerably easier since tea time yesterday. Joe Root is in following the departure of Che Pujara, who isn’t half battling at the moment. Pujara was bowled by Peter Siddle for 41 having not offered a stroke. And it wasn’t just clipping off-stump either. Root survived a sizeable caught behind shout from Siddle before getting off the mark with his seventh ball. He is currently unbeaten on four, with Yorkshire 197-3 and leading by 95. Harry Brook has moved to 70. It all seems to be coming together for Tom Abell, the Somerset captain, who has helped his side claim a fourth batting point at Old Trafford this morning with an unbeaten half-century, backing up the one he scored in victory over Yorkshire last week. Abell’s form with the bat forced him to drop himself briefly last season, but he has recovered impressively. Somerset are 358 for 6, with Abell unbeaten on 68. Kent have been bowled out at Cardiff for 174, taking a lead of 80 into the second innings. It has been a quiet start to day at Chelmsford as Yorkshire steadily advance to 177 for 2, a lead of 85. I reckon we may have already had three, maybe four, wickets by this time yesterday. Che Pujara has driven Jamie Porter down the ground for four and has 35. Peter Siddle had a big caught behind shout against the Indian in the first over turned down. Good morning from a sunny Chelmsford. I have to say I’m still trying to get my head around yesterday’s events. For two sessions, it was carnage as batsmen floundered amid a series of loose shots and bowlers prospered by just hitting an area to coin a players’ cliche. Then, after tea, Jonny Bairstow and Harry Brook both played aggressively to change the momentum of the contest and swing it in Yorkshire’s favour. Bairstow hit 50 and Brook 57 unbeaten. The decision to open with Bairstow second time around could be the game changer when all is said and done, and he played in typically combative fashion, hitting Sam Cook superbly over long-off for six. Brook, the current England under 19s captain, then attacked the spin of Simon Harmer - playing spin is a particularly strength of his - on the way to his maiden first-team fifty. Yorkshire will begin day two on 161/2 in their second innings, leading by 69 with India overseas batsman Che Pujara on 22 alongside Brook. Elsewhere in Division One, leaders Somerset hold the advantage at Old Trafford thanks to centuries from George Bartlett and Marcus Trescothick, the latter who suffered a broken metatarsal and faces a stretch on the sidelines. They will resume on 321/5. At Trent Bridge, Hampshire are 70/3 in reply to Notts’ 302, with Stuart Broad having taken two early wickets. Hashim Amla is unbeaten on 27 against his former county. At the Oval, Rory ‘how is he not in England contention?’ Burns will resume on 137 with Surrey at 278/4 against Worcestershire. In Division Two, they’re into day three at Edgbaston, where Warwickshire have a firm grip on their clash with Derbyshire - 375/6 in reply to 318. Will Rhodes, Chris Wright, Jonathan Trott and Matt Lamb have all posted fifties. Lamb is 79 not out and targeting a maiden career hundred this morning. Leicestershire have started positively against Durham at the Riverside, reaching close on day one at 301/4, with fifties for Carberry, Horton and Cosgrove. It was an opening day not too dissimilar to Chelmsford down at Sophia Gardens Cardiff, where Glamorgan were bowled out for 94 thanks to Darren Stevens and Matt Henry, who claimed six and four wickets respectively, before Kent responded with 163/9. Timm van der Gugten matched Stevens with six-for. And finally at Hove, former Yorkshire seamer Oliver Robinson, sacked by the White Rose and Jason Gillespie for a series of misdemeanours a few years back, including turning up at the wrong ground for a second-team game, claimed 7-58 for Sussex against Middlesex as they bowled them out for 230. Sussex were 60-4 in reply. Division One Surrey 278-4 v Worcestershire Notts 302, Hampshire 70-3; Hampshire trail by 232 Lancashire v Somerset 321-5 Essex 142, Yorkshire 50, 161-2; Yorkshire lead by 69 Division Two Sussex 60-4, Middlesex 230; Sussex trail by 170 Glamorgan 94, Kent 163-9; Kent lead by 69 Durham v Leicestershire 301-4
0||Sale hopes of a Champions Cup place ended by George Ford’s salvoThis was a bizarre frolic to end the season for two sides with Europe on their minds. Despite the unbroken sunshine the floodlights were switched on 20 minutes into the game and the warm, dry conditions nurtured a rash of handling errors rather than continuity. Leicester had spent the previous two weeks in a daze and struggled here with blurred vision initially before George Ford gave them clarity. Sale needed to win with a bonus point to snare a Champions Cup place and they could have all but secured it by the interval. They made seven line breaks in the opening half but, if the final pass went to hand, it tended to be knocked on. The last one, when Jono Ross surged to the Leicester 22 and found AJ MacGinty, ended when what would have been a scoring pass to his half-back partner Faf de Klerk was intercepted by Jonah Holmes. Leicester had taken an early lead through Holmes after Manu Tuilagi’s thrust prompted a blindside move. Ford, standing flat, was twice involved but it was a rare example of the Tigers swiftly securing the ball at the breakdown where Tom Curry was quick to get back on his feet. The visitors’ advantage was up front, Sale’s scrum, like the ball when they attacked, tending to end on the floor. Sale, prompted by de Klerk, were quick witted, scenting space around the fringes and instantly switching on after a turnover. The Sharks had not enjoyed a week that public relations consultants dream of, forced to deny any interest in signing the shamed former Ulster players Paddy Jackson and Stuart Olding after spluttering from commercial partners. Not that fly-half is a position of particular concern with MacGinty scheming cleverly initially before Leicester – after a half-time rejoinder that instead of indulging Sale in a bun fight they should treat them to some raw beef and let Ford do the slicing – muscled up. The Tigers were too loose and haphazard in the opening half, unable to sustain pressure, but the change of approach brought an instant reward. Ben Youngs attacked round the fringes and linked with Ford – both his first-half penalties struck a post – who had a free run to the line. Leicester stayed direct and forced Sale to infringe. Two MacGinty penalties had restricted Leicester’s interval lead to a point but a pair of kicks from Ford in 10 minutes after his try put the Tigers 20-6 ahead and comfortably in control. The Leicester sides of old would have carried on in the same manner, not only until the game had been won but right to the end. Here they invited Sale back in when Telusa Veainu weaved his way out of his 22 and left three defenders trailing. He got to halfway after outpacing de Klerk but a risky pass to Sione Kalamafoni went to ground and Ben Curry picked up to commit what passed for a defence and free Marland Yarde. A near-capacity crowd celebrated the resurrection of hope. Sale had won their last two home matches against Leicester who in the previous two rounds had flopped at home to Northampton before blowing a 10-point lead late on to Newcastle, but Ford ensured that this time their grip was not broken. He continued to operate flat and in traffic and 15 minutes from time committed defenders to send May through a gap for the wing to find Mike Williams and restore the Tigers’ 14-point advantage. Sale were finally spent, Ford’s late drop goal and Holmes’s second try decorating the victory. Champions Cup qualification used to be the minimum requirement at the start of the season for Leicester but, as the salary cap has had a levelling effect, they have gone from being winners to beaten finalists to top-four finishers to top-six, a decline that has started to gather momentum. They cannot recruit A-list players in the numbers of old but Ford playing as he did here and a referee not tolerating collapsed scrums make a significant difference. The Premiership has reached the point where, with spending broadly similar, reputation counts for little. “The margins are tight,” said Leicester’s director of rugby, Matt O’Connor. “The standard has improved dramatically. I am not happy merely to be in the Champions Cup because at the start of the season our goal was to win the competition and it really hurts not being in the play-offs. We’ll be the better for this.”
13||Rangers give Steven Gerrard stark reminder of challenge to comeAfter the lord mayor’s show? The Saturday afternoon scene here was such that you would barely have known the show occurred in the first place. Exactly 24 hours after Steven Gerrard was afforded a rapturous reception by thousands of delirious fans, Rangers’ players offered a stark reminder as to why an epic shake-up was needed in the first place. Gerrard was not on hand to witness this laboured showing. He will take up office on 1 June, a situation that looked sensible as Kilmarnock offered 84 minutes of comfortable resistance. The man who breached it, David Bates, will be a Hamburg player by the time Gerrard starts his first manager’s role. This, on paper, was the easy part of Rangers’ final three games; treacherous trips to Aberdeen and Hibernian lie ahead. “We look forward to welcoming you back next season for exciting times under our new manager Steven Gerrard,” said the PA announcer in understated form at full-time. Only moments earlier, the Ibrox support had chanted the new man’s name for the first time. It was, given what had come before, curiously muted if requiring context; at the last home game Rangers’ support had held up banners in protest at what they regard as boardroom mismanagement. One swallow and all that. Gerrard will be under no illusions regarding the scale of rebuilding work required. Interestingly, he opted not to emphasise his final decision on the signature of players when unveiled to the media, instead insisting on a “teamwork” approach. Such a response is useful to conspiracy theorists, if also an indication that a novice manager cannot be expected to instantly excel at recruitment, fundamental though it is. Even before confirmation of Gerrard’s upcoming arrival, Rangers had been active in the pre-contract transfer market. Dominic Solanke is the first Liverpool player to be linked with a move north on loan; it is safe to infer the forward will not be the last. With that comes a health warning, given the numerous Premier League loanees who have toiled in Scotland. The Old Firm in particular requires a certain mind set, as linked to intensity and a necessity to win every fixture. Kilmarnock provide an image of what Rangers could have done. Their ability to coax Steve Clarke back to his native Ayrshire, with the club rooted to the foot of the table with a tally of four points from eight games, has been the most inspired move of this Scottish season. Kilmarnock, as revived on and off the park after dormant years, will finish fifth. Clarke’s effective pragmatism, plus the recruitment of the excellent Youssouf Mulumbu, have been key features. Rightly, there is focus on what Gerrard will do for the profile of Scottish football; it does the game further good to have Clarke as a key component. A stop-start first half had seen Kilmarnock come the closest to scoring. Kris Boyd’s free kick was parried by Jak Alnwick, with Kirk Broadfoot and Aaron Tshibola contriving to get in each other’s way when seeking to convert the follow-up. The most meaningful Rangers reply arrived from Jamie Murphy, who clipped the top of the bar with a clever header. The backdrop during those opening 45 minutes only highlighted why performances and results will determine Gerrard’s status beyond initial hoopla. His name was not audible at all. The UVF and Derry’s Walls, Ibrox staples, were bellowed out where the identity of the incoming manager was not. Rangers were impotent once more after the break. Alfredo Morelos, a striker whose summer sale will be pertinent in respect of what funds Gerrard has at his disposal, provided little by way of incentive to potential employers. Ibrox hoped rather than expected a breakthrough against a well- drilled side. Bates was the unlikely source of salvation, with a back-post header that roused the subdued supporters. “He’s blue, he’s white,” came the belated chorus in acclaim of Gerrard, adding a little crudely that he is also dynamite. He might have to be.
0||Exeter’s Alec Hepburn finishes off a six-try victory over HarlequinsAnother match meant another horrible defeat for Quins. At home they may have been, with the sun on their backs as they have always liked it, but they could not contain a rampant Exeter who show no signs of faltering in defence of their title. The Chiefs gave run-outs to more of their squad, the way they change players in and out as indicative of their quality as the six tries here and, indeed, as the eight points by which they top the table. Quins had their best game of the end of this wretched season, only seven points behind for most of the second half, but they shipped 17 in the last 10 minutes or so to finish the season in 10th, their worst performance since the year they were relegated in 2005. Inspired by Joe Simmonds, Exeter scored four unanswered tries in the first half alone, then finished with two more as Quins unravelled once again. It was no way to mark the departure of John Kingston, rugby’s answer to Arsène Wenger. “I’m glad it’s out the way,” he said of his final day in charge. “I haven’t got myself emotional – and I do do emotional. The future is positive. I believe the squad we’ve assembled is the strongest I’ve seen in 17 years at the club. We had 20 players missing again today. We’ve had a nightmare with it. We have a very strong squad but we’ve not seen it on the pitch this year.” Well-wishers lined the perimeter of the Stoop as Kingston embarked on a farewell lap of honour but this farewell has been long and painful, heavy defeat after heavy defeat since his exit was announced. There is no doubt this was the least debilitating of those recent losses, a bright start hinting at Quins form at last, but in the end only Northampton’s last-minute penalty denied Worcester the bonus point that would have sent Quins into 11th place. They looked a long way from such ignominy at the start, Marcus Smith scoring the game’s first try in brilliant fashion after nearly four minutes of almost unbroken possession. All it did, though, was prompt Exeter – and Simmonds in particular – to take over. By half-time Exeter’s young English fly-half had outshone Harlequins’, scoring Exeter’s fourth and converting and/or creating the other three. Dave Ewers drove over in uncomplicated fashion for Exeter’s first, before Simmonds’ clean break and glorious pass on the run to Phil Dollman paved the way for another Ewers rumble. Dave Dennis was on hand to take the latter’s inside pass for try number two. Exeter’s captain claimed number three, too, this one sparked by a Simmonds half-break that showcased a certain amount of power to take Exeter to within yards of Quins’ line, where the forwards took over. And then Simmonds himself picked a superb line off Olly Woodburn to claim Exeter’s bonus point five minutes before the break, after Santiago Cordero had caused havoc down the line and Exeter’s support runners had combined sweetly. There was time, though, for Quins to reply. Mike Brown looked back on form generally but in particular when he picked a deadly line himself off Mat Luamanu to pull Quins back to 24-17 on the stroke of half-time. The wonder is that the third quarter passed without score. Exeter replaced Simmonds with none other than the stalwart Gareth Steenson, who set the scoreboard moving again with a penalty 10 minutes from time and Exeter duly tightened their grip with two further tries, both classic Exeter, their close-quarter work round the fringes unanswerable. Suddenly Quins were looking at another ugly scoreline. Exeter, on the other hand, look as if they will be back in this neck of the woods at the end of the month.
3||Enough liberal hand-wringing – raising alcohol prices is not class warHatred of the nanny state is not only found among Conservatives raised by nannies. The left can be as libertarian as the right and as repelled by a culture dominated by prigs and killjoys. Left libertarianism powers the modern feminist approval of prostitution and its damning of traditional campaigners against the sale of women’s bodies as “whorephobes” and “swerfs” (sex worker exclusionary radical feminists, in the clunky jargon). As Scotland becomes the first country in the world to try to price drinkers out of alcoholism with minimum booze charges, the same resistance to the paternalist state is evident. The modern left is an overwhelmingly bourgeois movement and liberal guilt can always be exploited. In Scotland, four cans of beer or a bottle of wine cannot cost less than £4.50, a three-litre bottle of cider £11.25 and a bottle of vodka £13.13. Wealthy drinkers buy craft beers and fine wines and won’t be affected. Minimum pricing looks like class war from above: the prosperous telling the lower orders to “do what I say, not what I do”. From Orwell on, a strain of left-wing writing holds it natural for the overworked and exhausted to want the hit of fatty food and cheap booze. “We walked through the door at midnight at the end of a shift,” said James Bloodworth of his time in an Amazon warehouse, “kicked off our boots and collapsed on to our beds with a bag of McDonald’s and a can of beer.” As far as he and his colleagues were concerned, foodies telling them to eat a healthy diet “could go to hell”. Bloodworth, like Orwell before him, doesn’t believe a high-calorie, high alcohol diet does anything but harm. But their subtleties are lost in the general fear of seeming a snob. I’m all for liberal guilt. If liberals have a fault, it is that they are not guilty enough. But left libertarianism fails in theory and in practice. Only those who do not know what alcoholism is, or how the poor live, could entertain it. Most on low incomes don’t drink as much as the middle classes. (They can’t afford to.) Minimum pricing does not target moderate drinkers but the 5% of, generally, but not exclusively, poor people, lost in addiction. It is a truth universally unacknowledged that, like drugs cartels, the drink industry makes most of its money from addicts. It thrives on hooked customers, who put boosting the brewers’ profits before their and their families’ health and happiness. Sixty per cent of alcohol sales – worth £27bn a year in England – are to “increasing risk” drinkers taking more than 21 units of alcohol a week, in the case of men (about 10 pints or two bottles of wine), and “harmful” drinkers taking more than 50. Twenty one units (14 for women) does not sound much in my world of journalism, but it is a sign of people who cannot go a day without a shot of their drug, which is as good a definition of an addiction as any. Even at that rate, the afflicted bring on the risk of cancer, stroke, brain damage and liver failure. By the time you are topping more than 50 units (35 if you are a woman) you are at risk of full degeneration. Don’t think I’m talking only about old men on park benches. In a vain attempt to persuade Westminster to introduce minimum pricing, researchers at Sheffield University said it would limit the 63,000 alcohol-related deaths in the next five years in England and Wales. Before they go, the afflicted will have reached the stage where they can only feel well when they drink. They will sweat, vomit, succumb to an alcoholic dementia that destroys their co-ordination and memories and see their liver fail and stomach distend. As Ken Kesey succinctly described the process in One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: “He was blind and diseased from drinking. And every time he put the bottle to his mouth, he didn’t suck out of it, it sucked out of him.” When you clear away the old snobbery about fine wines and the new snobberies about single-estate gins and craft beers, you are left with a clear view of a drinks business whose main source of revenue is sucking the life out of its customers. And out of anyone unlucky enough to know them. John Stuart Mill’s principle that adults should be free to harm themselves as long as they don’t harm others does not help the alcohol conglomerates. Unlike the trade in illegal drugs, the sale of alcohol is not conducted with violence. Instead, it provokes violence. So much violence that the British Crime Survey estimated half of all violent crime was alcohol related. The partners and children of alcoholics take the hardest hits, a fact we seem to have forgotten. The original feminist movement was well aware of the relationship between booze, rape and abuse. Cristabel Pankhurst wrote against “the great scourge” of men driven by “foul thinking and alcohol” to infect their wives with syphilis, which was incurable in the early 20th century. Josephine Butler, who led the campaign in the 1860s against the forcible genital examination of women, but not men, to see if they were carrying sexually transmitted diseases, was also a temperance campaigner. Their successors do not want prohibition today. Just prudent public health measures: minimum pricing, mandatory health warnings on bottles and an advertising ban. They do not receive the support they deserve because the old knowledge that alcohol is a feminist and socialist issue has all but died. Few want to seem an uncool prude or risk the accusation of being the world’s first Derf (drink exclusionary radical feminist, if I may coin a phrase). Fewer still understand that coolness can kill and the only way to stop the killing is to become a killjoy. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist
18||End of the guitar? Gibson bankruptcy fuels fears for futureBruce Springsteen stood in a black T-shirt on a Broadway stage and talked about when he first discovered the power of the instrument in his hands. “The guitar,” Springsteen said, plucking at a Japanese-made Takamine P6N, his favored acoustic. “It was the key, the sword in the stone, the staff of righteousness. “As my father christened it, ‘that fucking guitar’.” Within the walls of Manhattan’s Walter Kerr theater, where the musician is now six months into his memoiristic Springsteen on Broadway residency, that instrument, the guitar, is secure in its sacred object status. But outside in Times Square, the LED news tickers were telling a different story. On Tuesday, Gibson Brands, Inc – with the biggest product line in the guitar business – filed for bankruptcy, succumbing to an estimated $500m debt load and a failed reinvention in 2014 as a “lifestyle brand”. Troubles in the land of the six-string are not restricted to Gibson. Ten years post-recession, the guitar industry in the US continues to bob, with the 2,633,000 units sold in the United States in 2017 about 5% short of where things stood in 2008, according to Music Trades magazine. The heavyweight retailer on the American scene, Guitar Center, carries $1.6bn in debt. Take into account adverse cultural and economic trends – changing musical tastes, online commerce, the lure of the smartphone and the eclipse of the guitar hero – and whispers begin to circulate about the guitar being on the way out. Unless it is already dead? “The demand for guitars has softened – that’s a story in its own right,” Chris Martin IV, CEO of the legendary acoustic guitar maker CF Martin &amp; Co, told the Guardian. “And Gibson was over-leveraged. But please don’t draw the wrong conclusions. Do not conclude that the guitar is dead. “The guitar’s been around since Mesopotamia, in some way, shape or form.” The historic durability of the instrument, however, is part of the problem with guitars, from a market perspective. Many musicians prefer used ones to new ones. And it’s never been easier to find the right used guitar. “The market has softened. It’s not as vibrant as it was in say the early 2000s,” said Brian Majeski, editor of Music Trades. “We think that an enormous factor in that has been the improved availability of used product, and the rise of a generation used to buying things on the internet.” Reverb.com, an online clearinghouse for musical instruments, will sell between $400m and $500m worth of guitars in 2018, Majeski estimated – “and almost all of them are used”. The Gibson tradition The beginning of the end for Gibson was marked by the $135m acquisition in 2014 of an audio and home entertainment business from the Dutch multinational Philips, accompanied by losing forays into consumer electronics – headphones, speakers, DJ products. “It had nothing to do with the guitar business,” Majeski said of the Gibson bankruptcy. “They bought a consumer electronics business.” Reckless though it may have been, however, Gibson’s downfall is a jarring moment for music fans who love the guitar, who grew up listening to it, and who care deeply about the tradition it represents. The company built jazz guitars for Charlie Christian and Bucky Pizzarelli, flat-top acoustics for artists from the Everly Brothers to Sheryl Crow, and the Les Paul electrics wielded by guitar heroes from Jimmy Page to Neil Young to Slash. While that heterogenous tradition might not be endangered, exactly, it takes up noticeably less cultural bandwidth than it used to, edged aside by software-based pop music, electronic dance music and hip-hop, among other currents. Displacement in music is a constant global phenomenon, said George Murer, a researcher in ethnomusicology at the City University of New York – and no instrument has benefitted so much from changing tastes as the guitar. “The guitar has entered the vernacular of so much neo-traditional music, especially north Africa, the Sahara region, even in Azerbaijan, where at weddings when they play traditional Azeri music, electric guitar is incredibly popular,” Murer said. “Same with the Sahara region, with all the Tuareg and Songhai and south Moroccan Berber and Fulani – the whole range of cultures that have long interacted across the Sahara and had some kind of exchange on the basis of these kind of plucked lutes and fiddles. Now guitar has become the centerpiece of a lot of that repertoire. “I’m pretty sure that global sales of guitars made by Fender, made by Gibson, must be at an all-time high because guitar music globally is just growing and growing.” Ed Sheeran to the rescue Much lamented as guitar sales decline has been the disappearance of the guitar hero – Clapton, Hendrix, Page et alia. Martin said business for its acoustics goes up when prominent guitar talent – think Taylor Swift or Mumford and Sons in the past decade – steps forward. “One of the big demand drivers is whenever you have a pop band playing guitars,” he said. “We all take it when we can get it, but the business doesn’t go away when that’s not happening, it just kind of levels out a little bit.” Happily for the company, Martin devotees include Ed Sheeran, whose signature guitar is manufactured by the company with a list price of $699. “The nice thing about Ed is that he is appealing to a younger customer,” said Martin. “And the guitar he plays is a very affordable Martin, so the younger customer can kind of go, ‘I can afford one of those’.” That population of younger customers who represent the next generation of guitar musicians and fans is surprisingly robust, said Phil Schaffart, a tour and production manager who opened Ground Floor Guitar, a boutique instrument retailer, two years ago in Omaha, Nebraska. “There’s still lots of kids,” he said. “I believe – it’s a little corny for me to talk about it, or maybe it doesn’t make sense or somebody doesn’t feel the same way – but rock and roll is such a real thing in music, it’s like a religion. “And I think that that is very real, and I see that all the time with young kids coming into our store and getting interested in guitar, both girls and boys. “The real main thing is putting it in their hands, making them touch it, making them feel it, and making them believe that ‘I can do this’. People get really excited about that.” Near the end of his show Wednesday night, Springsteen described a recent scene from his life, standing in a kitchen one night with his mother, talking about “all the things that guitar had brought us”. Then he bent his head, lifted his arm and made it sing.
19||Book clinic: what to read on a train journey round EuropeQ: My wife and I are retired and plan to spend June travelling by rail around central Europe and Italy. Can you recommend a few books, not too heavy for our luggage, that we can take with us? Mike Young, York A: Andrew Martin, novelist, nonfiction writer and train enthusiast, whose new novel, The Martian Girl, will be published in July Since the inquirers will be spending a lot of time on trains, I will focus on that (well-chosen) transport mode and on their destination, central Europe and Italy. Central Europe was traversed by the various incarnations of the Orient Express, and we trainspotters like to mention that Murder on the Orient Express (1934) by Agatha Christie is actually set on the Venice Simplon-Orient-Express. The plot is outrageously high concept and the railway detail accurate, Christie being a regular on the OE. In The 8.55 to Baghdad (2004), Andrew Eames traces every possible connection between Christie and the OE route. He gives insights into the queen of crime while encountering heavy scenes in the Balkans and elsewhere. Here is Sofia: “The station was ringed with people in kiosks, peering out through glass grilles patched with cracked Sellotape, like railway priests waiting to hear fare dodgers’ confessions.” Stamboul Train (1932) by Graham Greene is a torrid, cinematic thriller, and the best OE novel. Here is its arrival at Budapest: “He had a flashing glimpse of water between tall grey houses, of lights burning in upper rooms, cut off abruptly by the arch of the station…” Three of the six stories in Open All Night (1922) by Paul Morand have central European railway action. Morand is a problematic figure, being a Nazi sympathiser with a terrific prose style: “The scarlet fruit of the signal fell from its latticed trunk in obedience to the timetable.” Italian Ways (2013) by Tim Parks is about Italian railways and therefore Italian people. Parks has a bathetic eye: “A tiny vineyard, just three rows of a dozen vines each, is choked between two cathedral-sized warehouses of prefabricated concrete panels.” But in the south, the beauty of landscape and weather asserts itself, and is beautifully evoked. If you’ve got a question for Book Clinic submit it below or email bookclinic@observer.co.uk
19||Margo Jefferson: ‘I have always loved Michael Jackson’Margo Jefferson is the author of Negroland: A Memoir, which won a National Book Critics Circle award, (for autobiography) and was shortlisted for the Baillie Gifford prize. Born in Chicago, she lives in New York and has worked as an associate editor for Newsweek, and a book and theatre critic for the New York Times, where she won a Pulitzer prize for criticism. Aged 70, she now teaches at Columbia University School of Arts. Her book On Michael Jackson will be published on 3 May (Granta, £9.99). This book is about the life and work of Michael Jackson, from his early years as a child star to the “freak show” aspects of his image later on. Why write about an already well-documented life? Because I’ve always loved Michael Jackson – first in a “pure fan” way, and then as I got older it became a critic’s fascination. He was the best performer at his peak – an all-encompassing dancing, singing artist in the theatrical tradition of Fred Astaire, Sammy Davis Jr, Jackie Wilson, James Brown, with an acute sense of the mise en scène. He craved omniscient superstar status – a need to top himself with more record sales, bigger audiences, than the last time. By the time I was writing this book, he had become emblematic of complicated dilemmas, cultural obsessions, racial, gender and body metamorphoses. This book was first published in the US in 2006, three years before Jackson died. It’s now out in the UK with an updated introduction. Has your outlook on his life, and his trial for child molestation, changed since then? Yes and no. I can now feel my own struggles in this book. I was asking questions that weren’t being asked then except through underground gossip routes – on his vitiligo, on the alleged sex with little boys – to which I could get no firm answers. The final chapter, on his trial, I’d want to think through more carefully now, especially in the context of #MeToo and the Time’s Up movement, and to grapple with the asymmetries of the alleged sex abuse. You write that Michael Jackson, since his death, has been rehabilitated into the music canon – that “he got it all back with his art” after his death. Do you think we can separate his music, wonderful as it was, from the allegations that dogged him? No, we can’t. But his death allowed the canon simultaneously to reacknowledge the greatness of his art and to look at him as a damaged, harmed, and harming person. I have to live with, and keep analysing, this contradiction. In deciding I love Michael Jackson I take it all in – his music, the crimes he may have committed, his inner turmoil. I need the pleasure and the complications he gives me. As F Scott Fitzgerald said: “The test of a truly first-rate intelligence is to hold two opposing ideas in mind at the same time and still retain the ability to function.” Jackson the child star was thrown into an adult world and abused by his father but you also call him a pioneer. Can he be both victim and pioneer? I’ve long been interested in child stars. It’s a fascination that goes back to watching Shirley Temple, but in his case, a gifted child star becomes an equally gifted adult, and a ground-breaking figure. Was he a victim? He was conscripted by a domineering father into very tough, demanding work. There are accounts of the hours of rehearsing he did and the travelling. But he was also pioneering. The black child in American culture tended to be seen as someone too young to be dangerous yet. He was the male version of Topsy from Uncle Tom’s Cabin or the hired “piccaninny”. What he managed to do was to transform that “pic” into an adorable, all-American black boy. You call the adult Jackson a shape-shifter, playing with notions of gender and race. Would he have been more at home today when biology is increasingly being seen and accepted as distinct from gender? Possibly. He was interested in mixing musical genres so he mixed pop and rock with sentimental Tin Pan Alley, and it was the same with his interior and exterior construction of himself. But he was also very cautious and reticent in talking about gender and sexuality. He didn’t make daring decisions in the way Madonna did, who was willing to be openly transgressive. He was always playing the innocent. What was the first Michael Jackson record you bought? I Want You Back by The Jackson 5. It was when they were still putting out 45s. I was dancing to it at every party so I bought the record. His fans then were people in their 20s who’d grown up on Motown but saw the politics of Berry Gordy’s Motown as so middle-of-the-road. Is there a black singer alive today breaking as many boundaries? I don’t know yet if they’re breaking the same kind of ground – someone like Kendrick Lamar is addressing race in interesting ways. And Beyoncé is combining music with the theatre and dance tradition – but I have to wait and see. What kind of music do you listen to? It depends on the time of day, my mood, what I’m writing. I’ll listen to classical music, jazz, songs from the great American song book, Nigerian pop, minimalism. It’s an unholy mix. Is the US a better place to live than it used to be for black Americans? It is in terms of culture. If you look at the arts pages of the New York Times, which are very mainstream, a variety of artists will be represented – Latino, black, Asian. It’s the same with Hollywood, TV and literature. There are nonwhite legacies and traditions pushing forward and being acknowledged in ways they haven’t been before. But it’s a fraught time. Injustices are being acknowledged but the push-back is terrifying. What’s the last really great book you read? A book of poems by Layli Long Soldier called Whereas. She is so linguistically sophisticated. The collection is a combination of poetry as personal, family and psychic narrative, with poetry as cultural and political narrative. Which novelists and nonfiction writers working today do you most admire? Now that I’m no longer a beat critic, I look for books that provide intellectual stimulation or that might be interesting to teach. Often I’m looking for writers who work in the same form as me, so I like the essayist experimentation of Yiyun Li, and I like Claudia Rankine, Maggie Nelson, Fred Moten. I follow critics, too: Darryl Pinckney in the New York Review of Books and Jacqueline Rose in the London Review of Books. I’ve recently read White Tears by Hari Kunzru, which I loved, and Ayòbámi Adébáyò’s Stay With Me – her writing is a great pleasure. I like reading Nell Zink and I’m just starting Rachel Kushner’s first novel, Telex from Cuba, because I thought her second, The Flamethrowers, was amazing. Do you prefer to read on paper or a screen? I still like to read the old-fashioned way but I do read on screen when I travel. I have an iPad and I’m happy to download books but in my house and on the subway I still like reading physical books. I love the way they look and to hold them. I still get the newspaper delivered to my door. Which classic novel are you most ashamed not to have read? So many. A few years ago I did War and Peace. That helped assuage my guilt. To order a copy of On Michael Jackson for £8.49 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99.
20||'I was capturing living history': Jim Grover on his photographs of south London's WindrushersAmid the furore surrounding the mistreatment of Caribbean-born British citizens by the Home Office appears an exhibition, Windrush: Portrait of a Generation, to be shown in central London, just across the water from Westminster. Jim Grover, a documentary photographer, set out to capture the daily lives and customs of the Windrush generation in the heart of the south London community where he lives. The project began in June 2017 in Grover’s church, where a parishioner invited him to see the clubs where he played “bones” or dominoes. “It was a revelation to me,” says Grover. “I had no idea that Caribbean migrants met three times a week for dominoes in Clapham, where I’ve lived for 30 years.” Intrigued, he began to visit domino clubhouses in Clapham, Croydon and Wandsworth. At first, people were wary of the stranger with a camera, but soon Grover was welcomed into homes, community centres, places of worship and even funerals. Grover discovered a much more important story waiting to be told: “I wanted to capture a Caribbean way of life that most likely won’t be around for ever.” He adds: “I feel so privileged to have been able to photograph the distinctive lives of this lovely community.” Timed to coincide with the 70th anniversary of the arrival of Empire Windrush at Tilbury in June 1948, the exhibition incorporates a number of interviews Grover conducted with Caribbean-born UK residents. “I knew I had to track down at least one surviving ‘Windrusher’ if I were to do justice to this story,” he says. His research took him to 92-year-old Alford Gardner in Leeds, who served in the RAF during the war as a motor mechanic. Having paid the standard £28 to cross the Atlantic on the Windrush, Gardner found work in Leeds with commercial engineers. Inevitably, as a Caribbean “room-seeker” back then he experienced racism (“Room to Let: Regret No Kolored”, ran the typical advert). Usually, though, there was no violence, as any aggressors fled once challenged. “I’ve lived a brilliant life here,” he told Grover. “It was supposed to be tough, but I never really had tough times.” In migrating here, the Windrush citizens believed they were exercising their birthright. “UK – Right of Abode” was stamped in their Commonwealth-issue passports. Teachers, lawyers, writers, artists and field labourers came in response to a recruitment drive and because they hoped for a better life. Not all of the Windrushers had intended to remain “in foreign”, but gradually it dawned on them that the dream of return was just that: they were here to stay. Curated by Katy Barron, the exhibition combines personal stories from first- and second-generation Caribbeans with a series of 12 themed photo-stories that, together, seek to describe the “totality” of their lives today. It explores the community, faith, love, death and friendship; it looks at the lives of metalworkers, engineers, churchgoers and former NHS nurses. With his genial manner, Grover was granted access to photograph a Jamaican funeral and its Nine Night mortuary custom, where friends and relatives gather at the deceased’s house for food and drink. The tradition is fast disappearing among the young, but there is life in it yet. (As they say in Jamaica: “No call a man dead til you bury him.”) “Jamaican spirituality is such a beautiful thing,” says Grover, who wanted to capture Caribbean religious respect for a life well lived. His previous photographic exhibitions have documented a year in the life of a Clapham vicar, called Of Things Unseen, and the busy life of a neighbourhood, in last year’s 48 Hours on Clapham High Street. He shoots with a wide-angle lens: “That means getting in really close. At the Jamaican funeral I was literally standing at the grave’s edge. It required a good deal of trust.” For this project, Grover took photographs on 70 occasions. “In order to capture a dominoes match and its after-party, I sometimes had my camera out for long stretches – seven or eight hours. At other times, I just sat and listened to stories and watched life unfold in front of me.” The photographs are poignant and intimate. We see calypso-mento dancers in their “felts” (fedora hats) and domino hotshots banging down tiles. At crowded festive dance parties, or “bashments”, he photographed the elderly moving and flexing to jazz-tinged ska, rock-steady and reggae. The dapper Bockie, a regular at the Cosmo club in Wandsworth, told him: “Our generation… we’re rocking our bodies in our chairs.” Between 1948 and 1969, the formative years of the NHS, an estimated 5,000 Jamaican women came to the UK to work as nurses, while many others worked in different NHS roles. Monica Blair, one of Grover’s 12 photo subjects, arrived from Jamaica in 1964, aged 21, to marry Soney and worked as a cleaner at St Thomas’ hospital near Westminster, before becoming a seamstress. With her deep religious faith, Monica attends the same Anglican church in Clapham as Grover. In his photographs, she ministers communion wine and pores over a well-thumbed Bible, a gift to her as a teenager in Jamaica. By his own admission a “perfectionist” as a photographer, Grover scoured the south London streets in search of one of the famed “front rooms” and found one in Brixton. Once a part of every Jamaican home, front rooms typically contained framed family photographs, a picture of Jesus walking on water, sofas covered in protective plastic, leopardskin rugs and bouquets of artificial flowers. Often, a gold, plastic model of Big Ben or some other shooting-gallery prize graced a giant cocktail cabinet with a Formica top. The rooms are nearly all gone now. “They speak of a bygone era,” says Grover. “Sadly, to the second- and third-generations they’re just clutter.” Towards the end of his project, Grover was invited to photograph a Friday “open house” typical of Caribbean life. In the Brixton home of Hermine Grocia, as many as four generations gather each week for food, chat, a quiz or a game of Scrabble. “I wasn’t even sure I had space for it in the exhibition,” he says, “but I am so pleased to have spent the evening with Hermine and 21 of her family. It was so moving to see this wonderful family be so loving, relaxed and connected… they get together every Friday. It was the last thing I shot, and it ended the project for me on such a high.” Hermine met her future husband, Lester, on the Kingston wharf in 1959, just as they were about to sail for “Missus Queen’s” country. Like most of the Windrush generation, she had come to the UK determined to work. Grover’s moving and often beautiful photographs show the other side of the current Windrush scandal: they celebrate a community and a generation that contributed immeasurably to our cultural life. “The more I immersed myself in this project,” Grover says, “the more I realised that I was capturing living history. As this generation passes away, and the successive generations pursue their own lives here, some of these traditions will inevitably weaken. It felt imperative to document this way of life and to record these stories before it becomes too late.” Windrush: Portrait of a Generation is at gallery@Oxo, Oxo Tower Wharf, London SE1, 23 May-10 June. Ian Thomson’s The Dead Yard: A Story of Modern Jamaica, is published by Faber Visit the website for the Windrush: Portrait of a Generation photo essay
13||Rochdale pull off great escape, Barnet drop out of Football LeagueLeague One Joe Thompson’s second-half winner completed Rochdale’s fairytale escape from relegation as they saw off play-bound Charlton to leapfrog Oldham on the final day. Rochdale were 11 points from safety in February – albeit with games in hand – but Thompson, playing again after overcoming cancer twice in three years, scored to complete a dramatic escape from relegation. Oldham drew at already-relegated Northampton, taking the lead through Sam Edmundson only to end the first half behind. Thomas Haymer’s equaliser was set to keep them up until Thompson struck for Rochdale. The Latics, inaugural members of the Premier League in 1992, drop into the fourth tier for the first time since 1971. Will Grigg’s 19th goal of the season earned victory for Wigan at Doncaster to seal the League One title. Blackburn won 2-1 against Oxford but had to settle for second place despite accruing 96 points. Charlton finished sixth as Plymouth failed to find the big win they needed to scrape into the play-offs, instead slumping to a 5-2 defeat at Gillingham. Scunthorpe drew 1-1 with Bradford to finish fifth and will play Rotherham, who beat Blackpool 1-0, in the play-offs. Third-placed Shrewsbury lost 1-0 at home to relegated MK Dons. League Two Barnet have been relegated from the Football League for the third time in their history despite a last-day 3-0 victory over Chesterfield at the Hive. John Akinde’s goal just before half-time set Martin Allen’s side up for the win they needed, with Richard Brindley and Alex Nicholls adding late goals against already-relegated opponents. The win proved to be in vain as Morecambe picked up a 0-0 draw at Coventry. Both teams needed a point to achieve their respective goals – safety for the visitors, and a play-off place for Coventry. The Sky Blues also secured their first top-six position in any division since 1970. Lincoln City also secured a play-off spot in their first season back in the fourth tier with a 1-1 draw against Yeovil. Exeter will face the Imps in the semi-finals after wrapping up fourth place, Robbie Simpson getting the winner against Colchester. Notts County will play Coventry after drawing 0-0 with promoted Luton. Mansfield needed a win to have any chance of sneaking into the top seven but fell behind early to Crawley and could only draw, with Kane Hemmings equalising just past the hour. Swindon beat the champions, Accrington Stanley, 3-0 at the County Ground and finished ninth. Finishing with a flourish were Cambridge, who thrashed Port Vale 5-0 with five different scorers, and Grimsby, who continued their good end-of-season form with a 3-0 win at Forest Green, JJ Hooper getting a hat-trick.
16||Thousands of Scottish independence supporters march through GlasgowTens of thousands of independence supporters marched through the streets of Glasgow, aiming to bring Scotland’s largest city to a standstill. Marchers draped in Saltires waved flags and played bagpipes and drums as they walked from Kelvingrove to Glasgow Green on Saturday. The event is one of a series being held across Scotland by All Under One Banner. The pro-independence organisation aims to march at regular intervals “until Scotland is free”. “Glasgow city centre will be brought to a standstill as our independence march traverses through en route to George Square,” one member of the organisation said on a fundraising page before the event. The march achieved a high turnout. Police Scotland estimated that 35,000 people joined the procession, which ended with speeches and music on the green. A small number of pro-union campaigners met the procession to counter its message. Stuart McMillan, a MSP for the Scottish National party, wrote on Twitter that he had received abuse including “a azi salute and the middle finger” from pro-union campaigners. Amanda McGinley took part in the march with her daughter Ellie Casson, with both women sporting Saltire bows in their hair. “We’re just basically fighting for the cause. We’re serial marchers,” she said. Lesley Crawford said she had come to show support. “There is still a lot of people who are still campaigning for a vote for independence, and we’re not going away,” she said. Although the 2014 referendum led to a 55% vote in favour of staying in the UK,and 45% against, marcher Geoff Craig was confident independence campaigners could win a second referendum. He said that level of support for Scotland leaving the UK was “a good place to start from” and that backing for independence was edging up.
21||Tories would fail their Ofsted test, Angela Rayner tells teachersThe shadow education secretary, Angela Rayner, has attacked the government’s record on schools, telling a conference the Tories “wouldn’t survive their own Ofsted inspection”. Rayner, who left school pregnant at 16 with poor grades, told the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT) annual conference that the government’s record on education has meant targets for teacher recruitment had not been met for five years. She said more teachers were now leaving than joining the profession and 500,000 children were in “supersize” classes, while teachers have had their pay capped. “I went to a so-called failing school and it was that school, those teachers, that headteacher, those support staff, all of the people there that made me the resilient person that can stand in front of you today, that has become the education secretary elect and has done so well,” she said. “Because you taught me about making sure that you respect yourself and you are valued and loved regardless of what other people say. That’s what good schools do.” To applause from delegates at the conference in Liverpool, she said the Tories “wouldn’t survive their own Ofsted inspection”. Rayner said Labour was committed to creating a “cradle to grave” national education service, “a meaningful and radical transformation of our education system”, and asked the NAHT for its help to shape the policy. Rayner said funding spent on education was money well spent and an investment for the future. “People say, well that’s ridiculous, how can you afford it, Labour’s ‘spend, spend, spend’. But you know what? We are spending so much money on making children and young people feel bad and then catch up at a later date in adolescence, where we are having to spend money in the wrong place,” she said. The general secretary of NAHT, Paul Whiteman, said: “We’ll be engaging with Labour’s consultation on their national education service and their other policies which affect young people. “As I said in my conference speech, education is the best route to a happy and fulfilling future for our young people, and the only silver bullet to solving the problems in our society.”
13||West Brom 1-0 Spurs, Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea, Barnet down and more – as it happenedThat’s about it for today’s Clockwatch. We’ll have more match reports on the website shortly. Thanks for your company, bye! Ed Aarons was at the Vitality Stadium on behalf of you, dearest reader. Here’s his report from Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea. Here’s a bit more on Stoke’s relegation from your friend and mine, Nick Miller. West Brom’s matchwinner Jake Livermore speaks “I don’t know what to say really. We’ve got that never-say-die attitude back. All we can do is take it game by game. We’ve been together all season despite our results. Hopefully we’ll get another win and see where it takes us.” “West Brom,” says Bill Hargreaves, “are going to do a Leicester and with the Premier League next year.” “So Rob,” says Kevin Porter. “I took your advice and bet my mortagage on Coverntry and Morecambe ending 0-0. And after 10 minutes of nail biting anxiety that I might lose my home, I’m now £2.45 better off. Gee thanks, buddy. “ We’ll have reaction and match reports shortly. In the meantime, there’s plenty more live football for you to follow. You won’t believe the scores! And here’s a round up of the main news so far Stoke have been relegated to the Championship, but West Brom are still hanging on by a fingernail Barnet have been relegated to the National League The four teams in the League Two play-offs are Exeter, Notts County, Coventry and Lincoln My bloody Fantasy Football hopes are in tatters These are the final scores in today’s featured games Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-2 West Ham Watford 2-1 Newcastle West Brom 1-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 3-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 1-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 1-0 Kilmarnock Coventry and Morecambe have played out a mutually agreeable 0-0 draw, which means Barnet are relegated to the National League. West Brom have done it again! They still need a miracle, but it’s been a preposterous run under Darren Moore: 11 points from five games. West Ham are surely safe after a terrific win at the King Power Stadium, in which Mark Noble scored a beautiful volley. A tame performance from Swansea, who will slip into the relegation places if Southampton win at Everton tonight. Barnet did their job, but they are going down because of the draw between Coventry and Morecambe. A good win for Watford, which ensures they will be playing Premier League football next season. I think Jake Livermore scored the winner against his old club, though nobody is quite sure who got the last touch. West Brom have scored!!! They are staying up for a bit longer! Alex Nicholls scores a superb goal to extend Barnet’s lead. They need four more in the last two minutes to move above Morecambe on goal difference. Coventry and Morecambe both declared at 0-0 after about an hour of their game. Swindon 3-0 Accrington James Dunne of Swindon and Jimmy Dunne of Accrington have both been sent off at the same time, presumably after an argument about Christian name abbreviations. David Bates has scored an important late goal at Ibrox. As a result, Rangers still have realistic hopes of finishing second. West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Daniel Sturridge is 28 years old. Barnet are going down with honour. Richard Brindley’s goal has secured a fifth victory in the last eight games under Martin Allen. The substitute Tom Pett has equalised for Lincoln! A draw would be enough to put them in the play-offs with Coventry, Exeter and Notts County. West Brom 0-0 Spurs West Brom, who need a win to stay up, have taken off both their forwards. Mansfield 1-1 Crawley Mansfield have had a goal disallowed for offside. As things stand, a winning goal would put them into the play-offs ahead of Lincoln. Coventry 0-0 Morecambe You can put the mortgage on a 0-0 draw. We’ve been here before. These are the latest scores in our featured games Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-2 West Ham Watford 2-1 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 1-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 1-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur Harry Kane is denied by a brilliant save from ... Hugo Lloris. That would have been a strange own goal. “Does he know own-goals don’t count towards the Golden Boot?” sniggers Matt Le Tissier on Sky Sports. West Brom 0-0 Tottenham West Brom are playing with 10 men behind the ball, diligently holding on to the draw that will secure relegation. Coventry 0-0 Morecambe With both teams needing only a draw, the match has started to become a bit of a non-event. Barnet won’t be happy but it looks like they are going down to the National League. That’s a big goal at the One Call Stadium. Mansfield are level, and one more goal could put them in the play-offs. If they win and Lincoln lose - they are 1-0 down to Yeovil - Mansfield will be in the play-offs. “For fans of Scottish football, deciding what the worst game you’ve ever seen is easy,” says Simon McMahon. “It’s always the next one.” West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur Danny Rose is booked for putting hands on Allan Nyom, who visits the canvas in absurd fashion. West Ham are surely staying up. The captain Mark Noble has doubled their lead with a storming long-range volley at Filbert Street. “Bit harsh to cite this game as evidence of Spurs’ impending decline,” says SF Devereux. “Thanks to WBA’s turgid anti-football, that first 45 minutes might make this the worst game I’ve ever watched, beating the long-time previous holder - a 1980s charity game between a Winsford United XI and the cast of Brookside.” What about that Jimmy Corkhill, eh? What a beautiful false nine he was. Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Steve Cook has missed a great chance to make it 2-0, heading over from close range. Newcastle, who were beyond inept in the first half, are back in the game at Vicarage Road thanks to a classy half-volley from Ayoze Perez. It’s all quiet at the start of the second half. Thus, I have precisely nothing to say except that these are the latest scores in our featured matches. Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-1 West Ham Watford 2-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 1-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock West Brom 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur Salomon Rondon, usually so deadly in front of goal, has missed a great chance to put the home side ahead at Stoney Lane. Peep peep! The second halves are under way. Barnet or Morecambe are 45 minutes away from the National League; West Brom need a goal or they will be going down to the Championship. Half-time chit-chat “Classic Machiavellian two-point plan from Benitez: get enough points to be safe, then be rubbish for the rest of the season to say ‘well what can I do, we need investment,’” says Shaun Wilkinson. “Genius!” “Holy heat maps you should be watching the game at The Hawthorns,” says JR in Illinois. “Other than two saves by Foster and an Eriksen free kick that hit the wall West Brom have literally not touched the ball. (That is a factually correct statement now that the word ‘literally’ has been defined as meaning both literally and not literally.) Looks like the fans are being treated to one final dose of Pulis-ball before they get relegated. This is really something else.” That’s the end of a fairly quiet opening 45 minutes in the big games around Britain. As things stand West Brom are going down, and so are Barnet, but it’s all exquisitely tight. These are the half-time scores in our featured games. Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-1 West Ham Watford 2-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two Barnet 1-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock Barnet are doing their job. A win will complete an astonishing escape if Coventry beat Morecambe. It’s currently 0-0 at Highfield Road. Spurs finished last season in brutal form, winning their last two games 6-1 and 7-1. This season is petering out somewhat, not helped by Harry Kane’s poor form. I wonder whether we might eventually reflect on that FA Cup semi-final defeat as the end of an era. The latest scores in our featured games Premier League Bournemouth 1-0 Swansea Leicester 0-1 West Ham Watford 2-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two (selected fixtures) Barnet 0-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL (selected fixtures) Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock “Currently 0-0 between Cove and Cowdenbeath,” boasts Simon McMahon. “If it’s drama Ian Copestake is after he may be interested in a play I’m currently working on about Scottish football, called The Comedy of Basic Schoolboy Errors. It’s a tragicomedy.” It’s a tragedy, isn’t it. Paul Dummett is absurdly penalised for a foul on fresh air - but Troy Deeney’s penalty is saved by Martin Dubravka! Bournemouth wanted a penalty - but it doesn’t matter because they have scored from the free-kick. It was worked neatly to Ryan Fraser, whose shot took a deflection and beat Fabianski. That’s exceedingly good news for Southampton. Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea A bit of controversy at the Vitality Stadium, where Callum Wilson is fouled right on the line of the penalty area. Bournemouth want a penalty; the referee gives a free-kick. Shortly after hitting the bar himself, the talismanic Marko Arnautovic sets up Joao Mario for the opening goal. This would be a huge win for West Ham. Matt Green has missed a great chance to equalise for Lincoln. His penalty was saved and he smacked the rebound against the bar. West Brom 0-0 Spurs Harry Kane has been denied by an excellent save from Ben Foster at the Hawthorns. Andre Gray heads into an empty net to extend Watford’s lead over a listless Newcastle. Watford are staying up. Barnet continue to dominate Chesterfield at the Hive, but it’s still 0-0. They need to win to have any chance of staying up. These are the latest scores in today’s, er, featured matches. Just count those goals! Premier League Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea Leicester 0-0 West Ham Watford 1-0 Newcastle West Brom 0-0 Spurs League Two (selected fixtures) Barnet 0-0 Chesterfield Coventry 0-0 Morecambe Lincoln 0-1 Yeovil Mansfield 0-1 Crawley SPL (selected fixtures) Aberdeen 0-0 Hibernian Rangers 0-0 Kilmarnock Leicester 0-0 West Ham West Ham are dominating at the King Power Stadium, albeit without creating many clear chances. It’s all a bit quiet in the Premier League, with just the one goal at Vicarage Road. Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea Swansea are under a lot of pressure at the Vitality Stadium. Andrew Surman has missed an excellent chance for Bournemouth. Still no goals at the bottom of League Two: it’s Barnet 0-0 Chesterfield and Coventry 0-0 Morecambe. Bournemouth 0-0 Swansea Asmir Begovic has denied Swansea with an excellent double save. If Swansea win today you’d have to fancy them to stay up; their last two games are at home to Southampton and Stoke. Bad news for Lincoln, who are hanging on to the last play-off place in League Two. They need a draw to ensure a place, though they can afford to lose if Mansfield fail to win at home to Crawley. This is the stage of the season when everyone has one particular phrase to hand: “as it stands”. With that in mind, I’d like you to consider the as it stands table on the last day of the Divizia C, Seria VIII-a 1983-84 season. An important goal in the battle for League Two play-off places. Mansfield, who need to win to have any chance of sneaking into the top seven, have gone behind at home to Crawley. “Hi Rob,” says Felix Wood. “Why doesn’t Will Hughes get mentioned for England? We’re not exactly overwhelmed with two-footed, hard-running creative midfielders. Surely must be worth a punt, especially if the alternatives are Shelvey and Livermore.” He’s got the potential to play international football but that’s all it is at this stage, no? A full season in the Premier League would help. “One effect of Stoke getting relegated is three extra points for my Arsenal next season (though given our away form, that’s not really guaranteed),” says AB Parker. “No more away trips to the Britannia, and Ramsey getting booed for getting his leg broken. I have a few friends who are Stoke fans who I feel bad for, but their general behaviour towards Ramsey and chants about him walking with a limp will not be missed.” Watford will be mathematically safe if they win, though realistically they can afford to lose 472-1. An early goal at Vicarage Road, where Roberto Pereyra has curled Watford into the lead and completely jiggered my Fantasy Football title challenge. “Having been eye deep in proofreading, I need some drama to distract me,” says Ian Copestake. “I would usually follow Arnautovic around as I think he is top and could be top, top. But something perverse draws me to West Brom.” The 3pm matches are about to kick off. Let’s do some football! “Hey Rob,” says JR in Illinois. “As a West Brom fan I got all my complaining out of the way already. I wanted Pulis out before it was fashionable. I was always willing to risk going down if it meant not watching Pulis-ball. What I wasn’t willing to do was ever accept Alan Pardew as manager. That was a sickenating slap in the face. But now that it’s just about over there’s nothing of immediate concern to complain about, which is kind of a weird feeling. At least the Baggies weren’t first to get relegated!” “Afternoon Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “A contender for Clockwatch Guest Fixture of the Week must be Cove Rangers v Cowdenbeath in the first leg of the play off to decide which of those teams will be playing senior league football next season. Nothing against Cove, but Cowdenbeath’s 137-year history is on the line here, with a realistic chance of the club folding should they lose over the two legs. Plus my brother in law is a fan of the Blue Brazil, though he was at Tannadice last night to see United make it through to the Scottish Premiership play off semi final by beating Dunfermline. By the way, the United keeper injured himself performing a cartwheel to celebrate United’s equaliser and had to be carried off. I wonder what Jim McLean would have thought about that?” “No Hart or Chicharito on the bench for West Ham,” notes Ian Sargeant. “Story?” Hernandez has a knee injury. Hart is, officially at least, suffering with illness. After 10 years of Premier League overachievement, Stoke have gone back to the Championship after a 2-1 defeat at home to Crystal Palace. Follow the reaction with Scott Murray. West Brom v Spurs team news West Brom (4-4-2) Foster; Nyom, Dawson, Hegazi, Gibbs; Phillips, Livermore, Brunt, McClean; Rondon, Rodriguez. Spurs (3-4-2-1) Lloris; Alderweireld, Sanchez, Vertonghen; Trippier, Wanyama, Alli, Rose; Eriksen, Lamela; Kane. Palace have taken the lead at the bet365 Stadium, which means Stoke are going down as things stand. Join Scott Murray for more news. You won’t believe the score! Watford v Newcastle team news Watford (4-4-2) Karnezis; Janmaat, Cathcart, Kabasele, Holebas; Hughes, Doucoure, Capoue, Pereyra; Gray, Deeney. Newcastle (4-2-3-1) Dubravka; Manquillo, Lascelles, Lejeune, Dummett; Shelvey, Diame; Murphy, Perez, Kenedy; Gayle. Leicester v West Ham team news Leicester (4-4-1-1) Hamer; Benalouane, Morgan, Maguire, Fuchs; Mahrez, Silva, Iborra, Choudhury; Diabate; Vardy. West Ham (3-4-2-1) Adrian; Rice, Ogbonna, Cresswell; Zabaleta, Kouyate, Noble, Masuaku; Joao Mario, Lanzini; Arnautovic. Bournemouth v Swansea team news Bournemouth (3-4-3) Begovic; Francis, S Cook, Ake; Fraser, L Cook, Surman, Daniels; King, Wilson, Pugh. Swansea (4-4-2) Fabianski; van der Hoorn, Fernandez, Mawson, Olsson; Dyer, Ki, Carroll, Roberts; A Ayew, J Ayew. Crystal Palace have equalised at the Whatever Stoke’s Stadium is Called These Days Stadium, which is terrible news for Stoke. Scott Murray has the latest. SPL There’s a huge game at Pittodrie. Second-placed Aberdeen host Hibs, who are two places and three points behind. Rangers, in third, are at home to Kilmarnock, though Steven Gerrard will not be in charge until the end of the season. League Two The big games are at the bottom, where either Barnet or Morecambe will be relegated to the National League. Barnet are two points behind with an inferior goal difference, so they need to win at home to Chesterfield, who are already relegated, and hope Morecambe lose at Coventry. There is plenty for Coventry to play for - they need a point to ensure a play-off place. If Barnet survive, it will be one of the greatest escapes. Here are all today’s League Two fixtures, and this is the league table as it stands. Championship and League One Nothing to see here: the final Championship games are tomorrow, and the final League One games kick off at 5.30pm tonight. The Premier League There are four 3pm kick-offs, all involving teams who could still be relegated. Bournemouth v Swansea Leicester v West Ham Watford v Newcastle West Brom v Spurs The most important game is Swansea’s trip to Bournemouth, though West Ham could still be dragged into the filth. Bournemouth and Watford are not mathematically safe either. West Brom are already breast deep in the filth and will go down if they don’t beat Spurs today. And if Stoke beat Crystal Palace in the early game, West Brom will be relegated before kick off. If you want do the mathematics yourself, here’s the Premier League table. It’s business time. To some, that phrase might stimulate unwanted images of, say, Mick Hucknall consumed by lascivious desperation, exhaling erratically in all directions, but here we speak only of football. It’s the business end of the season, the penultimate weekend in the Premier League and the final day of the regular season in League Ones and Two. I’ll be keeping several eyes on the important 3pm kick-offs across Britain, more of which anon. In the meantime, you can follow Stoke’s must-win game at home to Crystal Palace with Scott Murray.
13||Bournemouth leave Swansea teetering after Ryan Fraser seals victoryIf Swansea are to survive this season of highs and lows, then they are going to have to do it the hard way. Ryan Fraser’s first-half strike was enough to inflict a third successive defeat on Carlos Carvalhal’s side, who have lost form just when it matters most. From a position of relative security a few weeks ago, they are now in serious danger of slipping through the trapdoor. At least their manager could console himself with the fact that, with Tuesday’s crucial home fixture against Southampton and another against already-relegated Stoke City to come, Swansea’s fate remains in their own hands. Yet on this evidence, after a seventh match in a row without a victory, they could be on borrowed time, even if Carvalhal appeared relaxed about the nerve-wracking week he has ahead. “I’m not worried because we depend on ourselves,” insisted the Portuguese. “When I arrived, if I had said at that moment that we would have two games at home left to stay in the Premier League, then nobody would have believed it. When you have something in your hands, let’s do it. At the Liberty we are strong and the fans can make a big impact. When we depend on ourselves we can do it all the time. We don’t need to hear about other teams on the radio or on television.” He added: “Tuesday will be a game that will decide a lot of things – we’ve known about that since I arrived. I believe we will stay in the Premier League.” Given that his side had failed to win on the road since the victory over Watford in his first match after replacing Paul Clement at the end of December, it was no surprise to see Carvalhal opt for a safety-first approach to his starting lineup against Bournemouth. Perhaps with the showdown with Southampton in mind, he opted to leave Sam Clucas and Kyle Naughton out to give them a chance to be ready for Tuesday. With their own Premier League status for another season virtually confirmed even before kick-off despite Eddie Howe’s protestations to the contrary, there was a carnival atmosphere for Bournemouth’s last home game of the campaign, on a beautiful day on the south coast. The home side’s intent was clear from the start and they almost took the lead inside the first 90 seconds when Federico Fernández did well to deny Callum Wilson a clear-cut chance. Mike van der Hoorn then should have put Swansea ahead in the 12th minute, after an excellent free-kick routine, but Asmir Begovic was there to deny him. Wilson was the next to waste an opportunity after a delightful ball across goal from Fraser, but, prompted by Lewis Cook’s industry in midfield, Bournemouth continued to dominate proceedings. Yet Swansea, and Alfie Mawson in particular, were the architects of their own downfall when they fell behind eight minutes before half-time. A moment’s hesitation from the defender allowed Wilson to nip in front of him and Mawson was lucky referee Kevin Friend did not point to the spot after bringing down his opponent just inside the box. He was the first to react to Bournemouth’s quickly taken free-kick, but could only divert Fraser’s shot past a helpless Lukasz Fabianski with his head. Jordan Ayew had the chance to equalise immediately, after excellent interplay with his older brother, but his shot went embarrassingly wide of the target. The second half also began with Ayew going close, although, this time, he at least forced Begovic into another save after creating space for himself. An increasingly fretful Carvalhal paced the touchline like a man possessed whenever Bournemouth came close to threatening at the other end, with Steve Cook wasting a great chance from Joshua King’s cross. The manager threw on Tammy Abraham in place of the ineffective Nathan Dyer and the Chelsea loanee at least gave Swansea a platform from which to build attacks, even if no real chances of note actually materialised. Nathan Aké could have put Carvalhal out of his misery 15 minutes from time, but he headed straight at Fabianski when well placed, while Wilson will be wondering how he didn’t convert late on after a point-blank save from the Polish goalkeeper. “I think we will score – I’m not really worried because we have players who can score, even if they have not been scoring for the past few games,” said Carvalhal. Swansea fans will be hoping some of their manager’s confidence rubs off on his players over the next 48 hours.
13||Paul Lambert says Stoke sleepwalked towards relegation but will returnPaul Lambert said Stoke City sleepwalked into trouble after their relegation from the Premier League was confirmed by their 2-1 home defeat by Crystal Palace. The loss condemns Stoke to the Championship after a decade in the top flight, with Lambert unable to save them after he was appointed to replace Mark Hughes in January, taking over with the team in 18th. They have won only one of Lambert’s 14 games in charge but he suggested the damage was done before he arrived. “Your season starts in July,” he said. When you don’t get results you sleepwalk into situations you never want to be and we never had enough. I’m gutted for everybody, because it’s a brilliant club. When it rebuilds it will be really strong.” An error by Ryan Shawcross, club captain and the only player left from when Stoke won promotion to the top flight in 2008, gifted Crystal Palace their late winner and he looked close to tears after the final whistle. “It didn’t happen over one game,” Shawcross said. “We’ve not been good enough all season, and ultimately that’s down to the players.” Scoring goals and an inability to hold on to leads when they did find the net have been two of the most obvious causes for Stoke’s relegation, something Lambert acknowledged. “It’s people being anxious, worried about what might happen when we’ve got the lead,” he said, when asked about the 12 points they have surrendered from winning positions since his appointment. “That’s what we’ve got,” he said, about their striking options. “The top end of the pitch, right across it, I don’t think it’s been good enough. We lacked that natural instinct of a goalscorer. Not just a goalscorer, but creativity as well. I don’t think we’re well balanced in that area.” Lambert admitted Stoke would have needed to rebuild even if they had survived, a process that will begin after their final game of the season, against Swansea next weekend. “The football club will come back fighting because of the support it’s got behind it,” he said. “The football team should mirror the supporters.”
10||Teachers to protest at Kentucky Derby, a symbol of state's inequalityTeachers’ union activists in a state that saw a dramatic strike last month plan to protest at the running of the Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs on Saturday. After last month’s Kentucky teachers’ strike, the state Republican majority chose to take control of the heavily black Jefferson county public school system, based in the Louisville area. Governor Matt Bevin said it was because of concerns about finances. Union leaders say Bevin is punishing teachers for striking. “That sure looks like pure retribution to us,” said National Education Association president Lily Eskelsen García. “Here you have Kentucky lawmakers angry that those upstart teachers demanded that something better is done for school funding and their students.” To many activists, the Kentucky Derby and its crowd of dignitaries, including Bevin, represent everything wrong with what some consider still a racially divided, Jim Crow state. “Kentucky does an extremely poor job of grappling with its history of racism. Symbols like the Kentucky Derby matter,” said Attica Scott, the only black woman in the Kentucky statehouse. For years a union organizer, Scott has helped previous protests at the Derby, for the rights of immigrant workers. At the 170,000-seat, 147-acre Churchill Downs complex, some seats cost as much as $6,000. But the course sits in a relatively poor Latino neighborhood, known as the Backside, where residents have frequently protested. Immigrants train horses for millionaires; hundreds of horse stable workers earn as a little as $400 a week and a place to sleep. This year’s protest will see teachers target Bevin. He has supported a “neighborhood schools” bill, which would largely defund bussing programs and emphasise schools that draw students from nearby neighborhoods instead of the whole area. Critics say this is re-segregation by stealth. With control over Jefferson county schools firmly in the hands of a panel of state education commissioners appointed by the governor, activists say Bevin will likely get his opportunity to smash a school busing program that has won national praise. “The governor has had it for Louisville since he was elected because we did not vote for him,” said Scott. “His ego has gotten the best of him. He has had it out for Louisville, and part of the way in which you attack Louisville is through its school system, which educates 101,000 students and is most diverse body of students [in the state]. That diversity scares and threatens the governor because that’s not something he’s comfortable with and respects or values.” Activists also worry that the Republican administration could threaten Jefferson county’s sanctuary schools program, which allows migrant children to attend regardless of the state of their documentation. Bevin claims he is taking over the school system because of financial mismanagement he blames on the locally elected school board’s relationship with teachers’ unions. “This is political,” Bevin told the Louisville Courier-Journal. “And it’s about power. And it’s about money. And it’s about union dues. And it’s about who gets to elect – and if people don’t think the teachers’ union has elected the school board in Jefferson county they haven’t been paying attention.” Activists say that if Bevin was serious about helping fund Louisville schools, he would start by eliminating tax breaks for horse racing and bourbon industries. Both are major political players in Kentucky: horse racing and associated business brings in more than $4bn a year while bourbon brings in more than $8.5bn. The precise value of tax breaks to bourbon and horses is unclear, but an analysis provided by Scott’s office showed that it deprives the state of tens of millions of dollars a year. “It’s a shame,” said teachers’ union activist Erin Vachon. “The Churchill Downs is a corporation, the bourbon industry is full of corporations, and they have an obligation to make wealth trickle down. We haven’t seen that.” The Jefferson county school board and the union intend to fight the governor’s takeover in court. If they don’t win there, Scott feels optimistic support for teachers and their unions will win back the state legislature in November. “We’ve got a historic number of women running for office, and a historic number of people of color running,” she said. “Intersectional organizing is powerful and this election is going to be a referendum on the attacks on education by the governor and his Republican supermajority.” This piece was amended on 5 May 2018. Due to a transcription error, it misidentified a source. The correct name, Erin Vachon, has been included.
19||Junot Díaz withdraws from Sydney Writers' festival following sexual harassment allegationsThe acclaimed Dominican American novelist Junot Díaz has been feted for his powerful literary expression of the pain of sexual violence. In 2008 he was awarded the Pulitzer prize for his book The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, the story of a young boy growing up amid abuse in New Jersey, and last month he was widely applauded for writing a confessional essay about being raped when he was eight years old. But this weekend Díaz has cancelled his scheduled appearances at the Sydney Writers’ festival following a public accusation of sexually inappropriate behaviour. Díaz, 49, was confronted with the claims by the writer Zinzi Clemmons both during a festival event and on Twitter. “As a grad student, I invited Junot Díaz to speak to a workshop on issues of representation in literature,” Clemmons tweeted on Friday. “I was an unknown wide-eyed 26-year-old, and he used it as an opportunity to corner and forcibly kiss me. I’m far from the only one he’s done this to. I refuse to be silent any more.” On Saturday morning the festival confirmed that Díaz had withdrawn from his remaining sessions. He is thought to have left Australia soon afterwards. A panel discussion entitled The Politics of Empathy that Díaz had been due to take part in later in the day was cancelled. “Sydney Writers’ festival is a platform for the sharing of powerful stories: urgent, necessary and sometimes difficult,” the festival said in a statement. “Such conversations have never been more timely. We remain committed to ensuring they occur in a supportive and safe environment for our authors and audiences.” Clemmons followed up her accusation with a further tweet in which she wrote: “I told several people this story at the time … I have emails he sent me afterward.” Clemmons confronted Díaz about his alleged behaviour during a public question-and-answer session on Friday, asking why his recent essay in the New Yorker had not said more about his own bad conduct. The panel moderator Ashley Hay apologised to Díaz, attempting to defuse the situation, and Clemmons left the theatre. After Clemmons’ tweets appeared on Friday night, two other women wrote publicly about encounters with Díaz. Carmen Maria Machado, a 2017 National Book Award finalist also attending the Sydney festival, tweeted that he had angrily rounded on her in public when she questioned the “pathological” attitude to women of one of his characters. In a thread of tweets that followed, Machado said Díaz “has treated women horrifically in every way possible”. On Friday another writer, Monica Byrne, wrote in a Facebook post that she experienced a “verbal sexual assault” at the hands of Díaz at a literary festival in 2014, adding she had “never experienced such virulent misogyny in my adult life”. The author’s New Yorker essay, The Silence, told of his own childhood rape experience at the hands of “a grown-up that [he] truly trusted”. “After he raped me, he told me I had to return the next day or I would be ‘in trouble’,” Díaz wrote, adding: “And because I was terrified, and confused, I went back the next day and was raped again. I never told anyone what happened, but today I’m telling you. And anyone else who cares to listen.” In the essay Díaz addresses a reader who once asked him if had been sexually abused. At the time, the author did not reply, but his New Yorker confession goes on to explain his belief that the abuse he endured as a child led him to mistreat women in adult life. “I think about the hurt I caused,” he wrote. Díaz responded to the accusations about his behaviour in a statement made to the New York Times on Friday. “I take responsibility for my past,” he said. “That is the reason I made the decision to tell the truth of my rape and its damaging aftermath. This conversation is important and must continue. I am listening to and learning from women’s stories in this essential and overdue cultural movement. We must continue to teach all men about consent and boundaries.” A Melbourne venue has confirmed that Díaz will no longer appear there tomorrow following the cancellation of the rest of his tour of the country.
15||Macron’s reforming zeal will be a test of France’s appetite for change‘The left and the right don’t know how to respond to President Macron’s reform agenda,” said a former senior trade union official. “What he’s doing doesn’t fit with the way we think about politics. It’s not like the third-way politics championed by Tony Blair. “It is based on empowerment of the individual – which threatens the left – and on the deployment of the state to invest and drive through reforms – which upsets the right. Neither has found a language or an alternative agenda with which to confront him.” Tomorrow, France’s prime minister, Édouard Philippe, will meet trade union leaders in an attempt to defuse a row that is seen as an important test of France’s appetite for change. Plans to strip train drivers of their many privileges, including retirement at 52, were backed by France’s lower house of parliament earlier this year, which set MPs on a collision course with one of the most powerful blocs of workers in Europe. Strikes began last month and are set to run until July in a bid to force a U-turn. President Emmanuel Macron, 40, has said he will pursue the reforms “to the end”, and polls say most French voters are behind him. An Ifop poll last week found that only 41% of French people consider the train drivers’ industrial action justified, a drop on a survey the previous week. Other polls have suggested the same, but some with a closer margin for and against. Yet there is anger across the spectrum about the speed at which changes are being implemented, and the implications for European Union elections next year and local elections in 2020, now that Marine Le Pen’s Front National has become a mainstream protest vehicle. The shake-up of pension arrangements for state rail operator SNCF affects almost 200,000 employees. According to Macron’s manifesto, that is just the start. He has plans to fold 40-odd employer and state pension schemes into one, potentially asking millions to give up benefits and privileges negotiated over many decades. Alain Duhamel, a political commentator, said Macron had “taken a great risk by starting with a whole series of reforms which weren’t popular even before this social turnaround”. He told RTL radio: “What’s at stake is the metamorphosis of SNCF, a national company that is the most symbolic in France.” The president, he added, had to avoid a “coagulation of conflicts”. This “coagulation” has been a recurrent fear among French governments since the riots of May 1968. Georgina Wright of the Chatham House thinktank said Macron feared his powers might evaporate quickly were the coalition he formed from his fledgling party and mainly right-of-centre rivals to break apart. “His majority in the lower house is just 23. So he has pushed hard while the majority is still in place. He also needs to deliver on some of his pledges and see results quickly. For instance he wants to cut 50,000 public sector jobs in his first term, but critics have been quick to point out that only 1,600 have gone so far, and many of those were contracts, not full-time posts.” One example of the way Macron has confused opponents is the legislation passed in January that allows citizens the “right to make a mistake” when dealing with the state without being sanctioned. Only one error is allowed and it must be made “in good faith”, but the intent is to push back against bureaucratic control. Businesses and individuals have long complained about the unresponsive French state. “It’s impossible to get a state worker on the phone, and when you do, they just say non,” an unnamed official said last week. This droit à l’erreur is viewed as a gimmick by some, but to Macron it is the cornerstone of a wider attempt to foster a “trusting society” and simplify bureaucracy. Government departments are seen as sclerotic institutions that don’t talk to each other and are staffed by blinkered civil servants who, unlike their British counterparts, rarely change departments. This may smack in some ways of Blairism, and there are similarities in Macron’s urge to support entrepreneurs with tax cuts and a more flexible labour market. He also wants to open up higher education and push some of France’s moribund universities into international rankings dominated by US and UK institutions. Chloë Morin, director of the Opinion Observatory at left-leaning thinktank the Jean Jaurès Foundation, said opinion polls showed Macron’s support wavering in some income groups: “The more people earn, the higher the support for Macron. This shows a polarisation of French society in terms of opinion.” Morin argues that Macron is in danger of being seen as “unfair”, not so much because of his attack on SNCF workers, but more in his wealth tax and pension reforms. “There’s a sense that it benefits exclusively the rich, but also criticism of the method, a sense that he is inflexible, rigid and doesn’t listen. We are hearing this more and more: that he doesn’t listen but is set on imposing his model.” The SNCF dispute has been contagious, sparking industrial action at Air France and among refuse collectors, hospital workers and teachers. Only 8% of France’s workforce is unionised, but the unions – especially the Conféderation Générale du Travail (CGT) – punch above their weight. What’s worse for the president is that the left likens him not to Tony Blair, but to Margaret Thatcher, a despised figure in France. Alexis Corbière, of leftist party La France Insoumise (France Unbowed), said the government’s response to the SNCF crisis had a Thatcherite feel: “He’s a bit Margaret Macron … there’s a certain contempt for union organisations and the train drivers.” He said the striking drivers were “heroes fighting for a public service”. Former Socialist president François Hollande accused Macron of hitting the poor while helping the rich. “This deepening inequality is a major problem … My governments reduced inequalities; this one is increasing them.” Even some who support the SNCF reforms are critical of Macron. Laurence Sailliet of the centre-right Les Républicains said: “The method is bad: there’s a lot of arrogance from the president … and from members of the government who keep playing the big guns and haven’t realised that the unions can be a blocking force.” Speaking to journalists before a meeting with the prime minister tomorrow, Laurent Berger, head of France’s other large union, the CFDT, said: “I hope he will listen to us. The solution to the conflict is first of all that the trains begin rolling normally again but also that the drivers don’t feel humiliated. We don’t need people showing their muscle, but people who will discuss the real issues.” The moderate CFDT has overtaken the leftist CGT in recent years to become France’s biggest union by member numbers. For Macron, the sense that old-style radicalism – represented by the CGT, with its tyre burning and secondary picketing – is dying, is hugely helpful. The former union official summed it up: “French people are ready to make sacrifices if they think their children’s future will be improved. As long as unemployment keeps falling, job opportunities increase and the extra funds for education and training make a difference, he has a good chance of deflecting claims that he’s a president for the rich.” Five things Macron wants to change Taxation Macron’s reputation as a president for the rich was burnished by the cut in wealth tax pushed through last year and effective from January. A tax introduced in the 1980s on savings, investment and property was limited by Macron to just property. Like its predecessor, the tax has a sliding scale from 0.5% annual surcharge on real estate worth €1.3m to 1.5% on properties worth more than £10m. Revenues to the government are expected to fall from €5bn to €2bn. But the plan is also about mimicking the UK by consolidating several charges on savings and investments into one capital gains tax at 30% (the UK’s non-property CGT is 20%). Copying the trend across the developed world, corporation tax, currently 15% on profits of €38,120, 28% up to €75,000 and 33.3% on above €75,000, will by 2020 apply to all firms at a rate of 28% before falling to 25% in 2022 (the UK is due to cut the current 19% rate to 18% in 2020). Union power Nothing in Macron’s plans comes near the anti-union legislation brought in by Margaret Thatcher during the 1980s. But big unions such as the CGT dislike new rules allowing workers in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to negotiate their own agreements. The government says 96% of SMEs do not have union reps. Firms with 11-50 staff can strike a deal with a non-unionised rep. Firms with fewer than 20 employees can organise a referendum, though changes to terms and conditions will need a two-thirds majority. To end the lottery of compensation claims for unfair dismissal, Macron will set a mandatory sliding scale for damages, from three months’ salary after two years of service to 20 months’ salary after 30 years. Appeals must be lodged within a year rather than two. Business regulations When a company hires its 50th employee, it faces a series of obligations, including the nomination of workers’ representatives to a works council and a health and safety committee. Under proposed changes, the three groups will be folded into a single social and economic committee, though separate health and safety committees will remain in high-risk sectors. Short-term job contracts A large underbelly of France’s workforce is on short-term contracts, which are routinely renewed. This helps employers avoid the protections offered by long-term contracts, which include a 35-hour working week. Macron wants to move away from this to industry-based rules set by representatives from each sector. The government hopes that incentives to work beyond 35 hours, which are much used already, and reformed dismissal terms will make the system more flexible. Public finances Macron needs to finance his reforms and has signalled to Brussels that he may bust budget spending limits in the short term. A version of austerity-lite has shaved a few euros from student benefits and capped rises in some welfare schemes. But even a modest proposal such as cutting 150,000 civil servants from the 5.3 million total has been met with resistance.
15||A new reality: could VR revive the amusement arcade?The rise of the gaming console has left its mark on living rooms and bedrooms around Britain – but it has also hit the high street. There were around 1,000 amusement arcades in the UK in the 1980s, but that number had halved by 2011, according to the amusements industry trade body, Bacta. Now, the next generation of gaming – virtual reality – is once again making the arcade the prime venue for playing cutting-edge games. Back at the inception of gaming, fans went to video-game arcades. Japanese coin-operated games like Out Run and Street Fighter managed to draw in players once Pac-Man and Donkey Kong fell away, but they could not beat increasingly impressive home consoles such as Sony’s PlayStation, which came along in the mid-90s, and Microsoft’s Xbox at the turn of the century. Seaside arcades have clung on as “family entertainment centres” or “mixed entertainment facilities”, full of games aimed at small children alongside rides and attractions. However, VR Star in Bristol is one of several hundred virtual reality arcades around the UK that are persuading gamers to quit their homes for the high street. They mirror a global trend for dedicated “VRcades” springing up in the US, Japan, South Korea and China. With 380 such dedicated venues now operating around the world, could VR offer the arcade a route back in the shape of so-called “destination gaming”? While it’s possible to buy budget technology, good quality VR is expensive. HTC’s Vive headset is available for around £599 in the UK, but to function effectively it requires a computer with serious processing power and a high quality graphics card, raising the bar to thousands of pounds. Even then you’re not tapping the full potential of VR gaming. The driving simulators and shoot-em-ups in VR Star Bristol are further brought to life with motion sensors and high-quality sound, taking the experience to another level. The 360-degree visuals and depth of field take on another dimension when paired with hydraulics and tilting floors. LA-based Dreamscape Immersive’s Alien Zoo experience even uses wind machines to add to the sensation of movement. “To get the full experience, VR needs what we call SiSoMo: sight, sound and motion,” says Martin Higginson, the executive chairman of British developer Immotion, which owns VR Star. “If you want a truly immersive experience you need high-end components, and for that reason VR will be an out-of-home experience for some years. I’ve spent most of my life in digital media and it is the most exciting thing yet.” Situated in a modest space in Cabot Circus shopping centre, VR Star was launched to test the waters in mid-December. By the beginning of March, it had admitted 4,000 customers, paying £30 an hour. The enthusiastic response has encouraged the company to open four more venues in Swindon, Cardiff, Manchester and Leeds. A total of 60 VR Stars are planned around the country, along with units in existing arcades and custom-made rides for brands such as Legoland. Just before Christmas, Immotion announced a £1.3m investment to launch its platforms in Europe and the US. The units in VR Star play games from a Chinese developer but Immotion intends to run its own titles following last year’s acquisition of Studio Liddell, a Manchester-based animation producer. “What you see and experience currently is like the early days of computer gaming,” says Higginson. “It’s going to improve rapidly. Those games are 2K [screen resolution] but very soon we will be running 4K with faster processing and better rendering. We will take you on Jurassic rides or helicopter you over the Serengeti and it will blow you away.” Experts say VR has come at the right time for the arcade business. “Arcades have always had lifecycles reflecting changing innovation,” says Devi Kolli, the head of VR equipment firm AiSolve. “They can’t survive the way they are without reinventing themselves with cutting-edge technology, and we are part of that. The response to VR so far suggests the market is hungry for good products.” If they are prepared to invest in the new generation of VR, existing arcades could enjoy a return to prominence as gaming destinations, though they will have to compete with dedicated spaces like VR Star. Jeremy Dalton, a VR consultant at PwC, is more positive. He says the complexity of setting up VR experiences offers an ideal chance for arcades. “The set-up issues with VR provides a perfect opportunity for third parties ... and that’s gaming arcades. You just hand over your money and enjoy the ride.”
13||Stoke City 1-2 Crystal Palace: Premier League – as it happenedAnd that’s your lot. Commiserations to Stoke City, whose ten-year stay in the Premier League ended this afternoon. The last time they slipped out of the top flight, in the mid Eighties, it took them 23 years to get back. Here’s wishing them a speedier recovery this time round. Meanwhile congratulations to Crystal Palace, who have stayed up with ease, no mean feat after their appalling start to the season. That seven-game losing streak seems an awfully long time ago now! And now a downbeat Paul Lambert. “It’s a tough afternoon, and I feel for everybody connected with the club. The season starts in July, August. You find yourself sleepwalking into situations, and we just never had enough. We just fell short. I came here in January. We tried to identify and rectify what was going wrong, and I can’t fault anyone’s effort, but we didn’t have enough up front and that eventually caught up with us. This is a brilliant football club. It will be difficult, but we have to man up. It is tough at the minute, but the club is in a good position to rebuild. We’ll sit down and regroup, it’s in really good hands, with a marvellous support base. It’s an opportunity to rebuild.” Roy Hodgson reflects on Palace’s survival and Stoke’s demise. “The players deserve all the credit. They came out of the blocks, and asked a lot of questions of our back four. They stopped us playing football. I’m proud in the second half we showed more courage and got the ball down better. Perhaps their taking the lead meant they had something to hold onto and so they dropped deeper. But I’m proud of my team’s performance, not just today but over the whole of the season. I feel a lot of sympathy and empathy for Stoke, it’s a very tough day, so any joy I feel is measured by looking at the faces of those players who gave everything they could give. But they came across a team who were not prepared to lie down. It’s nice to get over 40 points, and we’ll try to get a place in the top ten, but if they can’t do it they won’t get any criticisms from me!” Our man Nick Miller was at the Bet 365 Stadium this afternoon. Here’s his report on the shattering of dreams in the Potteries. There’s nice. Ryan Shawcross reflects. “It didn’t happen over one game. We’ve not been good enough all season. The fans were brilliant, even at the end. They were still cheering us on, which shows their dedication. We’ve had a right go, but for whatever reason we’ve not got the goals we needed and that’s cost us. The last goal was my fault, and I hold my hands up. But we will be back. The club have got a lot of big decisions to make. If we keep our players - and we’ve got a good manager - we’ll be back and hopefully will come back strong.” So to confirm, Stoke are the first team to be relegated from the Premier League this season. Bottom club West Brom can still save themselves, though they’ll need to start by beating high-flying Tottenham in the 3pm kick-offs. Roy Hodgson, who has experienced some tough times of his own over the years, makes sure not to rub it in when he shakes hands with Paul Lambert. A grim, apologetic face as he offers commiserations to his opposite number. It’s a small thing, but a classy touch, especially as Palace have completed their own escape today. Jack Butland is in floods of tears as he claps the Stoke support, who never stopped believing ... well, for 86 minutes, anyway. The bittersweet love is returned by a large crowd who have stayed behind to thank their team, despite it all. Xherdan Shaqiri, who had given Stoke hope with his first-half free kick, simply looks stunned. That’s it, all over for Stoke City. They’re relegated after a ten-year stay in the Premier League. Crystal Palace’s win ensures the survival of the south Londonders. 90 min +4: Shaqiri makes a little space down the left for a cross. Shawcross, desperate to make amends, sends a header softly over the bar. 90 min +3: Benteke twists and turns in the Stoke box, but can’t shoot or win a penalty. 90 min +2: Palace play the corner backwards, then hold onto the ball awhile. Their fans give it the olé!s, which is really adding insult to injury. 90 min +1: Benteke barrels down the left and earns a corner off Bauer. 90 min: Five extra minutes. Five minutes to save Stoke City’s Premier League life. 89 min: Shaqiri is booked for an appalling rake down the back of Loftus-Cheek’s leg. He should be sent packing. Loftus-Cheek is in a lot of pain. 88 min: That goal will also confirm Palace’s continued membership of the Premier League. Townsend is repalced by Schlupp. The Stoke fans are beginning to make their way home, the jig nearly up. Benteke plays the ball wide right for Zaha, who looks to deliver it back into the centre for Van Aanholt. Shawcross tries to intercept ... and manages only to take the pace off the ball and tee it up for Van Aanholt. The Palace defender takes a stride and slams the ball under Butland and into the net. Is it the goal that relegates Stoke City after their ten-year stay in the Premier League? 85 min: Pieters is booked for an earlier tug on Zaha. Then Sobhi twists, turns and earns Stoke’s first corner down the left. But the set piece is wasted. And then ... 84 min: Townsend and Zaha exchange crisp passes down the right, before releasing Loftus-Cheek, who tries the spectacular from a tight angle. Nope! Zaha was free in the middle, too, waiting for a tap-in. 83 min: Townsend dribbles with purpose down the left and earns Palace’s sixth corner of the afternoon off Allen. Nothing much comes of the set piece. Ndiaye then clatters into Loftus-Cheek. You usually see yellows for that leg-hanging clumsiness: he’s very lucky to still be on the park. 81 min: Ndiaye is booked for a late tackle on Townsend. 80 min: Benteke, dropping deep down the left, tries to return the favour. He’s close to finding Zaha with a fine diagonal pass. But there’s a little too much power in the pass, and it flies through to Butland. 79 min: Zaha finds Benteke inside the box from the right. Benteke can’t control, but the ball nearly squirms into the bottom right anyway. Stoke are living very dangerously now. 77 min: Campbell comes on for Johnson. An attacking substitution for Stoke, but within seconds they’re nearly losing, as Townsend breaks down the left and pulls the ball back for Zaha, who must surely bury it from the penalty spot. But he leans back and balloons a wild one deep into the stand. Stoke could see ten years of Premier League life flash before their eyes then. 76 min: Sakho plays an awful ball out of defence, allowing Ndiaye to intercept and attempt to slip Shaqiri free. Shaqiri is dozily flagged offside. 75 min: Townsend crosses low from the left. Benteke gets ahead of Pieters, but instead of flinging himself for the cross, opts to flop to the floor instead, looking for the penalty. The referee isn’t having it. 74 min: A free kick for Stoke out on the left. The home heroes load the box. Shaqiri hoicks long. Allen, of all people, rises highest to win a header at the far post. But he can only send it harmlessly over the bar. 72 min: Stoke’s nerves are beginning to betray them. From the Palace corner, the ball is worked to Zaha, 25 yards out down the right. Pieters comes through him. Free kick. Milivojevic curls deep. Tomkins should plant his head on the ball, on the left-hand corner of the six-yard box, but Diouf does just enough to put him off. 70 min: Stoke won’t be relegated if this match ends in a draw ... but they’ll be in all sorts of trouble, with Championship football next season more than likely. Accordingly, they press forwards. Shaqiri tries to find Zouma in the Palace box with a ball from the right. Nothing doing. Palace break, and they’re two on two! Fortunately for Stoke, Townsend overplays a bit, and nobody gets a shot away. But they do earn a corner on the right. Stoke ship yet another lead! Zaha romps through the middle of the park. He slips the ball to his left for Loftus-Cheek, who shuttles it on further. McArthur, on the overlap, slides the ball across Butland and into the bottom right! It had been coming. 67 min: Sobhi comes on for Crouch. 65 min: Milivojevic tries to get his head onto the free kick, but nothing significant occurs. Pieters clatters Zaha. Nerves are jangling now. This is all very edgy. 63 min: Bauer is booked for a fairly basic challenge on Zaha. Before the free kick can be taken, Benteke comes on for Cabaye, and there’s some playground shoving on the edge of the Stoke area. Johnson, 33, and Tomkins, 29, are booked. 61 min: Palace push Stoke back. But suddenly Stoke break out. Allen rolls a fine pass down the right to release Shaqiri into acres of space. The ball’s rolled inside for Diouf, who should power clear but can’t sort his feet out. Then Crouch tries to take up possession on the edge of the area, but he goes over instead of getting a shot away. What a chance to put some daylight between themselves and Palace! 60 min: Milivojevic chips the free kick over the Stoke back line, but Tomkins, coming in from the left, can’t stop the ball from going out for a goal kick. 59 min: Palace are well on top now. They’ve enjoyed 76% possession during the last ten minutes. Shawcross comes through the back of Townsend, 30 yards from the Stoke goal. Free kick, and a chance for Palace to load the box. 57 min: Zaha turns crisply down the left and slips a pass down the wing for Townsend. Townsend flashes the ball across the face of goal, where Zaha and Loftus-Cheek look to poke home, but the winger had gone early and is rightly flagged for offside. A totally unnecessary mistake, and Palace are currently burning chances to get back into this match. 56 min: ... a short-corner routine goes badly wrong. Van Aanholt tries to rescue the situation with a shot from distance, but his effort flies miles over the bar. 55 min: Milivojevic has a dig from 25 yards. The ball’s deflected wide left for a corner. From which ... 54 min: Shaqiri makes to chip the ball past Milivojevic, who raises an arm to block it. The Palace midfielder is booked for deliberate handball. 53 min: Allen tries to release Shaqiri down the right, but there’s too much juice on the ball. 51 min: We go again. Sakho and Crouch tussle under a high ball. Crouch is penalised for being overly aggressive. He’s got Sakho’s face in his hand at one point, as he shoves him backwards to the ground. He’s very lucky not to see yellow. Some referees, on a hair-trigger, might even have flashed red. An unnecessary risk, given the predicament his team is in. 50 min: So much for that lively start: Zouma spends a couple of minutes getting treatment. 48 min: Palace string together some pretty triangles in the middle of the park. Suddenly Cabaye slips one down the left channel for Loftus-Cheek, whose shot from the edge of the area is stopped by a sliding Pieters. The ball ricochets off Loftus-Cheek and out for a goal kick; it hasn’t been his day so far. But Palace nearly sliced Stoke open there. A lively start to the half. 47 min: Shawcross lifts the ball long. Crouch, on the edge of the D, heads on to Diouf, who has his back to goal but a chance to flick Shaqiri free to his right. The flick doesn’t quite come off, but that was a sweet move, proof that long-ball football can be beautiful too. It would have been a fine goal. We’re off again! Stoke get the party restarted. No half-time changes. Half-time reading: It’s the Women’s FA Cup Final later today. We’ll be covering it here, so get up to speed with Louise Taylor’s preview of the big Wembley showdown between Chelsea and cup specialists Arsenal. See you at 5.30pm for that one! Stoke haven’t been particularly coherent. But Xherdan Shaqiri, with a little help from Ruben Loftus-Cheek, has given them a precious half-time lead. As things stand, their survival bid remains a live prospect! 45 min +4: Ndiaye’s back up. 45 min +2: Zaha dribbles down the left, momentarily bothering Stoke. Then Kelly tries to find someone in the middle from a position out right. Ndiaye sticks out a leg to block and takes a sore whack. He’s down getting treatment. 45 min +1: That goal has given Stoke a huge lift, as you’d expect. Pieters launches into the Palace box. Shawcross is causing the visitors concern. Hennessey just about deals with the situation. 45 min: Loftus-Cheek played a big part in Palace’s downfall there. He tries to make amends immediately, chesting down a Townsend cross from the right. But he can’t sort his feet out, ten yards from goal, and Stoke clear. There will be four added minutes of this intriguing half. 44 min: Stoke haven’t been very good. But that was a delicious free kick. And the stadium explodes into life! Shaqiri and Lambert cavort on the touchline accordingly. Shaqiri curls the free kick into the top right! The ball took a little deflection off the eyebrows of Loftus-Cheek, sending it right into the corner. Hennessey would have had little chance of saving Shaqiri’s effort anyway, but that deflection definitely took it out of his reach! 42 min: Loftus-Cheek tries to break upfield from deep. Allen robs him and feeds Shaqiri, who is upended by Loftus-Cheek. A free kick, just to the right of the Palace D. One for Shaqiri, who springs up in excitable fashion with a view to taking the set piece. 40 min: Ward, injured earlier, can’t continue. Kelly comes on as he limps off. 38 min: Ward dallies over a throw. Oh, it’s not Palace’s! He takes his own sweet time to give the ball back to Bauer, who has steam coming out of his ears. Palace are pressing Stoke’s buttons this afternoon. The crowd respond accordingly. Magnificent pantomime. 36 min: After Zaha is bollocked by the referee for moaning about the minor incident with Johnson, Palace work their corner in from the left. Cabaye tries to fire a spectacular one into the top right from the left of the D. The effort just about stays inside the stadium. 35 min: Zaha, fuelled by righteous ire, swans past Shawcross in the middle of the park. He slides a pass down the inside-left channel for Townsend, who very nearly breaks clear on goal, but makes do with winning a corner off Zouma. 34 min: Zaha threatens to burst down the inside-left channel, but Johnson eases him off the ball. Zaha sits on the turf, glowering. Johnson wanders off. 32 min: Palace work the ball to the right wing. A cross. Cabaye loops a header goalwards from the edge of the box, but it flies harmlessly over and Butland has it covered anyway. 31 min: ... Van Aanholt volleys from the edge of the area. Johnson closes him down. His block leads to another corner on the left. 30 min: Stoke press Palace back a little. Johnson nearly finds Diouf in the middle from the right. Pieters crosses from the left, but Crouch heads across goal instead of going for it. Palace then break up the other end and earn a corner. From which ... 29 min: Pieters is back up. But this stuttering action isn’t helping Stoke, who need to keep press, press, pressing in search of that precious win. Johnson tries to get things going again with a run down the right, but his cross towards Crouch is easily cleared. 27 min: This is stop-start. Now Pieters is down, having taken a whack on the kneecap from McArthur, who was attempting to boot the ball at the time. Ooyah, oof. A sore one. 26 min: Ward’s back on. Loud boos as he takes possession of the ball, then offloads it. But he’s moving a bit gingerly at the moment. 25 min: Ward is down getting some treatment. The crowd think he’s trying it on, of course they do, but close-ups suggest the full-back is struggling a bit. He limps off with the physio, and for now Palace are down to ten men. 24 min: That move has given Stoke succour. Shaqiri spreads the play to the left. Bauer hoicks a cross into the mixer. Crouch rises with Hennessey, and fouls the keeper, but for the first time in the match, Palace are looking a little unsettled. 22 min: Stoke finally put something together, and it’s the best chance of the game. Shaqiri opens his legs and romps down the right. He curls into the centre, finding Diouf six yards out. Diouf tries to guide a downward header into the bottom left, and though it bounces wide it’s not too far away. Some promise for the desperate hosts. 20 min: It continues to be scrappy. Stoke can’t get anything going at all. Pieters rakes a long pass forward out for a goal kick. That was nowhere near a team-mate. The stadium has fallen a little quiet. 17 min: On the touchline, Lambert loses his rag over a throw-in near the halfway line. Passions are running high. Stoke are a collective study in agitation right now. 15 min: Palace start stroking it about patiently. They’re slowly beginning to dictate terms, some control amid the mayhem. The ball’s worked to Zaha on the right. Zaha fires across goal and left of the target. Not far away. 13 min: Now Cabaye stays down after being clipped by Crouch. The big man offers a hand of friendship, but an irritated Cabaye refuses it. The Stoke faithful give him the bird. A pattern developing here. 12 min: Palace are taking their time over throw-ins, trying to take the sting out of Stoke’s early play. A ploy straight out of the Mourinho-at-Anfield ‘14 playbook. Clever Roy. The crowd don’t like it much. 10 min: Townsend zips down the right and cuts into the centre. He shoots low for the goal, from the edge of the Stoke box, but his effort is blocked bravely by Pieters. Both teams are attacking with purpose, though Palace’s moves look a little more measured, smoother, less hysterical. 9 min: Bauer powers down the left and reaches the byline. He looks for Crouch in the middle, but his low cross is snaffled by Hennessey. 8 min: Bauer races down the right, after a long ball. For a second, it looks like he’ll reach it, and move menacingly towards goal, but he can’t quite reach. Then Palace go straight up the other end, Loftus-Cheek drifting in from the left and curling a magnificent effort inches wide of the top-right corner. That would have been a picture-book goal ... but not quite. 6 min: Allen bursts down the Stoke left. He’s dispossessed. Zaha races along the Palace right, to little effect. We’re up to 110mph. 4 min: Butland blooters long. Crouch rises above Tomkins, and concedes a free kick. This is all very intense. Shapeless and unpredictable, with passes at a premium. It’s like a Champions League semi-final. 2 min: And now Crouch is caught offside, chasing a Diouf flick-on. This is being played at 100mph at the moment. What a hectic, end-to-end start. What an atmosphere! And we’re off! Palace get the ball rolling. Or, more accurately, bouncing around hysterically in the middle of the park. But then some order, as Townsend breaks down the left and feeds Loftus-Cheek on his inside. Loftus-Cheek tries to feed the ball forward down the channel for Zaha, but the pass is too strong. Goal kick. The teams are out! Stoke City are in their famous red-and-white stripes, while Palace play in their black change strip. It’s a sunny day in the Potteries; the atmosphere at the Bet 365 Stadium is blistering. As it almost always is, rain or shine, mid-table irrelevance or relegation battle. Two clubs with supporters who really know how to whip up a beautiful noise. This is magnificent. A quick blast of Delilah and then we’ll be off! Some pre-match praise for the Hodge, courtesy of Felix Wood. “Palace under Hodgson have become good to watch and have pulled themselves out of free-fall, with an injury list that others would have hidden behind. I hope that posterity remembers Hodgson not as the man who had Kane on corner duty but as someone who consistently made small clubs and unfashionable players punch above their weight. And also for any young players coming through, Zaha and Loftus-Cheek’s experience this season will attest to the fact that a team that will play you and a manager that will allow you to achieve is better than being squashed at one of the mega-clubs.” Paul Lambert talks! “We have to try and win, throw everything at it. We have 90 minutes to do it, so we can’t go at it from the off, but the intent is there. We can’t attack for 90 minutes, it’s impossible. But if we win today, we’re right back in it. We’ve lacked in forward areas, that’s evident, we don’t have the personnel. But hopefully someone will create something and we’ll get a goal. Palace won’t take their foot off the gas, we have to be ready for that, and be on the front foot. The crowd will be right for us, and drive us on. We just need a break, and play well to win.” Roy Hodgson speaks to Sky. “I hope we have the same mindset we’ve had all season. I’m really hoping it won’t change at all. We want to play as well as we possibly can to the end of the season, not least because of the integrity of the league, and it’s a mistake when teams switch off. We’re not going to switch off. If we lose, it’s because Stoke will have played better than us. When you play against a team that is going to be as motivated and fired up as they’re going to be, it’s always going to be a problem for you. What’s more, they have very good players. We have prepared the players, but now it’s all about the actors on the field. We’re aware it’s last-chance saloon time for Stoke.” If It Ain’t Broke I: Stoke City earned a commendable point at Liverpool this time last weekend, so the one and only change to their starting XI is enforced. The injured Bruno Martins Indi is replaced by Glen Johnson. If It Ain’t Broke II: Crystal Palace won 5-0 last weekend. They’ve named the same team. Stoke City: Butland, Johnson, Shawcross, Zouma, Pieters, Shaqiri, Allen, Ndiaye, Bauer, Diouf, Crouch. Subs: Ireland, Adam, Cameron, Fletcher, Haugaard, Sobhi, Campbell. Crystal Palace: Hennessey, Ward, Tomkins, Sakho, Van Aanholt, McArthur, Milivojevic, Cabaye, Loftus-Cheek, Townsend, Zaha. Subs: Sorloth, Lee, Schlupp, Cavalieri, Benteke, Wan Bissaka, Kelly. Referee: Martin Atkinson (W Yorkshire). If Stoke City win their last two games of the season, there’s a reasonable chance of their staying up. It’s not beyond the realms: they just need two from Southampton, Swansea, Huddersfield and West Ham to end the season in miserable fashion, while winning their own matches today against Crystal Palace and next weekend at Swansea. On the face of it, far from an impossible dream. The only small problem: they’ve only won one of their last 18 games, and only scored four times in their last eight. Gritty points at Anfield are all good and well, but now they’ve got to start winning. Can they complete stage one of this great escape against Palace? Well, Roy Hodgson’s side aren’t yet mathematically safe ... but come on. So there’s a slight chance they might not be matching Paul Lambert’s men for desperate intensity this afternoon. And Stoke did beat Palace the last time these teams met in the Potteries. But to balance all that out: Palace are four unbeaten, have just completed a 5-0 thrashing of 2015/16 champions Leicester, and have won six of the last seven against Stoke. Whatever: Stoke need to win their first game since January 20. If they don’t, they’re as good as down; a point today might not be enough to retain hope, depending on other results. A loss and they’re gone. It’s the relegation precipice. It’s the last-chance saloon. It’s the final roll of the dice. It’s on! Kick off: 12.30pm BST.
17||Some children reach brink of suicide before getting help with mental health, charity warnsBritain is confronting a mental health crisis because resources for children are so stretched that some only receive help if they seriously self-harm or attempt suicide, Barnardo’s has warned. Javed Khan, chief executive of Britain’s largest children’s charity, said that young people’s mental health had never been worse in the organisation’s 152-year history. Radical action was needed, he said, because funding cuts had forced charities to abandon vital services. “It’s never been as bad, and in another five years’ time it’s going to be even more complex,” Khan told the Observer. “This mental health crisis is getting more severe and more difficult by the day. The numbers keep going up. Educational psychologists are pulling their hair out – they haven’t got the resources. They can’t respond as fast as they need to. “We are going to regret this period if this goes on for too long. We are going to rue the day when we took our eye off the ball.” Neera Sharma, assistant director of policy at Barnardo’s, said that in some parts of the country the pressure on resources was so severe that only the most extreme cases received help. “The threshold is suicidal in some cases; the child would have had to have attempted suicide or committed serious self-harm to get a response,” Sharma said. Speaking before Barnardo’s annual lecture this Wednesday, where representatives of Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, will be among the audience, Khan urged the government to adopt a dramatic new approach. The lack of resources has forced the charity to walk away from a number of contracts during the past year because the money available to local authorities meant it could not offer a sufficient service, Khan said. “They are tightening their belt to a point they cannot tighten it any more. They are asking for more to be delivered for far less resources than ever before, and there is a tipping point where you just can’t deliver a safe, high-quality service,” said Khan, who is also a member of the advisory board for the children’s commissioner for England. One way the government could save money would be to scrap the traditional tendering process in favour of a more collaborative approach between the state and charities: “I don’t think the tendering model is sustainable – there aren’t enough resources in the system,” said Khan. The latest on the UK’s mental health problem emerged on Thursday when statistics showed that almost one in five children could be at risk of having mental health issues later in life, according to the study of more than 850,000 seven-to-14-year-olds. Figures from NHS trusts in England in November revealed that 60% of children and young people referred for specialist care by their GP were not receiving treatment. In December the government published a green paper on mental health problems but Khan said that the plans lacked ambition, falling significantly short of what he felt was required. “If you analyse it, then three-quarters of children are going to get no support,” he said. “The response is insufficient, it’s not broad enough, there is limited financial detail. It talks about rolling out a number of initiatives in a number of areas but funding is only secured to these areas until 2023. The prime minister has talked about this issue as a burning injustice but we don’t think the action is matching the rhetoric.” Last month Hunt intervened in the debate to condemn social media companies for “turning a blind eye” to mental health damage suffered by children who have uncontrolled access to their online platform. Khan said social media was an issue – comparing new technology to “allowing a film crew into the bedroom” – and that they were also liaising directly with companies such as Google and Facebook to limit potential harm to young people. • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org
13||Stoke relegated from Premier League after Van Aanholt strikes for PalaceExactly a decade ago on Friday Stoke City won promotion to the Premier League with a tense draw against Leicester City. Their 10-season spell in the top flight is now over, after defeat at home to Crystal Palace confirmed their relegation. At full-time they remained only three points from the last safe spot with one game to play but Swansea face Southampton on Tuesday and so one of those teams’ tally will increase beyond what is available to Paul Lambert’s side. “I can’t put my thoughts into words so soon after the game,” said Lambert. “Emotions are up and down after a tough afternoon. I feel for everybody connected with the club.” Xherdan Shaqiri had given Stoke both the lead and a bit of hope but second-half goals from James McArthur and Patrick van Aanholt, combined with an anaemic home display in which Lambert’s players looked absolutely terrified of their fate, sent them down. This has, of course, been coming. The club left it too long to dismiss Mark Hughes, under whom the club had stagnated, waiting until January to make the change. It might have looked like deflecting blame, particularly as Stoke have won only one of Lambert’s 14 games in charge, but it is tricky to disagree with his assessment of their fate. “When you don’t start right, and don’t get the grip of it, then you end up in trouble,” he said. The atmosphere was tense from the start. The home fans did their best to intimidate, booing every slight delay of a Palace throw-in as if the taker had spat on the statue of Stanley Matthews that stands outside the ground. But that merely masked their nerves. It was a bitty game that neither team looked capable of getting hold of. Lambert spent most of his time doing shuttle runs along the edge of the technical area, jawing in the ear of the fourth official, his face turning a curious shade of puce – or, put another way, looking every inch the nervous manager. He was briefly calmed just before half-time. Shaqiri was fouled about 25 yards out, hitched his shorts up his vast thighs and whipped the free-kick into the goalkeeper’s top-left corner. It flicked off Ruben Loftus-Cheek, who had committed the foul, in the wall on the way in but nobody cared: Shaqiri skipped into Lambert’s arms and there was hope in the Potteries. Yet the problem with a struggling team going ahead is it can exacerbate nerves rather than cool them. That has been a theme of Stoke’s season. “It’s people being anxious, worried about what might happen when we’ve got the lead,” Lambert said. That anxiety manifested itself in Stoke’s defensive line dropping virtually on to Jack Butland’s toes, inviting Palace on. Stoke looked like a team trying to hold on for 45 minutes and, while Lambert has tightened their defence since arriving in January, it seemed a risky approach. So it turned out, although Palace’s equaliser came after one of Stoke’s few attacks. Wilfried Zaha led a counter and fed Loftus‑Cheek, who slipped in McArthur. Shoulders slumped around the stadium when he bobbled a shot home. The decisive moment came with four minutes left. Zaha played what was actually a terrible pass looking for Van Aanholt, which Ryan Shawcross looked to intercept but poked straight into the Dutch full-back’s path, and he slotted the ball beneath Butland. It was cruel, perhaps, that the final error came from the man who has been with Stoke since they came up to the top flight. The result also confirmed that Palace are safe. Roy Hodgson has done an extraordinary job since taking over a team that had not managed a goal or a point in their first four games, (and went three more in kind under him) but he tried to direct praise towards his backroom staff. “I suppose every orchestra has to have a band leader,” he eventually said, when pressed for a little less modesty. “I’m really proud of our team’s performance, not just today but over the whole season.” In some ways it might be the kindest thing that it is over now for Stoke. Even with a victory they might still have gone down this weekend, so at least this curtailed their pain. “It’s a chance for Stoke to rebuild,” said Lambert.
14||UK regulator orders Cambridge Analytica to release data on US voterCambridge Analytica has been ordered to hand over all the data and personal information it has on an American voter, including details of where it got the data and what it did with it, or face a criminal prosecution. The UK Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) served the enforcement notice to the company on Friday in a landmark legal decision that opens the way for up to 240 million other American voters to request their data back from the firm under British data protection laws. The test case was taken to the ICO by David Carroll, an associate professor at Parsons School of Design in New York. As a US citizen, he had no means of obtaining this information under US law, but in January 2016 he discovered Cambridge Analytica had processed US voter data in the UK and that this gave him rights under British laws. Cambridge Analytica had refused to accept this and told the ICO that Carroll was no more entitled to make a so-called “subject access request” under the UK Data Protection Act “than a member of the Taliban sitting in a cave in the remotest corner of Afghanistan”. The ICO did not accept this as a valid legal argument and has now told SCL Elections, which acted as the data controller for Cambridge Analytica, that it has 30 days to comply or appeal. Cambridge Analytica and its affiliates announced this week that they had gone into liquidation, but the ICO has made it clear that it cannot avoid its responsibilities under UK law and states that “failure to comply with this enforcement notice is a criminal offence”. Carroll said the decision was a landmark moment not just for him but for the millions of other people whose data Cambridge Analytica used in the Trump and other campaigns. “This should solve a lot of mysteries about what the company did with data and where it got it from,” he said. “I hope that it will help the ongoing investigations in my country and yours, and other places like Canada. There’s a lot of questions that no one has been able to answer until now so hopefully this will be a major breakthrough in our understanding of what it did.” He said the ICO’s letter was “pretty extraordinary” and “proved what we’ve been saying for a long time: this is not a normal company. To have the audacity to say that American voters are no different than jihadis hiding in a cave is pretty shocking”. He said that it was the fact that it was a British company that had processed US voters’ data in the UK in an act of “digital colonialism” that had originally inspired him to ask the company for his data back. He went public in an interview with the Observer last year after Cambridge Analytica sent him a “profile” they had created about him but no information about how they created it: “They had given me ‘scores’ for different issues but I had no idea what they’d based this on.” Carroll is also pursuing his right to his data through the British courts, with his case due to be heard in the high court in the next few months. Ravi Naik, a human rights lawyer with Irvine Thanvi Natas, the British solicitor who is leading the case, said the decision “totally vindicates David’s long battle to try and reclaim his data”. He added: “The company put him through such a torturous process over what should have been a very simple subject access request. It was always astonishing to us that Cambridge Analytica and SCL took such a combative approach when the law is crystal clear. Data flows across borders, so the law follows.” The covering letter from the ICO says that if Cambridge Analytica has difficulties complying, it should hand over passwords for the servers seized during its raid on the company’s office – something that raises questions also about what it has managed to retrieve from the servers so far. Paul-Olivier Dehaye, a data expert who helped Carroll with his request, said that his website, PersonalData.io, had received a flood of inquiries from people who wanted to reclaim their data from Cambridge Analytica and other companies. “The data commissioner has said that data crimes are real crimes and she is now putting this into action. This would have been unimaginable a year ago. It’s a real landmark. The ICO is showing that they are real consequences to not complying with UK data laws.. “Cambridge Analytica has been able to evade journalists’ questions and mislead both parliament and Congress, but now if they don’t answer these questions, it shows they’re criminally liable. And there’s also the potential that the truth could be even more incriminating.” The company has claimed to have up to 7,000 data points on 240 million Americans, and if it refuses to comply with Carroll’s request or can be shown to have misused data, it could open itself up to class action from the entire US electorate – a fact that Dehaye suggests may have contributed to its decision this week to fold. Carroll, who has studied the modern “adtech” industry for his professional work, said that he didn’t expect to find his data had been harvested from Facebook “since I’ve always been pretty paranoid about my privacy settings”, but that he expected to find a whole host of other companies implicated. “I think we’re going to find that this goes way beyond Facebook and that all sorts of things are being inferred about us and then used for political purposes.” Cambridge Analytica has been approached for comment.
13||Melbourne Victory beat Newcastle Jets to win A-League grand final – as it happenedThere you have it, another A-League season done and dusted. Good luck figuring it all out when the team that finished fourth takes home the biggest prize, last year’s wooden spooners host the grand final and the most dominant side in the land contemplate an offseason of upheaval. The grand final itself was testament to Melbourne Victory’s fortitude. It was never a vintage season for them but to come past Adelaide United, Sydney FC and Newcastle Jets in the manner they did was an extraordinary accomplishment. I’m off to ice my fingers, rail against VAR and book Lawrence Thomas a ticket to Russia. Until next season, bye for now. Here’s Emma Kemp from Australian Associated Press’s take on a glorious night for Melbourne Victory. Kevin Muscat speaking to Fox Sports: The records are not something that motivates me. What motivates me is getting in each week and improving people. We had a massive challenge this season and this week it seemed the whole country wanted us to fall over.” Asked if he had a response to the boos he received midseason from Victory supporters, Muscat pointed to the packed stands of delirious fans, remarking, “I reckon they’re pretty happy now.” Ernie Merrick is understandably stony faced and furious. Unsurprisingly he takes aim at VAR. Expect more of the same in his official press conference. We Are The Champions reverberates around McDonald Jones Stadium as the Victory crew charge over to their pocket of supporters. Muscat is in the middle of everything, grinding his never-ending gum with a massive grin on his face, one he richly deserves. The actual raising of the trophy is missed by the TV cameras in a pretty dismal snafu. Victory’s players don’t care, they’re all jumping up and down in customary fashion. Melbourne Victory skipper Carl Valeri offers his commiserations to Newcastle, then thanks the sponsors, FFA, the state government, family and friends, supporters, coaching staff, office staff, and finally the players. “We stayed humble through the highs and ground it out in the lows.” Victory’s players are now receiving their championship medals, which are cute little mini toilet seats. Nigel Boogaard delivers a rousing speech as the defeated captain. After the congratulations to Victory the message is all about returning “bigger and better” next year. Excellent job. One of the easier decisions in the history of individual awards, Melbourne Victory’s keeper receives the Joe Marston medal. He looks practically mummified when he dips his head to accept the honour, bandages holding his jaw together and stemming bleeding on his forehead. Presentation time now, led by Michael Zappone. FFA chairman Steven Lowy and chief executive David Gallop roundly booed on their introductions. The match officials receive even louder catcalls when they collect their momentos. They rode their luck in the first half but saw out the game superbly in the second. A record fourth championship for Victory, heartbreak for the Jets. It was an occasion that delivered on the hype, especially in a pulsating first half, but Newcastle could not capitalise on their ascendancy. After the break Victory fought their way into the contest and were largely untroubled. VAR will capture headlines for it’s non-use in Victory’s goal and Roy O’Donovan’s red card will join the list of all-time horror challenges but they are footnotes to an historic night for Kevin Muscat and his side. Victory become the first team to win the A-League championship from outside the top-two, and they did so by snatching away wins over the two sides that finished first and second on the ladder. In so doing they rob third-placed Melbourne City a spot in the Asian Champions League. After a season that never found its rhythm and even included Victory fans booing Muscat at AAMI Park, it is a remarkable conclusion. Wow, that is one of the worst challenges you will ever see. That was assault by O’Donovan on Thomas. Free-kick from Petratos that Thomas came out to claim and he receives a late kung-fu kick to his jaw for his troubles. That was horrific. Gillett was on the spot in a flash to brandish the red card, no need for VAR with that one. 90+2 min: Sanchez booked for a professional foul on Petratos and he adds to the frustration of the home crowd by running off with the ball after the whistle blew. 90 min: Victory milking the clock now, finding fouls, keeping the ball away from their danger area. Five minutes added time for the Jets to find an equaliser. 88 min: Another half-chance goes begging for Newcastle. The latest in a long line of dangerous Petratos crosses doesn’t hit a blue target and Victory’s massed ranks clear. The City Football Group will not be happy with this scoreline at all. 87 min: Victory appear to be growing while the Jets flag, late in the game. Barbarouses should do better with a cross down the right but he can’t find a white shirt and Newcastle clear. 86 min: Troisi comes within a whisker of a second, walloping a drive from an acute angle against the post. The interplay with Berisha leading to the chance was probably the neatest of the half from either side. 85 min: McGree turns the ball over in midfield and George takes the opportunity to shoot from 50m away with Moss off his line but the connection is poor and nothing comes of it. It allows Victory to reset their impressive defensive unit though and run more seconds off the clock. 82 min: Half-chance to the Jets and it’s the two subs who fashion it. Rodriguez beats his man down the right, he feeds Hoffman but his cross is clipped over the bar by Champness. 81 min: The crowd tonight is 29,410 and they have been excellent. Credit to the 4,000 or so that have made the trip up from Victoria. 79 min: A quarter of A-League grand final goals are scored in the final 15 minutes, apparently. The Jets don’t look like creating much at the moment though. 76 min: Let-off for Victory. Good deep cross from Petratos, Thomas flies out to punch but misses, the ball ricochets off O’Donovan and loops harmlessly over. Thomas picked up a cut to his noggin for his trouble. He now has the full Terry Butcher bandage situation going on. This will be an iconic look when he collects his Joe Marston medal. Muscat makes his first change of the night and it’s Matias Sanchez for Stefan Nigro. 74 min: Donachie and Deng both deserve recognition for their performances tonight. They were under the pump early on but they did enough to keep the Jets out and now they’re towering in the centre of defence for their side. Rodriguez for Georgiveski is Newcastle’s second substitution. The defender was looking a red card candidate and his replacement is far more attacking. Merrick going for it with 15-minutes to go. 72 min: Victory have the bit between their teeth now, contesting every challenge with intent. They have raised in the second half and the Jets have not matched them. 69 min: How did that stay out? Victory look certain to score a second after a George corner gets headed across the face of goal and almost across the line but O’Donovan does miraculously well to throw himself in front of Berisha and keep the ball out. He receives a massive whack to his cheek in the process as the Victory striker raised his arms to gain leverage for the header. The Irishman looks like a middleweight after ten rounds, a massive lump forming just under his left eye. 67 min: Newcastle cannot get anything going this half. There have been no opportunities to turn defence into attack at pace, no moments of individual brilliance by their creative types, and time is ebbing away. 66 min: A brief stoppage in play while James Troisi is treated for a head injury after being collected by Georgievski in a heading contest. Already on a booking the full-blooded Jets defender has to watch his step. 65 min: Champness enters the fray, replacing Vargas, a man for whom the phrase flatters to deceive springs to mind. 64 min: A few corners in a row to the visitors are testament to how they’ve been the more productive of the two sides this second half. Kevin Muscat deserves great credit for his work at the interval resetting Victory’s tactics and refocussing his player’s mindsets. 62 min: Newcastle’s attacks down the left are much slower and less intricate than the first half. As a consequence George is able to defend more than he did in the early stages, helping out his overworked fullback. Joey Champness is being readied. 59 min: Frustration starting to creep in now for Newcastle with a few innocuous decisions going against them. Victory have pushed noticeably higher up the field this half with Antonis and Troisi getting through a power of work closing down McGree and Ukarkovic, denying the simple release pass. 57 min: Victory fans in the crowd waving cheap dunny seats, causing Simon Hill on commentary to give one of those “to our overseas viewers” explanations. It will never stop being funny. The game remains in neutral with Victory far more assured this half than the first. 55 min: The crowd noise has dipped in tandem with a decline in the standard of play. Ernie Merrick must be tempted to make an early substitution before the Jets lose their early momentum. 54 min: The second half has yet to settle into a pattern, which suits Victory. It’s all very scrappy in midfield with plenty of long balls headed back into the congestion. 51 min: First yellow card of the night goes to Georgievski for a late and clumsy challenge on Barbarouses. 50 min: Thomas asserts himself at the earliest opportunity, claiming a Petratos set piece like Peter Schmeichel bossing an under-12s. 48 min: The second term begins with the Jets on the front foot again looking to capitalise on their advantage down the left flank. 46 min: Second half is underway. No changes at the interval. If Victory hang on the Joe Marston medal can only go to one man - the exceptional Lawrence Thomas. His first half was massive. Riley McGree and Dimitri Petratos have shone for the Jets and if they come back that pair will surely have had a hand in it. All the half time analysis on TV and all the noise on social media is about VAR’s role in Victory’s goal. Replays appear to leave little doubt that Donachie and other white shirts were offside when George whipped in his free-kick but the goal was allowed to stand. Robbie Slater is apoplectic about it on TV. Some half time stats: Newcastle have dominated the ball, enjoying 65% of possession. The Jets lead the shot count 11-3 but only three of those have been on target, where they’ve found Lawrence Thomas in inspired form. No yellow cards to report. Phew! That was breathless helter-skelter stuff. Great fun. One minute of added time at the end of the first-half. Most of it is taken up with Petratos lining up a deep crossfield free-kick that comes to nought. Somehow, despite an almighty battering, Melbourne Victory are one-nil to the good. 44 min: Vargas again collects the ball in a dangerous area but elects not to shoot on his left when space materialised, instead feeding the ball back inside and the chance fizzles out. 41 min: Vargas has been full of tricks and spins but his end product has been lacking. If he finds his range the Jets could be in business but a sloppy pass in midfield allows Victory to snuff out another attack at source. 39 min: Victory are so deep in defence when they do clear their lines all they can muster are isolated solo salvos. It helps that Leroy George is among their forwards and his strength keeps Newcastle’s defenders honest and then earns a free-kick in a dangerous position that earns a couple of minutes in more preferred territory. 36 min: I’m not sure I’ve seen a more one-sided contest where the scoreboard does not reflect the balance of play. McGree is running the midfield, Petratos has the bit between his teeth and the game is being played almost entirely in Victory’s defensive half. Still, they have the lead, and they have Lawrence Thomas. 33 min: McGree, Petratos and Koutroumbis have been at the heart of all that’s been good for the Jets tonight. Again they work space down the left but this time there’s no opportunity for a final ball. Victory need to rethink their right-hand side. 31 min: How are the Jets not level!? Thomas again with a superb save, low to his left after brilliant play from the increasingly effective McGree. The victory keeper then somehow manages to recover and smuggle Hoffman’s effort over the bar from point-blank range. 29 min: Victory have worked their way back into the contest, evening up the midfield duel and fashioning a couple of half-chances. 24 min: Scrappy couple of minutes with the ball pinging from one set of defenders to the other like an anti-rondo demonstration. Riley McGree does his best to settle things down, he’s growing into the game nicely in the centre of midfield. Ahead of him Petratos remains the most dangerous outlet and again he tricks his way beyond Nigro and dinks a cross over but there’s no finish to match the preparation. 21 min: Newcastle are prospering down the left where Nigro is again failing to cover himself in glory at right-back for Victory. Petratos, Koutroumbis and Vargas are making neat combinations at will but they still have nothing to show for it. 20 min: A goal-kick offers brief respite for Victory in the face of an onslaught from the Jets. This remains full-blooded and frenetic. 18 min: Brilliant save from Thomas! Reflex dive low to his left to keep out O’Donovan’s flick after great build-up down the left between Petratos and Koutroumbis. The Jets are all over Victory right now!. 16 min: Half-chance for the Jets courtesy of yet another wicked ball from Petratos. It’s a long free-kick this time that curls agonisingly away from Thomas who has to come out to try to punch but he doesn’t connect offering a glimmer to the leaping Hoffman behind him but he can’t put boot to ball. 14 min: It remains all Newcastle on-field but Victory have the crucial advantage on the scoreboard. Whenever the visitors take possession the Jets rob them of it in an instant but their rapid incursions forward have yet to catch Victory napping. Hmmmm. Replays are starting to filter through of the build-up to Victory’s opener and there is a distinct hint of offside when Donachie heads the ball across goal. VAR studied it but gave it the all-clear. We’re unlikely to have heard the last of that. 11 min: Newcastle respond immediately fashioning two decent attacks that Victory do enough to scramble away. Petratos has been lively, finding space in the final third and whipping in trademark crosses. The earliest goal in grand final history goes to Melbourne Victory. A long free-kick from Leroy George finds the towering Donachie at the far post, his centring header falls to Barbarouses who drills hard and low beyond Glen Moss via a deflection off Koutroumbis. VAR had a look for offside at the original header but it’s given the all-clear. 8 min: The Jets have started to settle and move the ball around. Victory, by contrast have yet to establish any rhythm. The TV cuts to Bert van Marwijk in the stands, he’s back in the country! 6 min: First proper attacking opportunity falls to the home side. O’Donovan is wrestled to the ground just to the right of the penalty area and Petratos’ teasing cross just evades three Novocastrian foreheads, skimming off one and away to safety. 4 min: This is yet to blossom into a celebration of the beautiful game. The pace is too hot for anyone to put their foot on the ball or connect with more than one pass in a sequence. James Donachie looks beautiful with his new bleached blonde crop though, like an 80s Bond villain in the mould of Dolph Lundgren or Brigitte Nielsen. 2 min: As expected it’s pinball during the opening stages with both sides sprinting out some nervous energy. The 2018 A-League grand final is underway! Seconds away from kick-off. Hannah Ringrow calmly nails the national anthem a capella while smoke drifts across McDonald Jones Stadium. The stage is set. Out stride the two teams to deafening noise, fireworks, and a sea of flags. This is fizzing beautifully. It’s cool, clear, dry and still in Newcastle. Perfect conditions for football. The pitch doesn’t seem half bad either, despite an NRL fixture taking place last night. The two teams are making their way down the race. Newcastle are clad in their all-royal blue home strip, Victory in their all-white change uniform. Some grand final stats for you, courtesy of Opta. Head-to-head: Newcastle Jets have won two of their last three games against Melbourne Victory, this after having gone without a win in their previous five games against them. Melbourne Victory have won just one of their last 12 visits to McDonald Jones Stadium (D5, L6), posting a 1-0 win there in January 2016. Kosta Barbarouses has scored in two of his three appearances versus Newcastle Jets this season; he comes into this game having scored in the semi-final against Sydney. Grand final history: Just once in the previous 12 seasons has the host of the Grand Final lost the competition decider played at their home ground (2009/10). Newcastle Jets won their only previous Grand Final appearance (2007/08), while Melbourne Victory have won three of their previous five with both losses in that time coming via penalties. Success in this game will mean that Melbourne Victory will have been A-League Champions on more occasions than any other side, they have currently done it three times alongside Sydney FC and Brisbane Roar. Besart Berisha has scored five goals in A-League Grand Finals, the joint-most of any player in competition history alongside Archie Thompson. Other: This game will see the league’s two most prolific creators go head-to-head; Leroy George (75) and Dimitri Petratos (74) have created more scoring chances than any other player in the competition (next best, 55 -Andrew Hoole). Just because. An A-League grand final build-up wouldn’t be worthy of the name without checking in with David Squires. If only Ernie had rocked up tonight in a leopard-print onesie... The unexpected absence of Sydney FC makes this grand final an unpredictable affair tactically, as Ante Jukic explains. The crowd in Newcastle is being ‘treated’ to some pregame entertainment courtesy of some LED-clad percussion and DJ noise while more LED-clad people jig about around them and a few kids juggle glow-in-the-dark footballs. It’s fine, and has actually picked up the longer it’s gone on, but still.... yeah nah. In case you didn’t know, the Jets owner’s wealth comes from LEDs. Kevin Muscat: I don’t think I’ve worked with a more resilient group than the one I’ve got at the moment. It was unbelievable what they went through (against Sydney FC) and the performance they put on. I can only imagine how our members and fans felt watching that and the pride that they would have enjoyed and we made a lot of people happy on Saturday night and we certainly look to do that again on Saturday.” Ernie Merrick: They spend a lot of money on players, they won it in 2015, they lost it last year, so I think they’d be pretty keen to win and I think the pressure is on them. I’ve tried to get the pressure off our boys by getting them to relax and enjoy themselves. When it comes, our boys will perform and we’ll see who the better team on the night is. I was trying to avoid this aggressiveness that occurs in the Big Blue for example — it doesn’t make for a great spectacle. Certainly it was an exciting game (last week) especially in that match because of the goal in the dying seconds of normal time, but I think the crowd want to be entertained with much more free flowing, attacking football and that’s what we’ve been playing all year.” Before we check in with the coaches, a reminder their history goes deep. That relationship is far less convivial nowadays and with so much on the line sparks could fly in the technical areas tonight. Newcastle Jets have the opportunity tonight to vault from wooden spooners one season to premiers the next. Just reaching the grand final is a rarity in Australian sport, as AAP’s Vince Rugari details. NSWRL/NRL Sydney Roosters: bottom in 2009, beaten in 2010 grand final by St George Illawarra Western Suburbs: bottom in 1933, won 1934 grand final against Eastern Suburbs Newtown: bottom in 1928, beaten in 1929 grand final by South Sydney St George: bottom in 1926, beaten in 1927 grand final by South Sydney AFL/VFL Collingwood: bottom in 1976, beaten in 1977 grand final replay by North Melbourne Fitzroy: bottom in 1916, beaten in 1917 grand final by Collingwood (note: only six teams participated in 1917 and four in 1916 due to World War I. Fitzroy also won grand final as well as wooden spoon in 1916 after four-team finals series SUPER RUGBY Sharks: bottom in 2000, beaten in 2001 grand final by Brumbies Highlanders: bottom in 1997, beaten in 1998 grand final by Blues NSL/A-LEAGUE Newcastle Jets: bottom in 2016/17, face Melbourne Victory in 2017/18 grand final Brisbane City: bottom in 1978, beaten in 1979 post-series play-off final by Sydney City (note: Marconi recognised as champions) The atmosphere at McDonald Jones stadium is already something special, half-an-hour away from kick-off! Who knew an appropriately-sized rectangular stadium could facilitate such a spectacle? Your officials for the big one: Referee: Jarred Gillett Assistant Referee 1: Matthew Cream Assistant Referee 2: Paul Cetrangolo Fourth Official: Kurt Ams Fifth Official: Andrew Lindsay Video Assistant Referee: Craig Zetter Following the suspensions handed down to JP de Marigny and Dean Anastasiadis the role of Victory assistant coach tonight falls to fitness guru Anthony Crea. He will be joined on the bench by a familiar face, Victory football operations manager and living legend, Paul Trimboli. More on the Jets, this time from Richard Parkin, looking at how a unity of purpose from the owner down has created such a high-functioning football club this season. Win or lose tonight Newcastle’s renaissance has been the feelgood story of the season. John Davidson reminds us how far the Jets have come in such a short space of time. Victory’s starting XI is as expected, and unchanged from their semi-final victory over Sydney FC. There’s movement on the bench though with Christian Theoharous collecting an injury at Allianz Stadium forcing the dangerous impact substitute to concede his place to Jai Ingham. The only other two members of the Victory squad not at Kevin Muscat’s disposal are long-term absentee Mitch Austin, and the horribly unlucky Rhys Williams. Plenty of focus will fall on auxiliary defender Stefan Nigro. The youngster was a late inclusion last week and didn’t cover himself in glory in a performance containing a calamitous own-goal. He will have his hands full again against the free-scoring Jets. In midfield Terry Antonis will be the centre of attention following his remarkable showing against Sydney FC. He is vital to knitting Victory’s defence and attack, and in a game likely to feature plenty of broken play his ability to hold everything together will be crucial. Further forward despite turning in a far from vintage campaign Besart Berisha is finding touch at the business end. A finals specialist there’s nobody in Australian football you’d back more than the Albanian to step up on the big occasion. Just the one change to Newcastle’s XI with veteran Glen Moss replacing Jack Duncan following the regular keeper’s untimely injury during the semi final. Ivan Necevski has been press-ganged into a spot on the bench. Moss will be under immense scrutiny tonight but the 35-year old has been around long enough to handle the pressure. He sat on the bench for Victory in the 2009-10 decider. Ben Kantarovski remains a major absentee for Ernie Merrick and the club stalwart along with Wayne Brown would both be in the matchday squad had they been fit. Good evening everybody and welcome to live coverage of the showpiece event in Australian club football, the A-League grand final between Newcastle Jets and Melbourne Victory. Kick off at a jam-packed McDonald Jones Stadium is 7.56pm AET, giving us plenty of time to ease ourselves into a grand final state of mind. I can confirm well in advance that tonight’s going to be ace. How could it not be? We’ve got a full house in a regional centre, one steeped in football history, barracking for the Jets - a team riding one of the all-time most absurd waves of form. In case you’re not up to speed, Newcastle were rubbish for a long time, failing to make the finals since 2010 and finishing dead last last season. Ignoring all that baggage, Ernie Merrick strode into town in the offseason, recruited smartly, and told his side to play without fear. They went on to finish second, scoring the goal of the season along the way, and then won through to the grand final, scoring one of the goals of all-time in the process. It has been a rip-roaring football story. Not only will the Jets have a passionate home crowd behind them, pretty much the rest of the footballing community will be in their corner, in part because their opponents tonight are perennial grand finalists and serial winners Melbourne Victory. This has been a far from vintage season for one of the competition’s powerhouses but they’ve come good when it matters and Kevin Muscat is now just 90 minutes away from hoisting aloft the glittering toilet seat. I cannot wait. If you would like to join in during the evening feel free to do so by email (Jonathan.howcroft.freelance@guardian.co.uk) or twitter @JPHowcroft. It would be lovely to have some correspondence.
14||UK basks as temperatures climb towards record levelsThe bank holiday weekend has got off to a fine and dry start as most of the UK enjoys sunshine and blue skies. Around 10m vehicles were expected to hit the road over the next three days in what is expected to be one of the hottest May bank holidays on record. The temperatures will peak on Monday when they are forecast to “smash” the previous record, set in 1999. Dean Hall, a meteorologist for the Met Office, said: “It’s going to be a great May bank holiday weekend, which is notorious for usually being quite wet and miserable. Temperatures will rise day by day as we go through the weekend and into Monday, which is set to be the warmest bank holiday Monday on record. “Most parts of the country will enjoy unbroken sunshine and very warm temperatures,” he said. “We’ll see low to mid-20s in most parts of the UK, while areas in the south-east should expect high 20s.” The bank holiday was introduced in 1978 and the hottest weekend was in 1995, when a temperature of 28C was recorded in Cheltenham. The warmest temperature for the bank holiday Monday alone was 23.6C in 1999. “We’ll easily smash that record on Monday,” Hall said. “It wouldn’t surprise me if we reached highs of 28C.” Many people were expected to visit coastal towns and beauty spots to make the most of the weather. A spokesman for the AA, Luke Bosdet, said: “This weekend is going to be like the Easter we didn’t have. Easter was early and ended up being cold so there wasn’t much fun and joy. Now we have good weather, people are taking advantage and getting out to enjoy the great outdoors. Bosdet said drivers should be prepared for congestion. “There is a consequence to the good weather and that is you’re getting a lot of people on the road. On a typical bank holiday with good weather, we see in the region of 10m cars hitting the road.” He said high traffic levels could be expected on the M23 to Brighton, the roads to Cumbria and the A303 towards the West Country. “They tend to be the usual suspects for bad congestion and delays. My advice is for people to keep an eye on the travel updates before heading out and to be aware that trouble often hits when everyone comes back on Monday evening at the same time.” Rail travellers could expect a miserable weekend, as Network Rail carried out hundreds of maintenance and upgrade projects. Major work between Glasgow and Edinburgh meant East Coast services would start and terminate at Edinburgh, while West Coast trains would not run north of Lancaster-Oxenholme Lake District on Sunday. Liverpool’s mainline services were being reduced, with some replaced by buses or diverted via Manchester from Saturday to Monday. No trains would serve London Paddington on Sunday, which would also force the suspension of Heathrow Express trains. Network Rail’s chief executive, Mark Carne, said: “While most of the network is open for business as usual, some routes are heavily affected and so we strongly advise passengers to plan ahead this May.” For those staying closer to home the weather was also perfect for gardening, according to Guy Barter, the chief horticulturist of the Royal Horticultural Society. “So far this spring, weather conditions will have delayed some tasks in the garden,” he said. “With a fine forecast for the three-day weekend across most of the UK, gardeners should feel excited they will have the time to invest in their gardens and also have time to spend relaxing with families and friends enjoying the fruits of their labours. A perfect end to National Gardening Week.” Hall warned those heading out to enjoy the sunshine to take precautions to protect their skin and eyes as UV levels were strong. Pollen levels were also high so hayfever sufferers may be affected.
10||Gun control activists protest NRA's first annual meeting since ParklandThe Resistance Now is a weekly update on the people, action and ideas driving the protest movement in the US. If you’re not already receiving it by email, subscribe. Protests at NRA’s first annual meeting since Parkland Gun control activists are to meet 80,000 National Rifle Association supporters in Dallas this weekend, where the gun lobby is hosting its annual three-day meeting. The convention is being held less than two months after the push for gun control drew thousands to protests across the country and inspired one of the largest student demonstrations in US history. An additional stressor for the NRA is the impact these actions and Donald Trump’s divisiveness will have on the Republican party heading into the November midterms. The Guardian’s Lois Beckett has done a great breakdown of the six threats facing the NRA here and will be reporting from the convention all weekend. Trump, whose campaign accepted more than $30m from the NRA in 2016, spoke Friday afternoon at the first day of the convention. “Thanks to your activism and dedication. You have an administration fighting to protect your second amendment and we will protect your second amendment,” he said. And if you’re wondering why the NRA is so powerful, the Guardian US business editor, Dominic Rushe, has the answer here. Teacher backs immigrants and refugees in moment with Trump At the White House this week, the National Teacher of the Year staged a silent protest by wearing overtly political badges, including one with a poster for the Women’s March, when she accepted her award from Trump. Mandy Manning, who leads a classroom for teenage refugees in Washington, also wore badges that supported the LGBT community to the annual ceremony. Manning told the Associated Press that in a private moment with Trump she gave the president letters written by her students and the community that she hoped would convey what coming to the US means for refugees and immigrants. Immigration lawyers have warned repeatedly that White House policies are slowing immigration to the US. And refugee groups have been sounding an alarm about the the fall in refugee admissions this fiscal year. Only 10,584 people have been admitted in the past six months, compared with 39,000 refugee admissions in the same period in 2017, according to the International Rescue Committee (IRC). The annual ceremony took place against the backdrop of teachers’ strikes in Arizona, Colorado, Kentucky, Oklahoma and West Virginia amid complaints over stagnant pay and shrinking pensions. What we’re reading Puerto Rican police fired tear gas at protesters on Tuesday during May Day demonstrations in the capital, San Juan. The peaceful march was held in response to austerity measures placed on the island by a controversial oversight board. The role of the board has become even more contentious as the island is still far from recovering from the devastation of Hurricane Maria in September 2017. “I don’t know what we will leave our young daughter,” one protester told NBC News. “This is just such an ugly panorama right now.” Over at BuzzFeed, Scaachi Koul goes deep into the college Republicans’ internal struggles in lefty California, where some fear opposition to Trump will give Democrats an even greater hold on the Golden State. Koul writes how this young segment of the GOP reflects the broader struggle in the party: “Do Republican politicians need to be bold, unapologetic, and often wildly offensive, to be effective? Or should they return to the decorum and professional tenor formerly expected in politics?”
4||Joe Wicks: ‘Other personal trainers think I got lucky’I was a hyperactive child. I wasn’t very academic and I had a very short attention span. I was a bit of a class clown and was always messing around. My school reports used to say: “Joe has great potential if only he stopped chatting in class.” The only thing I was good at was sport and before I became a personal trainer, I wanted to become a PE teacher. You can have an awesome physique by doing just 25 minutes exercise a day. That’s all I do. I was always a very skinny kid. From the age of 16, I tried to build my frame. I used to do a lot of weights. I’d probably spend about an hour and a half in the gym every day, but as I’ve got older I’ve cut that down. The occasional drink is my only vice. I probably get drunk twice a month, if I go out with friends. I used to like going out and partying, but now it’s more often a nice dinner, cocktails and home by midnight. I wasn’t born ambitious, but I am ambitious now. My mum is a social worker and my dad’s a roofer. My brother Nicky and I were the first two in my family to go to university. When I started to grow my audience and connect on social media and achieve certain things, like the book deal, then I became way more ambitious. The minute you have a little bit of success, you think: “I can do more and I can reach more people.” So as I’ve achieved more, I’ve become way more focused. I may appear famous on Instagram, but I’m not someone who is going to red carpet events and has loads of celebrity mates. I haven’t let that affect me. I just do my thing. I lead a really private life away from that and I’ve managed to keep a balance. What matters is friends and family and community – actual relationships. You have to become antisocial to become a social media star. In the early days, I was addicted to social media. I had to be on it and be engaged. When I was with my family and friends I was just constantly on my phone, replying to everything. But now it’s much more able to sustain itself although I do still probably post 10 times a day on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat. It’s a hamster wheel. I’m really not a sex symbol. People might leave cheeky comments on Instagram like, “I’d love to marry you,” but it’s not like I’m going out to clubs and meeting loads of women. It’s not real. It’s just a social-media thing. I’m in a happy relationship, so I don’t need that or crave that attention. The most negativity I get is from other personal trainers as they think I got lucky. I love a success story, but some people get jealous. I don’t ever engage in negative stuff. I just ignore it and keep spreading my message. The Joe Wicks Café opens as part of the Lifestyle Lab at Westfield London and Westfield Stratford City from 3 May, uk.westfield.com/london
14||Jumpsuits, zip cams, vegan cake: the latest trends in weddingsIt’s unlikely Prince Harry and Meghan Markle will rig cameras on zipwires across the lawns of Windsor Castle for their big day this month. But if they do, they’ll be joining a growing number of couples turning to new tech to capture the moment like never before. Zipwire cameras might sound like props on a sci-fi film but they are one of the quirky new trends for weddings this summer as brides ditch flowing gowns in favour of jumpsuits, and vegan cakes replace the traditional multi-tiered extravaganza. With most marriage ceremonies now involving millennials who are comfortable with adapting traditions to suit their own agenda, weddings are now being planned to take account of social media and concern for the environment, according to the big names in nuptials, from fashion designers to videographers. “The whole make-up of weddings is changing,” said bridalwear designer Charlie Brear, who has dressed model and fashion designer Alexa Chung and actress Sienna Miller. “There’s a lot less formality, and it’s all Pinterest, Instagram and social media-led. Brides want to step out of the norm, and make a statement they can share.” So out go the sweeping, fishtail trains, she said, and in come the all-in-one jumpsuits – talk of the fashion world since bridalwear designer Misha Nonoo, a close friend of Markle, released a spring jumpsuit collection. “They’ll be all the rage this year. The jumpsuit offers something more rock’n’roll, a bit cooler and easier to wear, but still elegant,” Brear said. The bonus is that the jumpsuit is easier to repurpose than a wedding dress, so it can be reworn once the confetti has blown away. And with the average white gown costing more than most people earn in a month (Brear’s range from £1,500 to £5,000), jumpsuits are a lot cheaper too. “If you accessorise it with a black belt, a black high heel and a black jacket you can wear it on any night of the week,” she said. If you’re going to walk the aisle in a jumpsuit, chances are you’ll want something different to eat and drink too. “When I got married, the centrepiece of the reception was a rich fruit cake,” said Rosalind Miller, a cake-maker whose show-stoppers are sold at Harrods. “But nobody wants fruit cake any more. Vegan cakes are now the big new trend.” Miller puts it down to what she calls a “generational thing” – the march of the millennials to ever more conscious decision-making. But cakes free of even the tiniest trace of animal products are tricky to make. “You have to find substitutes for everything – butter, eggs, milk, chocolate ganache,” says Miller. “Even the sugar flower petals have egg whites, so we have to use fresh flowers instead.” There’s also a trend for simpler cakes – what Miller calls “the naked cake” – with none of the traditional sugar paste icing. “More and more couples want their weddings to be natural and stripped back,” she said. There is nothing “natural” about squadrons of tiny cameras zooming across the matrimonial dance floor, though. Yet zipwire cameras are a game-changer in wedding videos, said Andrew Gemmell, a film-maker who has chronicled the weddings and private shindigs of celebrities including Elton John, Poppy Delevingne and David Beckham. “Zipwire cameras are great for shooting the dancing or the speeches. Almost like on a ski lift, they grab on to the wire then propel themselves along, panning side to side above the guests. It gives you angles you’d never dreamt of,” he said. Gemmell says that drones, GoPros and zipwire cameras are now essential gizmos for any videographer worth their salt. “It’s great – you control multiple cameras from your mobile phone, you meld into the wedding like a guest.” But there’s another technologically advanced way to blend in. Gemmell predicts the next big thing will be the “virtual guest” – a sort of Segway-iPad hybrid that will allow people who cannot get to a wedding to live and experience the occasion remotely. “With this thing, you can walk down the aisle, move around the reception, join in conversations – all at head height,” he said. The other attractive feature of the virtual guest, he said, is that if he or she is being annoying “the hosts can just turn the wifi off and shut them down”. Getting hitched in style For cakes... “No longer square or round, but petal shaped, hexagonal, oblong or teardropped. These shapes can be mixed together.” Natasha Collins, founder of Nevie-Pie Cakes, available at The Wedding Gallery “Vibrant colours of the rainbow, paired with contrasting black or white.” Rosalind Miller, founder of Rosalind Miller Cakes, available at Harrods For bridesmaids... “Brides want each bridesmaid to look their best and one style doesn’t always suit all. The mix-and-match trend is growing in popularity and ensures everyone looks great.” Rosanna Garden,bridesmaid gown designer and founder of www.moteemaids.co.uk For men... “Suits in bright hues – purple, burgundy or ink blue – are massively on-trend. There’s a fine line between cool and not cool when it comes to tweed but you can walk it the right way in 2018.” Dominic Troope, men’s fashion stylist at The Wedding Gallery,www.the-weddinggallery.com For flowers... “Granny as flower girl! I love alternative ways to march up the aisle.” Sandra von Riekhoff, photographer, founder of Divine Day Photography, www.divine-dayphotography.com For the invitation... “Printing on unusual material such as linen, wood and metal. The scope is fantastic.” Louise Richardson of Louise Richardson Bespoke Stationery
14||Cambridge Analytica is dead – but its obscure network is alive and wellThe announcement that Cambridge Analytica is shutting has a certain inevitability to it. Ever since 17 March 2018, when Carole Cadwalladr broke Christopher Wylie’s whistleblower story at the Observer and in the New York Times, there have been continuous revelations about Cambridge Analytica and its parent company, SCL Group, and their brazen use – or misuse – of Facebook data and dirty tricks. But given the complex business structure of SCL and Cambridge Analytica’s UK and US affiliates, there are reasons to question precisely what Wednesday’s announcement means. Already there are some suggestions that those associated with Cambridge Analytica may re-emerge in another form. Are Cambridge Analytica and SCL Group attempting to evade recent negative coverage, only to re-form and continue their work as part of a new entity? Damian Collins, the British MP who chairs the digital, culture, media and sport Committee that is investigating SCL and Cambridge Analytica, tweeted some words of caution on Wednesday after the news broke, noting that CA and SCL “cannot be allowed to delete their data history by closing”. Certainly the news presents as many questions as answers. Cambridge Analytica and SCL have at least 18 active companies, branches, and affiliates with similar names, based in the UK and the US. The complex relationship among these companies makes it very difficult to understand how revenues, employment, and data are shared. It almost seems as though the business structure was created to make it impossible to track decision-making and funding. On Wednesday afternoon Cambridge Analytica issued a press release stating: “SCL Elections Ltd., as well as certain of its and Cambridge Analytica LLC’s U.K. affiliates (collectively, the ‘Company’ or ‘Cambridge Analytica’) filed applications to commence insolvency proceedings in the U.K.” It also stated that “parallel bankruptcy proceedings will soon be commenced on behalf of Cambridge Analytica LLC and certain of the Company’s U.S. affiliates in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York.” It is notable that Cambridge Analytica’s press release does not mention SCL Group Limited, SCL Social Ltd, or SCL Insight Ltd. Is it closing only some affiliates and leaving others open? Shortly after the whistleblower story on Cambridge Analytica’s use of Facebook data broke in March, the Cambridge Analytica CEO, Alexander Nix, was suspended and three US states opened investigations into Cambridge Analytica and Facebook. In the following weeks, current and past employees of Cambridge Analytica and Facebook have testified in the UK, the US, Canada and other countries, and a US and UK class action lawsuit was filed against both companies in early April. However, reporting on Cambridge Analytica – from Cadwalladr and others – had begun to appear in 2015 and 2016 and intensified throughout 2017. While Cambridge Analytica and SCL Group began to be the focus of more media scrutiny, in the background, company executives were quietly setting up a new company. Emerdata Limited was incorporated in August 2017 with SCL Group’s chairman, Julian Wheatland, and SCL’s chief data officer, Alexander Tayler, as original owners, but the company suddenly expanded with new directors and funding this year. On 23 January 2018, four new directors were appointed to Emerdata, including Johnson Chun Shun Ko, who happens to be deputy chairman of Frontier Services Group. On the same day that Ko joined the board of Emerdata, shares were issued valued at £1,912,502. On 7 March 2018, Firecrest Technologies Limited was incorporated, with Alexander Nix listed briefly as director and then replaced by Alexander Tayler, and Emerdata listed as the owner. And on 16 March, a few days before the Cambridge Analytica whistleblower story broke, two more directors joined Emerdata, Jennifer and Rebekah Mercer. There has been much reporting on how Robert and Rebekah Mercer have funded US political action committees (Pacs) that have paid Cambridge Analytica, but there had been little public evidence showing a current legal or business connection from the Mercers to Cambridge Analytica. The business purpose of Emerdata is not known, beyond the general description of “data processing, hosting and related activities”. However, in a Channel 4 News report, the SCL Group founder, Nigel Oakes, said it was his understanding that Emerdata was set up to acquire all of Cambridge Analytica and SCL. Emerdata did not respond to multiple requests for comment sent to several company directors. The news Wednesday about the closure of Cambridge Analytica does not mention Emerdata or its subsidiary Firecrest Technologies. And just one day earlier, on Tuesday, the UK Companies House website posted an update on Emerdata, noting two pending filings, for “Resolution of removal of pre-emption rights” and “Resolution of allotment of securities”. The documents are being processed and will be available in five days. Perhaps these filings will show that the company is dissolving, or perhaps they will be the standard filings of an active company. All of the other UK SCL-related companies are still listed as active and have no pending filings. The beleaguered Nix is still listed as an active director and shareholder of SCL Group and many of the related companies. Wednesday’s news is big, but it is not clear yet what it means, and whether SCL, Cambridge Analytica, Emerdata and the same executives who ran these companies during the Brexit campaign and US election will re-emerge in a new entity to continue their work.
13||How Sheikh Mansour’s decade-long spree made Manchester City aristocratsWhen Liverpool went to the Etihad Stadium for their smash-and-grab victory over Manchester City in the Champions League quarter-final second leg it was odd to hear their fans sing the straight version of We Shall Not Be Moved – “just like a team that’s going to win the European Cup”. City fans’ version of that anthem was lyrically adjusted 19 years ago, when supporters who grew up on a team of internationals in the early 1970s found themselves trailing around League One while Manchester United were on their way to the treble. Watching in disbelief defeats that 1998-99 season by Lincoln City, York City and Wycombe Wanderers, standing in Blackpool’s Bloomfield Road, which had two sides condemned, some City wags reworked the words to: “We’re not really here.” It is still sung every game, the same statement of disbelief, but now at the spectacle of a world-class team in sky blue, the most expensively assembled squad in football, and the sport’s most coveted coach actually managing Manchester City. Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan, a senior son in Abu Dhabi’s ruling dynasty, bought the club 10 seasons ago, nine years after City squeaked up from League One on penalties following Paul Dickov’s 94th-minute equaliser in the Wembley play-off final against Gillingham. On Sunday, in the stadium built with public money for the 2002 Commonwealth Games, then handed to City the year after and now sponsored by the Abu Dhabi state airline, Pep Guardiola’s team will be handed their third Premier League trophy since Mansour landed. In 116 years before that – the club was formed in 1880 as a form of social work by Anna Connell, the vicar’s daughter at St Mark’s Church – City won the league title twice. They won the League Cup twice after it began in 1960, first in 1970 during the 1968-70 era that was previously the club’s best ever, then in 1976, Dennis Tueart’s dashing overhead kick winner having to sustain a generation for 35 years of loyalty and, mostly, cock-ups. The new incarnation of Manchester City have won the League Cup three times in the past five seasons, a triumph now barely registered. This season’s third was picked up on the way to winning the Premier League but Guardiola’s specified target of succeeding in Europe was challenged by losing to Liverpool. So this decade of Abu Dhabi mega-investment has not been a reclamation of past supremacy – as Liverpool’s resurgence now feels – but rather a whole new ball game. When the takeover was announced in August 2008, there was understandable wariness about whether it was real and there were guffaws at first about the idea that Manchester City were going to buy the world’s best players and be rebuilt along the lines of Barcelona. The seriousness of that intention has been inexorably accepted over the decade, with £1.2bn invested from Abu Dhabi, the players recruited, trophies attained, stadium expanded to 55,000 capacity, the power-projecting academy and “Etihad campus” built next to it – and Barcelona’s former chief executive, director of football and coach working for City on Ashton New Road. When Mark Hughes was sacked as manager in December 2009, news of Roberto Mancini’s pending appointment having leaked before Hughes’s final game in the sleet against Sunderland, there was widespread ridicule of City’s official explanation that Hughes had failed to reach his “targets”. There were fewer sneers by 2013 when City said the same about targets as they sacked Mancini, who the previous season had delivered their first Premier League title with Sergio Agüero’s 94th-minute winner against Hughes’s QPR. The club’s hierarchy plays down the apparent conclusion that this is an Abu Dhabi state project, expanded now to City-owned clubs in New York and Melbourne, and ownership too of Girona, Yokohama Marinos and the Uruguayan club Atlético Torque, as well as partnerships to polish young players from the Netherlands to Venezuela. City, the hierarchy maintains, is a private investment by Mansour – they present the holding company City Football Group as the owner, not Abu Dhabi itself. They point to the emirate not being overtly promoted in this most globally broadcast of its ventures, although its tourist authority, Visit Abu Dhabi, is a sponsor on the City billboards and the Etihad name is hardly hidden under a bushel. Students of football history have always learned that a key achievement of Herbert Chapman’s visionary building of Arsenal in the 1930s was having the Gillespie Road tube station renamed after the club. Now the Etihad campus has its own Metrolink station taking supporters to the ground, so in modern football Manchester City have secured a transport stop named after the club’s sponsor. The very start of the takeover was different. It did look like a private purchase then, even something of a whim by Mansour, who already owned a football club in Abu Dhabi. The City deal was fronted by Sulaiman al-Fahim, a Dubai property developer, who boasted about the stars City were going to sign and the “very deep pockets” of the club’s new owner. This vulgarity did not play at all well in Abu Dhabi, whose ruling family has sought to marry the windfall of oil billions to a dignified national style. Fahim was moved aside in days and a senior figure in the country’s business and government institutions, Khaldoon al-Mubarak, assigned to chair the City investment and its reputation-shaping implications. It is a testament to how carefully Mubarak and his executives have approached it that, while there have been persistent objections, particularly in Europe, to their claiming football success by vast spending of a country’s resources, they have also won friends at home. They understood that, for all its new money, English football is still rooted in supporters’ loyalty and expected to be a community activity and that the stadium and Commonwealth Games were intended as catalysts for economic revival in post-industrial east Manchester. The Abu Dhabi investors donated 5.5 acres of the 80 cleaned up for the campus, valued at £18m, and contributed a further £3m towards an excellent new public leisure centre and swimming pool next to it. A new sixth-form college named after Anna Connell also sits on the land, next to the new Manchester Institute of Health and Performance, which is used by the club and community and in the rehabilitation of some victims of the Arena terror atrocity last year. There has not been notably vocal support in Manchester for the protests raised by campaign groups over human rights in Abu Dhabi, which have focused on the conditions of migrant workers and the 2011 crackdown on dissenters following calls for more democracy. In 2016 Manchester city council’s leader, Sir Richard Leese, declined a request by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch to condemn the abuses, replying in a letter that “the alleged issues are beyond the remit of the city council”. Then and now the council’s assessment of their Abu Dhabi investors, who are also involved in residential projects, is: “They have made commitments not only to develop a successful business but also to invest in the regeneration of the city. They have honoured every commitment and we have found them to be exemplary partners.” At the end of 10 seasons that began with the then barmy-seeming aspiration to be “Barcelona plus” Guardiola, given £200m to spend on players last summer and £57m for Aymeric Laporte in January, is expected to be further furnished this summer with a central midfield player, centre-back and forward. The aim over the next 10 years is to become “Barcelona plus plus” and nobody doubts anymore the seriousness of that, however improbable it still feels at Manchester City, for all of this to be really here.
8||Spirit of ’68 bows to market forces as rebel icons go on saleIn the turbulent days of May 1968 in Paris, a group of artists calling itself Atelier Populaire launched a guerrilla operation to turn out thousands of agitprop posters boosting the class struggle. As student sit-ins and strikes spread, the collective’s secret printing press, hidden inside the prestigious École des Beaux-Arts where the artists also slept, churned out content day and night. The hastily produced posters, many featuring a clenched fist, were often date-stamped but rarely signed. The message, not the messenger, was of primary importance; the posters were “weapons of the struggle”, not for decoration or display in “bourgeois places of culture” and certainly not for sale – ever. Fifty years on, as France marks the anniversary of May 1968 with a new wave of strikes and student protests, the leftwing idealism of the Atelier Populaire has been trumped by the commerical instincts of the free market. Today the posters are on display in museums and for sale at auctions and galleries across the world with prices topping £2,000. Currently there are exhibitions at the Musée de Beaux-Arts in Paris, and on sale at the Royal Academy’s London Original Print Fair, the Tate Modern and at Lazinc gallery in Mayfair. The dealer, Gerrish Fine Art, has amassed more than 150 rare and original Atelier Populaire posters, some of which are on sale at the RA fair for between £350 and and £2,250 each. “These icons of rebellion and civil disorder are the forerunners of today’s thriving street art movement. As monuments to the intense power of the image to bring about change, they represent one of the most potent and striking graphic revolutions in history – fierce symbols of art at the service of insurrection,” it writes. Art experts now predict a boom in demand for the work that is credited as an inspiration for punk art in the 1970s and Banksy today. Not everyone is delighted by this belated critical recognition. The French political scientist, Thomas Guénolé, a member of the hard-left France Insoumise (France Unbowed) party is shocked, but not surprised. “We have a civilisation that cannot accept that there are some things that have no price,” Guénolé told the Observer. “The Atelier Populaire was vehemently opposed to the posters being sold, clearly declaring it was unacceptable to make money from them. But we are in a society where everything is for sale: workers, culture, museums, public services, our private lives … it’s hardly a surprise that great symbols like this become nothing more than goods to be sold. We see the same with Che Guevara’s image.” In the spring of 1968, as student protests spread to the Sorbonne and strikes paralysed France, Atelier Populaire produced around 500 different posters reflecting opposition to President Charles de Gaulle, the government, the police, media and capitalism. Printed on newspaper rolls supplied by striking printers, the images were simple but powerful. As the weeks went on they developed a collective style. Gérard Fromanger, an Atelier artist, said in 1988: “We were having great fun, we lived in the school day and night, it was passionate … and we were the only ones working, which was gratifying. The whole country was on strike except us. We never worked so hard in our lives. We were printing day and night.” The École was cleared by police in the early hours of 28 June, 1968. They found a few pots of paint and a handful of posters, but not the secret printing press they were seeking. Georgie Gerrish, of Gerrish Fine Art, who has spent 12 years collecting Atelier Populaire posters, says their message is still relevant. “Everyone is realising how historically important they are. They are from a magic moment full of hope and the idea that if we pulled together we could bring about monumental change. I suppose it does seem strange selling them, but we are now 50 years on, and perhaps the motives for not selling them are not so strong.” Guénolé, a strong supporter of the ongoing wave of public sector strikes in France, said their sale is “sacrilege”. He added: “If you consider the values they represent, then selling one of these posters for £2,000 is a misuse of something sacred. And their messages are relevant today, so much so I am using them to make a point about today’s protests.”
3||How does it feel to be a woman today? It's like living in the Twilight ZoneThe Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. You would think that after a man killed multiple people because he didn’t get the sex he felt entitled to, that no one would take his ideas about women and sex seriously. Enter male pundits, who for some reason felt it totally appropriate to pontificate on whether “redistributing sex” for the poor lonely men who can’t get any is a good idea. It’s hard to describe what it feels like to be a woman in this culture right now – it’s bad enough policy-wise, but then we have the nightmare of men getting paid to treat our lives and bodies like thought experiments. Should women be hanged for having abortions? Should we have a government policy that forces women to have sex with people they don’t want to? It’s like living in the Twilight Zone. I would hate to think that only women should write about issues that affect us, but men are not doing such a stellar job lately of convincing me otherwise. Glass half full A racist tried to rip up a protest sign and … it didn’t go well. Have watched this at least five times. What I’m RTing Who I’m reading Teddy Wayne with some satirical (but familiar) suggestions for future White House correspondents’ dinner jokes; Moira Donegan on sexual entitlement; Elizabeth Segran on working moms’ worries on having a second child; and Irin Carmon with Amy Brittain on the systemic failure around the allegations against Charlie Rose. What I’m ordering Roxane Gay has an anthology that’s just come out called Not That Bad: Dispatches from Rape Culture. I can’t say I’m looking forward to reading it, but I know it will be brilliant and necessary. How outraged I am The Trump administration is pushing a policy that would essentially be a domestic gag rule – barring doctors who receive Title X funding from even mentioning the word abortion. On a scale of one to 10, I’m at a 15. How I’m making it through this week This goat working up his courage is a salve to my soul.
9||Meet the ancestors… the two brothers creating lifelike figures of early manIdentical twins with a combined age of 102, Adrie and Alfons Kennis are among Europe’s most sought-after – and controversial – hominid palaeo-artists: sculptors of lifesize reconstructions of early humans. Working from a studio in their home town of Arnhem in the Netherlands, the brothers bring a surplus of exuberance to their creations, which are richly animated, expressive and – how better to put it? – human, even when they aren’t quite human. “If we have to make a reconstruction,” says Adrie, “we always want it to be a fascinating one, not some dull white dummy that’s just come out of the shower.” In the 10 or so full-sized reconstructions completed during their career they have run the gamut of human history, from “Lucy” – the earliest known hominin fossil – to Homo erectus, Neanderthal man and, of course, Homo sapiens. Just last week, they put the finishing touches to a model for St Fagans National Museum of History in Wales. Due to be unveiled in October, it will be the third Kennis &amp; Kennis work on display in the UK. The process is exhausting. First, they rebuild the skeleton, sometimes using fossils from several different sites, with the help of computer scans and 3D printing. The skeleton is suspended with wire cables and the spine is made flexible using silicone cartilage between the vertebrae. “We use a kind of paraffin wax clay to sculpt the muscles,” says Adrie, “and we make arteries using small ropes which lie over the muscles.” Layers of another clay are then wrapped around the sculpture as skin, and a mould is made to replicate the sculpture in silicone. “We do five layers of silicone to make the skin colour,” explains Adrie, “because real skin is translucent.” To achieve the remarkable accuracy and individuality of each of their sculptures, the Kennis brothers draw deeply from two reservoirs of inspiration. First, they are students of the science behind human anatomy and evolution, constantly educating themselves about the relative merits of the human and Neanderthal pelvis, and painstakingly rebuilding skeletons and musculature for each new sculpture. Fortunately for them, their career has coincided with huge leaps in DNA testing, allowing them to accurately recreate genetic traits such as hair type and eye colour. (Earlier this year, a heated political debate broke out after a Kennis model portrayed the earliest Briton, known as Cheddar Man, with dark skin.) Second, they are keen amateur anthropologists, and their sculptures are influenced as much by modern tribal peoples as they are by the fossilised skulls of their actual subjects. By studying people from more isolated or primitive societies, the brothers believe they can see through a window into the past. “They live outdoors, with completely different rules from ours. If you see pictures of the Tehuelche people of Patagonia, they walk nearly naked in snow. They have totally adapted to those conditions. And if you imagine going much further back in time, imagine how different those people would be…” For this reason, Kennis models often exhibit unique hairstyles and tribal tattoos, and strike poses that appear startlingly modern, provoking strong reactions. “We bring it to the museum, and many times the museum directors are shocked, because they find it too extreme, too alien.” This alien-ness is tempered, however, by their particular skill for facial expressions, giving life and personality to the clay. Each full-sized reconstruction takes half a year, but a face alone can take a whole month, and although the brothers refuse to refer to themselves as artists, this is obviously the area that gives them the greatest artistic freedom and satisfaction. “There are some things the skull can’t tell you,” admits Adrie. “You never know how much fat someone had around their eyes, or the thickness of the lips, or the exact position and shape of the nostrils.” This personal quality is what makes Kennis models so captivating, and so desirable to museums: they don’t simply depict a generalised early man, but a specific man or woman, an effect that allows onlookers to glimpse human prehistory with immediacy, even familiarity. But while curators and museum-goers are sometimes surprised by the vivid, emotive features of the Kennis models, there is only one person Adrie needs to impress: “If Alfons doesn’t like the face, I am disappointed. But if he likes it, if we are both satisfied, then we can handle the whole world.” Homo sapiens and Neanderthal side by side (pictured at top of article) Natural History Museum, London These two reconstructions demonstrate the differences between an early human – in this case taken from a Czech fossil – and his distant relative the Neanderthal, reconstructed from Belgian remains. “We made them as a pair, to compare,” says Kennis. “That’s why they are in a relaxed pose, never a cliched hunting or making-fire pose, because then you can’t see the anatomical differences between them.” For the same reasons, the models are unclothed. “We like to keep them naked because then you can see the features clearly: the Neanderthals were short with big hands and a broad pelvis, the first Homo sapiens were very slender.” This has been another source of controversy in the brothers’ work. “Chris Stringer, the head of anthropology at the NHM, gets emails all the time, usually from fathers, saying it’s scandalous that his daughter had to see a naked guy in the museum. It’s always parents that make the problems Cheddar Man Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom “Cheddar Man”, Britain’s oldest complete skeleton, was a mesolithic hunter-gatherer living around 10,000 years ago. Kennis and Kennis made the reconstructed head for a Channel 4 documentary earlier this year, using the skull found in Cheddar Gorge in 1903. Contrary to previous assumptions, DNA analysis revealed that Cheddar Man had dark skin and wavy hair, and the model was met with some controversy. “Many people were surprised by his dark skin,” says Kennis, “but for us, it was not a big surprise. At least three other hunter-gatherer skeletons have been found in Europe from around the same time, and DNA tests show they all have that strange combination of dark skin and blue eyes.” Neanderthal woman and child Gibraltar Museum This pair of Neanderthals, commissioned by the Gibraltar Museum in 2016, display the Kennises’ commitment to marrying scientific accuracy with human characteristics. “When we put the skeletons together,” recalls Adrie, “we used two life models standing for us. The child model happened to put her arms around her grandmother, and the grandmother’s face was suddenly so proud – proud of her granddaughter. It was such a nice idea, the woman looking proud while the child hangs around her waist.” Not much is known about the Neanderthal sense of community, but Kennis imagines a civilised species: “Neanderthals were quite modern. In la Sima de las Las Palomas [a Neanderthal cave in southern Spain] they were found buried, aligned together, with a panther claw on their chests. They had some art, they had bigger brains than us; I think the Neanderthal community was not so different from [that of] Homo sapiens.” Early European man from Peştera cu Oase, Romania Neanderthal Museum, Mettmann, Germany “This is the first western European Homo sapiens,” says Kennis, “reconstructed from the skull of a young adult, about 34,000 years old.” At this point in prehistory, humans had migrated to Europe from Africa via the Middle East, and Neanderthals had only recently become extinct. “Modern humans [those who left Africa around 70,000 years ago] have up to 4% Neanderthal DNA, but this man has about 9%. His ancestors had bred with Neanderthals only six generations before.” As is often the case with Kennis &amp; Kennis, the sculpture has raised curious questions about race. “If you ask people to pinpoint what continent he comes from, people say such different things,” says Kennis. “But he actually comes from Romania.” Ötzi the iceman South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology, Bolzano, Italy, 2011 More recent than most of Kennis &amp; Kennis’s subjects, Ötzi lived in the Tyrolese mountains 5-6,000 years ago, during the copper age. Because his body was mummified in ice, much more can be deciphered about his physiognomy and lifestyle. “He was 45, which is quite old,” says Adrie, “and he was very sick when he died, with stomach problems. His skull has an underbite, and his face points downwards: not a pretty face. Some people who see the reconstruction say: ‘Wow! It’s good!’ because he looks like shepherds who live high in the mountains and spend their lives out of doors.” Not everyone, however, was so thrilled with the Kennis version of Ötzi. “We did some research around the village where he was found, and many people thought he was young and handsome – a Johnny Weissmuller kind of guy. You should have seen how disappointed they were when they saw our reconstruction.”
18||Kamasi Washington review – spiritual sax that packs a punchIs spiritual jazz pop music? It is now. One of the most intriguing consequences of the civic shocks and political divisions of the past few years has been a widespread hunger for more meaningful cultural output, and an enthusiastic uptake of sounds rising to the occasion. Even five years ago, the idea that a tenor saxophonist clad in a dashiki – the roomy tunic favoured by some west African men, and LA jazz man-mountain Kamasi Washington – might find his dense, maximalist triple albums high up in the pop year-end lists would have given observers pause. And yet, in 2015, it happened with Washington’s much-feted solo debut, The Epic. Although technically inspired by a dream of Washington’s, the title of the first track from that record, Change of the Guard, declared the new consciousness being ushered in, one that wed vintage Afro-futurism and a commitment to transcendence with a fresh urgency in what many were calling a new civil rights era. Tonight, there are shouts of recognition when Washington and his band load up: an introductory military rat-tat-tat from the two drummers, a flurry of electric piano, some high-speed upright bass, and nought-to-sixty breathwork from Kamasi and the more languid Ryan Porter on trombone. No one is playing themselves in: this band of long-time associates (many of them childhood friends; and, later, Washington’s father, Rickey Washington) just flick a switch. Endowed with the lung-power of a cetacean, Washington can clearly dragoon his alveoli at will; the sax looks vulnerable in his hands. Silver-booted vocalist Patrice Quinn is tucked behind a plastic sound barrier as much for her own safety as to better hear herself. From this sci-fi pod, she invokes the universe with her hands and intones heroic snatches of the bigger chorales that fill this track in its recorded version. The Roundhouse is putty in Washington’s mitts. Last month, Washington wowed Coachella, the California pop festival – alongside Beyoncé and Cardi B. Next month, he releases a mere double album, one side entitled Earth (dealing with lived reality) and the other, Heaven (creating one’s own reality). Tonight, Washington plays three tracks from it: two teased online, and one – The Psalmnist – a live debut, a restless workout that nods to the 70s. One of the reasons Washington has resonated so loudly outside jazz is due to his fine missionary work on rapper Kendrick Lamar’s jazz-inflected 2015 hip-hop album, To Pimp a Butterfly (he also contributed to 2017’s Pulitzer-winning Damn); another is that Washington is such a welcoming musician. While rigorous, his atmospheres are inclusive, not elitist; you get the feeling this band leader is more of a shepherd, not an ego with airbags. There’s a willingness, too, to draw on non-jazz forms, like the 70s fusions and 80s funk that unfurl, just a little too often, from keyboard player Brandon Coleman (“the only person I know who is more into space than I am,” says Washington, “I go outside to look at the stars and he’s been there for 15 minutes”), or the Latin rhythms that punctuate certain passages. Bits of Heaven and Earth are, however, among Washington’s most outward-facing works yet. Most rallying of all is Fists of Fury, which covers the theme to Bruce Lee’s 1972 movie of that name. (“I know it doesn’t look like it,” notes Washington, with just-so comic timing, “but I like kung fu.”) Until now, Washington’s music has provided uplift and forbearance. But he’s had enough. Coleman loops Washington’s opening stabs of sax and unleashes some blaxsploitation-era cinematic piano, and Quinn lets 2018 have it. “When I’m faced with unjust injury/Then I change my hands/To fists of fury,” she seethes. The track mounts, with the horn players eventually giving way to the percussionists trading phrases so physical that drummer Tony Austin’s shades fly off. Washington has spoken of how Stravinsky’s The Rite Of Spring has inspired him; this is a track that also deserves a riot. It doesn’t quite get one in here in Camden. As rousing as Fists of Fury is, the heart of tonight’s performance sits in a more philosophical place – the final track from last year’s splendid EP, Harmony of Difference, in which Washington played with variations on motifs, uniting them all on Truth. This rendition benefits from one more horn: the sax of Shabaka Hutchings, leading light of the recent upswell in British jazz. The four players come together, fall apart, Washington’s more lyrical playing contrasting with Hutchings’s emphatic tone; the theme passed from horns to keyboards and back again, after the rhythm section detour to Africa. This is generous, collaborative musicianship, on a track that emphasises how difference should be celebrated, not tolerated; peak Kamasi is achieved.
1||Tully review – perceptive take on the woes of motherhoodThere are certain truths about new motherhood that are unassailable. Things that lodge themselves in your psyche as permanently as the butternut squash stain on your last halfway decent T-shirt. The bone-deep exhaustion. The uneasy combination of anxiety and boredom. The pressure to bring sexy back when it feels like someone has driven a combine harvester through your nethers. All of which this latest collaboration between writer Diablo Cody and director Jason Reitman nails with harrowing accuracy. It’s not exactly new territory. But what makes Tully such a tragicomic triumph compared with the brittle perkiness of films like I Don’t Know How She Does It (2011) and the god-awful Motherhood (2009) is that the film is not afraid to mine some pretty dark thematic territory. This is thanks largely to a towering performance from Charlize Theron as Marlo, mother of three, including a newborn. Theron has perfected the dead-eyed gaze of a woman who can’t quite work out where motherly love ends and Stockholm syndrome begins. Baby weight and cupcake panic are tag-teaming to smother any spark of life she once had. Then Marlo cracks, and calls the night nanny for whom her wealthy brother has paid as a gift. Enter millennial Mary Poppins, Tully (Mackenzie Davis), an unflappable free spirit who effortlessly shoulders the burden of motherhood. Marlo’s connection with her nanny is sudden and profound: Tully is like a window into her own past self. The wistful, sometimes melancholic tone of this rueful examination of parenthood doesn’t blunt the edges of Cody’s acutely perceptive writing. And it is perhaps no coincidence that Reitman, who seemed tonally unmoored with his last two films – Men, Women &amp; Children and Labor Day – returns to the incisive form last exhibited with Young Adult, his previous collaboration with Cody and Theron. Tully is emotionally complex, bleakly funny and only slightly depressing.
18||One to watch: Sassy 009If you’re in need of a soundtrack to your summer crush – or just a song to have a summer crush on – consider Norwegian trio Sassy 009’s Pretty Baby, a pulsing, sensual track that, according to the band, “flirts with being obsessed with someone without knowing what you’re attracted to”. The three – Teodora, Sunniva and Johanna – went to school together in Oslo, and although they joked to i-D that “our first impressions of each other were: ‘Basic b*tch, I would never play in a band with her!’’’, they nonetheless ended up crafting dance tracks using a pirated verson of Logic Pro X, their voices and, incongruously, Johanna’s flute playing. Named after Sunniva’s SoundCloud profile name, they have an improvised feel in the best possible sense, a playful looseness. There is also, considering the small number of tracks they’ve released to date (Pretty Baby was followed by debut EP Do You Mind in November), a pleasing breadth to their sound, from spoken-word reverb-y darkness of Summin’ You Up to the dreaminess of Are You Leaving, which steals the flute solo back from prog with aplomb. They’re currently working on their debut album. Before that, you can catch them at the Great Escape and Field Day festivals – but it looks like it’s going to be more than a summer fling. The Great Escape, Brighton, 17-19 May; Field Day, London, 1-2 June.
1||Meet the new double act of French cinemaTwo years ago, a striking image appeared on the April 2016 cover of the esteemed French film magazine Cahiers du Cinéma. It was of a young woman with red hair swept across her forehead in unkempt strands, and a cartoonish curly moustache etched in eyeliner on her upper lip, with the caption, “Cinéma Français: Vive les Excentriques!” The picture, illustrating a feature on a tradition of oddballs in French film, was from Jeune Femme, a feature in the works from a new female director, Léonor Serraille. The film itself didn’t emerge for a whole year after that, but when it premiered in Cannes last May, Jeune Femme lived up to the advance exposure. Audiences loved it, the film won the Caméra d’Or for best debut feature, and critics raved about the positively nuclear performance of its lead, Laetitia Dosch. She plays Paula, a woman whose older boyfriend has abruptly dumped her. Paula begins the film raging at him through the locked door of his Paris apartment block, bashes her head against the door, then further vents her spleen at the medic tending her forehead. At least she’s free now, he suggests: “Freedom’s for egotistical pricks!” she spits back. Described this way, Jeune Femme could sound harrowing; but while it has its dark moments, it’s extremely funny and, yes, certainly eccentric. The Cahiers cover pic shows Paula at a fancy dress party that she’s gatecrashed by wrapping her hair around the inside of a toilet roll and going as Amy Winehouse. The moustache turns up later as an unexplained addition. Much of the publicity around the film has pitched Serraille, 32, and Dosch, 37, as a duo, effectively as adoptive sisters: one photo has them in matching red polo necks, striking identical poses. They were supposed to operate as a team when they came to London in last month, but when I arrived to interview them at a central London hotel, I found a nervous Serraille watching the clock, as she had to return to Paris early; meanwhile, Dosch hadn’t arrived because her Eurostar was held up. In the end they barely got to say hello as they crossed paths in the lobby: a farcical setup they could use if they ever make a sequel, Jeunes Femmes. They immediately strike you as complementary opposites. Dosch turns up in a loose, hippy-ish red top and speaks fast and raucously, occasionally bursting into spontaneous laughter. Serraille, in contrast, has a high, quiet voice, wears tight black and sits hunched, with her arms wrapped round herself. It’s only after a while that I notice she is several months pregnant; she’s expecting a second child, having given birth to a daughter four months after shooting the film. Serraille is so completely unlike Paula that of course you can’t help asking whether, on some level, the character really is her. “Paula’s like my double in reverse,” Serraille laughs. “That’s what was exciting. I only realised once the film was out that I’d created a character who’s the total opposite of me, and the way I approach life and people. I’m a lot more introverted, so writing the film was a sort of liberation.” Nevertheless, she and Paula have experiences in common – not the breakup, not the living in cheap hotels, but certainly the frustrating episodes of employment, notably as a babysitter and as an assistant on an underwear counter. “I worked for a very big lingerie brand in a massive knicker outlet,” says Serraille, who – like Paula – got the gig after having to enthuse fulsomely in her job interview. “The bigger the lies, the better it goes down. Who cares about the brand? You just want a basic wage, but they want to hear, ‘I’m passionate about the product’, all that crap… I needed to turn it into comedy, because at the time it was hard going.” Also hard going was Serraille’s initial experience of Paris. Originally from Lyon, she moved to the capital at 18 and studied comparative literature at the Sorbonne, later enlisting at La Fémis, the city’s prestigious film school. In the film Paula complains: “Paris is a city that doesn’t like people”, and the young Serraille felt the same way. “Every door was shut; you had to fight all the time,” she says. “It made me feel that the city didn’t want anything to do with me – but that can also give you a certain strength.” When Serraille wrote Jeune Femme, she didn’t have anyone in mind to play Paula, but felt that it shouldn’t be a known face. Then she remembered seeing Dosch. Before making a mark as the lead in Justine Triet’s 2013 comedy Age of Panic, the French-Swiss performer had worked across a range of theatre and dance, with experimental Spanish choreographer La Ribot and writing and directing her own shows. Dosch turned out to be exactly who Serraille was looking for: “I felt that she was at once totally the character, and not the character at all. When I write a script, I can be a bit precious, so I need someone who’ll come in and blow the whole thing apart.” Overall, the film was tightly scripted, but Dosch has a few moments of inspired improvisation. She prepared for the role partly by walking around the city in character. “I wanted to know how she looked at people,” she says. “She’s like an animal alone in Paris, like a rat or something. She looks straight at people a bit too much. I wanted people to think, ‘Who is she? Has she just stolen something?’ I trained myself to look suspicious!” says Dosch, and bursts into a huge, throaty laugh. It sounds a bit like the way David Thewlis turned himself into the outsider, Johnny, in Mike Leigh’s Naked. “Yes, he’s ‘un peu cockroach’,” Dosch says, mixing her languages. “I wanted Paula to have a touch of cockroach too.” What she and Serraille didn’t want was for Paula to be – in English again – “too ‘wacky girl’.” Wacky like Greta Gerwig in Noah Baumbach’s Frances Ha, to which Jeune Femme has widely been compared? “C’est ça,” says Dosch. “I don’t like that film too much.” Serraille isn’t a fan of the film either, although she admires Gerwig’s acting. “There are too many movie references in it, and things work out too easily for the character – life’s not like that.” Nothing works too easily for Paula, that’s for certain, including her relations with women – like the ostensibly chummy young mother who hires her as a babysitter. “It’s that whole thing of: ‘Oh, we’re women – we’ll get on very well – oh no, actually we won’t, because you’re my employee’,” says Serraille. “I wanted to show that things can go badly among women too.” But most of all, Paula has to endure some grisly men – one who paws her at a party, laying on the bogus sensitivity. “You’ve been crying. That touches me,” he simpers. “Go and touch yourself!” she snaps back. You might say Jeune Femme is slightly ahead of its time, as its Cannes premiere came five months before the Weinstein revelations: Paula’s experience, and her response to it, makes this a perfect film for the #MeToo era. “All I know,” says Serraille, “is that I needed this woman to be able to take care of herself whatever happened. There’s a message there: that even if everything’s broken, you can rebuild it again. It’s important for women and men to be able to feel that. “But it’s true that, given everything that’s happened since, I now read the film differently. I know a lot of women who have never been beaten or raped, but feel comfortable being in a state of submission to men. The thing about Paula is that she chooses to leave her comfort zone. She chooses discomfort.” While not a huge commercial success domestically, Jeune Femme has put Dosch and Serraille on the map, together and separately. Serraille is working on the script for her next film, although she hasn’t yet decided which project to commit herself to – it will be either a study of a male character, or a thriller; she’s also co-writing the directing debut of Jeune Femme’s cinematographer Emilie Noblet. As for Dosch, British audiences will see her in October when she comes to the Barbican theatre, London, in an adaptation of Marguerite Duras’s novella La Maladie de la Mort, directed by Katie Mitchell and reworked by playwright Alice Birch. She also has another personal project in the works. “I’m writing a play called Hate – or it could be Hâte in French [meaning “haste”]. A woman is naked on stage with a horse, and she wants to have a child with it. There are songs, poems, the horse speaks…” Dosch bursts out laughing again. On her crowdfunding page, she describes Hate as “a crazy project for crazy times.” Vive les excentriques, quoi. Jeune Femme is released on 18 May
14||London Bridge closed after man falls into ThamesLondon Bridge was closed on Saturday morning after the driver of a suspected stolen van fell into the river Thames. The man was rescued from the water and treated by paramedics at the scene. He was arrested on suspicion of theft of a motor vehicle and taken to hospital, where he remains. Police were called out at around 8am after a report that a van had been stolen and was seen heading in the direction of London Bridge. The bridge was closed as local officers, the Marine Policing Unit, the Coastguard and London ambulance service dealt with the situation. A witness said on Twitter that the man jumped, rather than fell, into the river. No one else was injured and the incident was not being treated as terrorism related, police confirmed. A spokeswoman for the Metropolitan police said: “The van collided with a number of vehicles including a bus before the driver made off on foot. “The driver, a man, fell into the river Thames from London Bridge. He is under arrest on suspicion of theft of a motor vehicle and is in hospital.” She said officers were still at the scene but the bridge had been reopened.
8||Iraq-born refugee could become first Arabic speaker to head Britain’s JewsThe most influential organisation representing British Jews could soon have its first leader from a Mizrahi – or Arab – background. Edwin Shuker, one of four candidates campaigning to be the next president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, was born in Baghdad before fleeing persecution and arriving in Britain as a refugee. Shuker, whose first language is Arabic, says the board, which has played a crucial role in recent controversies about antisemitism in Britain, must be more diverse and inclusive, and is in urgent need of a change of culture to pay more attention to grassroots concerns within the community. “I want to be a voice for the community, and the authority of that voice comes from carrying all parts of the community, their concerns and aspirations, with you,” he told the Observer. Shuker was born into a dwindling Jewish community in Iraq in 1955. Amid rising tensions in 1971 he escaped with his parents, grandmother and two sisters through the Kurdish mountains into Iran before coming to the UK as a United Nations refugee. He later lived in Israel for six years. He said his bond with the Middle East was “total and continuing”: “My identity is as a Jew from Arabia, and an Arabic and Hebrew speaker.” Acknowledging that his background could be a challenge in next Sunday’s election, he said: “It would be a huge cultural step for British Jewry to accept an oriental with a foreign accent to be their president. But I hope we are mature enough for that.” Shuker praised the actions of Jonathan Arkush, the BoD’s current president, who has joined forces with the Jewish Leadership Council to forcefully tackle Jeremy Corbyn over antisemitism in the Labour party. “When Jews stand together, we are a powerful force, and that has been demonstrated in recent weeks. But I don’t want our brilliant, creative, vibrant community to be defined by antisemitism or by our enemies.” There were issues of great importance at grassroots level in the community, such as the inclusion of women and the challenges of an ageing community, he said. “We need to use the example of the antisemitism campaign to demonstrate how much clearer our voice is when we leave our differences behind. There are people who feel their voice is not heard and their presence is irrelevant. I want to change that culture.” The BoD leadership was “top down, and I want to make it bottom up,” he said. “We need to listen and unite, and not only when the community is facing an outside danger, but also on issues that are just as important to the welfare of British Jews but aren’t getting as much attention.” The current campaign against antisemitism in the Labour party was of critical importance, “but I don’t think it can be sustained with such intensity in the long term. We need to look beyond the next headline to other methods of combating antisemitism, such as education in schools. “We need to build alliances with as wide a range of British society as possible – political parties, Christian, Muslim and other faith communities – against every form of racism. Let’s use this crisis as an opportunity to root out any attack on religion, gender and so on.” He said criticism of the actions of the Israeli government was legitimate, but that the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement “crosses a red line” into antisemitism because it sought to delegitimise the state of Israel itself. There were individuals within the UK Jewish community who took issue with Israeli government policies and actions, he said. But it was the job of the BoD president to represent the whole community, and it would be inappropriate for the leadership to publicly criticise Israel. There are four candidates in the BoD election.
16||Alastair Campbell berates Labour over local election resultsThe former Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell has hit out at the state of the party after this week’s local elections. Tony Blair’s former adviser said in a speech that “huge swathes of the country” could not accept the current party in power. “If we cannot beat this shambles of a Tory party, we don’t deserve to be in the game,” he told the centre-left pressure group Progress. Defending his comments on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme he hit out at the Momentum movement, which backs Jeremy Corbyn, for celebrating results that suggested neither Labour nor the Tories could break the electoral deadlock that delivered a hung parliament last June. “We are really clutching at straws,” he said. “If I see one more person from the Momentum side saying: ‘These are the best results since 1971’. What planet are they on? These are bad results. “You’re talking here about the government, which is possibly the worst government in living memory. You’ve had Windrush, you’ve had Grenfell, you’ve had the Brexit negotiations going from bad to worse, you’ve had the National Health Service under more pressure than it’s been for a long, long time, serial incompetence day after day after day, yet the public do not seem in nearly sufficient numbers remotely interested in supporting the Labour party.” Campbell, who backs a referendum on the terms of the Brexit deal, said Labour should not be seen as supporting Theresa May’s plans for leaving the EU. Referencing a Blair-era soundbite, Campbell said Labour should be “tough on Brexit, tough on the causes of Brexit”, fighting against the UK’s departure from the EU while addressing the concerns of those who voted to leave. He said that if Labour’s Brexit tests were to mean anything the party could not support May’s strategy. “If they do, then though the Tories will be seen as Brexit’s architect, Labour will be its bricklayer, and history is harsh when the house comes tumbling down,” he said. “My Labour tribalism is being pushed to the limit by the return of militant-style nastiness in local politics, by my revulsion that any antisemitism has been allowed to fester, by the feeling that some in the leadership and their supporters feel much greater animus against other Labour supporters than against Tories.”
22||Sheridan Smith to cast new light on lives of porn actresses in hard-hitting dramaSheridan Smith is to star in a hard-hitting drama about British porn, aiming to shine a forensic light on issues of power and consent in a controversial but lucrative industry. Adult Material, a four-part drama written for Channel 4 by the award-winning playwright Lucy Kirkwood, will tell the story of an adult entertainment star Jolene Dollar, played by 36-year-old Smith. It begins filming next year. “It’s a series I’ve wanted to make for a long time because I think the porn industry is a really interesting environment through which to look at power and how we behave in the workplace,” Kirkwood told the Observer. “It’s not a simple subject and I found the grey areas, such as the fact that it’s one of the few workplaces where women earn more than men and one of the few industries that allows women to juggle work and childcare demands, really fascinating.” Jolene is a mother of three who has built a two-decade career in the industry. “She’s not quite Jenna Jameson, but she has a following,” Kirkwood explained, referring to the prolific American star known as “the queen of porn”. Jolene finds her world turned upside down after coming into contact with a younger woman, Amy, an aspiring dancer who turns to porn while recovering from an injury. “I wanted to look at the way the industry has changed in recent years – there’s a very high turnover of actors working very intensely over a short period now, and that obviously has had a seismic effect,” Kirkwood said. “Jolene considers herself a very maternal person, not only to her own children but also in the way she looks after other women on set, and one of the things that the series considers is how women take care of other women and the culture of complicity and silence that can occur. What it means if you fail to stand up for someone or listen to them when they tell you what has occurred. “It’s also not a straightforward series. The quality of writing on television these days means that you can’t deal in cardboard cutouts. I wanted people to be sympathetic to these characters, but for questions to also be raised.” Smith was always the first choice to play Jolene. “I just think she’s extraordinary – I’ve worked with her before [on Kirkwood’s first professional play Tinderbox in 2008] and have the most enormous crush on her. She’s like an old-school movie star,” Kirkwood said. “In the beginning I worried that she was a bit young for the role, but I also found it hard to imagine anyone else having her combination of soul and really precise technique. The character of Jolene is fairly informed by her, so like Sheridan she’s warm and rude and funny and sharp.” Kirkwood, whose plays Chimerica and The Children have won multiple awards, researched the subject by talking to industry performers and directors as well as feminist anti-porn campaigners. The writer has a reputation for tackling difficult subjects, from geopolitics and particle physics to sex trafficking, and stressed that the industry’s darker side wouldn’t be ignored. “It’s a subject about which I have all manner of feelings,” she said. “It’s easy to just get angry about porn and the way in which it affects lives, but I don’t think it’s very helpful to simply dismiss another woman’s lived experience in that way. “It’s one thing to sit in a bar and argue abstractly about how porn affects us and quite another to talk to a woman whose life this is. I wanted to look at that sympathetically but not softly. I don’t think this is a subject that you can simply take a single strident position on. There’s a lot to be said about how porn is the product of a capitalist mindset and will always have people who, out of necessity or out of choice, are willing to provide it.” The series is sure to draw comparisons with The Deuce, a period piece by David Simon, the creator of The Wire, about the growth of the porn industry in New York in the 70s, although Kirkwood stressed that she had a slightly different focus in mind. “I really admire the way in which The Deuce focuses on the economy and the way in which it drives the porn industry and it’s interesting how little has really changed in the most basic sense once you remove the changes in technology,” she said. “But in some senses comparing the British porn industry to the American porn industry is like comparing the British film industry to Hollywood. There’s a sense that it’s less mechanised and more of a cottage industry in Britain and I wanted to reflect that.” Most of all though she hopes that Adult Material will force audiences to look at the industry in a fresh way. “It’s a story about women navigating their way through a difficult and constantly changing world and I hope that if anyone is dismissive of porn actresses at the beginning then they will reconsider that by the end,” she said. “What I would love is for everyone to feel that the industry has been fairly represented, but also that watching it you have been pushed into areas that you might not always want to go.”
7||TV chef Lorraine Pascale: how I eatBreakfast I make a protein shake and drink half when I get up at 5.30am and the rest of it after the gym at 8.30am. I put turmeric, matcha, maca, spirulina and bimuno (a prebiotic) in a blender and blitz it with water and berries. I also add black pepper, because otherwise the turmeric won’t be absorbed. I don’t need coffee – I’m pretty awake from all the powders. Lunch I try to eat a Mediterranean diet. If I’m at home, I’ll fry chicken sprinkled with turmeric, black pepper, oil, chia seeds and black sesame seeds, and have it with kale, blueberries, raspberries and strawberries, and a honey-and-mustard dressing. If I’m busy, I’ll order a Deliveroo from Comptoir Libanais or Squirrel, where you can build your own salad. I like the crayfish and avocado sandwich from Pret, but there’s never enough crayfish so I have to buy two. I’m over sandwiches. Snacks I always have red grapes and berries with me on the go; I have to eat all the time. I get cravings for salt-and-vinegar chipsticks from the Boots Shapers range. At the hairdresser’s, I’ll eat the sweets from the bowl on the counter. And I love a bag of Revels. I like not knowing what I’m going to get, although I learned last week that the toffee ones always sink to the bottom. Dinner I don’t like cooking every night. And now that my daughter Ella, 21, has left home, I’m back in student mode. I’ll pop to M&amp;S and get something I can throw together, like organic salmon or chicken with kale and rocket. I don’t like broccoli, but I eat it because it’s good for you. I’m quite vegetarian by default, so I’ll make a chilli sin carne or veggie thai burgers. My favourite places to eat out are Roka or Nobu for black cod, rock shrimp tempura and lychee martinis. I like the cheese trolley for dessert: anything blue and strong. Lorraine Pascale co-presents Spring Baking Championship on Food Network. Series three starts 14 May.
4||Hello purple, bye bamboo: what's hot and what's not in horticultureBlooming Purple reign The Pantone colour of the year, ultraviolet, works brilliantly with many others and is robust enough to cope with brave combinations (purple and orange, say). There’s still time to plant tubers of the cactus-flowered Dahlia ‘Purple Gem’ or, for purple foliage, Heuchera ‘Forever Purple’ or ‘Frosted Violet’. For climbers, there are many violet clematis, but I like the compact ‘Edda’, which is ideal for containers. Local landscaping There is a move to source hard landscaping from local materials, which cuts down on transport miles and gives a sense of place. Materials that feel earthy and raw, such as copper and bronze, are having a moment, says designer Charlotte Harris. Source it ethically by searching salvage and reclamation yards and sites such as Freegle and Gumtree. Asymmetrical paving Crazy paving, which emerged in a couple of Chelsea flower show gardens last year, is back again, now as a fully-fledged trend. The key is to choose quality materials. It’s eco-friendly, too: it allows you to use materials that would otherwise be deemed damaged. Shrubs Prairie grasses may look fabulous in summer, but without some structure they’re pretty drab come November. That’s where shrubs come in: container-grown shrubs can be planted at any time and add instant interest to a border. Mexican orange blossom (Choisya × dewitteana ‘Aztec Pearl’) has evergreen, glossy foliage and fragrant, white flowers in spring, and copes with most aspects other than deep shade. Osmanthus x burkwoodii is another canny evergreen, with masses of scented, white flowers in spring; it can do well in shade, although you may not get as many flowers. Both can be clipped into hedges or left to maintain a more natural outline. Smart tech It’s now possible to connect everything to our smartphones – from plant sensors to speakers. Hozelock’s Cloud Controller allows you to tweak your watering regime via an app – attach the controller to your outdoor tap, then hook up your sprinkler or irrigation system. No more wilting plants in midsummer, or wasting water when it’s not needed. Garden tech is becoming more affordable, too, putting products such as robotic mowers within reach for some. The Robomow RX12U is marketed for smaller lawns and costs £499. Fading Box A twin-pronged attack by blight and moths is killing off topiary shapes and hedges all over the country. People are moving away from tightly clipped, formal shapes towards a looser look, using multistemmed trees. Nevertheless, the search for a suitable box alternative is under way; RHS Garden Wisley in Surrey is testing 25 plants for topiary in its walled garden, including Berberis darwinii ‘Compacta’, Lonicera nitida ‘Baggesen’s Gold’ and Pittosporum ‘Collaig Silver’. Plastic When Monty Don speaks, gardeners listen, so his announcement on Gardeners’ World this spring that he is cutting back on plastic has had a big impact on horticulture. Gardening’s dirty secret is that, like most areas of life, single-use plastic dominates, from sacks for compost to plant labels. The Horticultural Trades Association has launched a takeback scheme for plastic plant pots and trays for its members, so many garden centres should now accept your old plastic, but it is better to avoid buying them in the first place. Bamboo Yes, there are non-invasive bamboos that clump rather than run, but gardeners are often poorly advised at garden centres, and end up planting types that start popping up in the lawn and romping through the flowerbeds. Plus, for bamboo to look its best, it needs plenty of room to show off, something most of us don’t have. Posh planters Modernist, monochrome, shiny containers have had their day: instead, embrace materials that weather and blend in with the space, such as wood, terracotta and galvanised steel. You could call this a British conversion to the Japanese principle of wabi-sabi, which fosters an appreciation of how materials change over time, or just a realisation that high-gloss planters make your garden look like the patio at your local pizza restaurant. If you prefer to recycle, consider repurposing a salvaged water tank or chimney pot. Manicured lawns Not only does a lawn studded with buttercups, daisies, bugle and self-heal look pretty, it also provides a source of nectar and pollen. Either leave it to grow long and carve a path or two through with the mower, or just cut back on your mowing regime by a few days to give the flowers a chance. Sow in some microclover, and you will find the lawn stays greener during dry spells, too. And that bit of moss under the tree? That’s probably because that spot is just not suitable for a thick, green sward of grass. Just remember the adage, “If it’s green, it’s a lawn.”
10||'We're not changing any stories': Trump's week of contradictionThe end of Donald Trump’s week was shaping up nicely, on paper. On Friday afternoon, he was to speak to a group of America’s most ardent gun enthusiasts, a crowd sure to shower him with the kind of mass adulation he finds so gratifying that, 16 months into his presidency, he has never stopped holding campaign rallies stocked with true believers. But Trump’s speaking engagement, at the National Rifle Association’s annual meeting, was in Dallas, and he had to get there first. That meant passing two phalanxes of reporters – one at his helicopter, one at the foot of the steps leading to Air Force One. They were bursting with questions about the whiplash turns of the past week in two of the biggest stories of his presidency, the Robert Mueller investigation and the Stormy Daniels affair. Early in the week, a paraphrased list of 49 questions had been leaked to the press that Mueller, the special counsel investigating alleged collusion between the Trump campaign and Moscow, reportedly wanted to ask the president. The questions focused on whether Trump had obstructed justice by firing the former FBI director James Comey and other acts, and what Trump knew about his campaign’s contacts with Russians. The unwritten question was whether Trump would ever agree to such an interview – and, if he did not, whether Mueller would to try to force him through subpoena. Then Trump’s most freshly recruited lawyer, the former New York City mayor and unashamed Trump cheerleader Rudy Giuliani, went on TV and delivered a bombshell. He said that money used to seal a 2016 hush agreement with the porn actor Stormy Daniels had come from Trump, who had earlier flatly denied, on camera, any knowledge of the $130,000. Confronted on the tarmac at Andrews air force base about the Daniels payment, Trump grew aggressive. “This country right now is running so smooth, and to be bringing up that kind of crap, and to be bringing up witch-hunts all the time, that’s all you want to talk about,” Trump said. But wasn’t he the one who had an alleged extramarital affair with a porn actor, then secretly moved money to pay her not to talk about it right before the election, then said he had no knowledge of the payment, then this week tweeted that non-disclosure agreements “are very common among celebrities and people of wealth”? “We’re not changing any stories,” Trump said. With the tangled vines encircling Trump’s White House growing ever thicker, the president’s path to emerge from the scandals around him becomes increasingly obscure with each passing day. At the same time, the tools at Trump’s disposal to free himself might not be as effective as they once were. Not so long ago, the hiring of Giuliani, a former US attorney and street fighter who goes so far back with Trump that he once dressed in drag and pretended to be molested by him, might have enhanced Trump’s power to take his case to the American public. Instead, on day one, Giuliani, 73, appeared to be having trouble getting up to speed on the foregoing months of lawsuits and contradictory statements that the president’s camp has issued about the Stormy Daniels affair. The former mayor immediately stepped in it, letting slip that Trump had paid his personal lawyer Michael Cohen $35,000 a month in part to meet the payment made to Daniels. That gave the lie to a Trump statement aboard Air Force One on 5 April, when reporters asked him whether he knew where Cohen got the money to pay Daniels. “No, I don’t know,” Trump said. On Friday, Trump blamed Giuliani’s newness in his role as he tried to clear up confusion about the payment – “It’s actually very simple,” Trump said, without explaining how. “Rudy is a great guy, but he just started a day ago,” adding: “He started yesterday. He’ll get his facts straight. He’s a great guy.” “It’s a question of misinterpretation,” Giuliani chimed in in a separate interview, which concluded with a denial that he had lost his place in the president’s affections: “He says he loves me.” Those who would speak for Trump must be willing to ride the narrative tiger, and sometimes to be bitten. Even Sarah Sanders, the counter-attacking White House press secretary, adopted a defensive crouch when she was pressed on Thursday to explain contradictions in the changing White House account of the Stormy Daniels case. “Again, I gave you the best information that I had,” Sanders said, over and over again. While the struggling among Trump’s surrogates to stay on the same page has a slapstick quality, the seriousness of the allegations that Mueller is weighing against Trump lends an air of tragedy to the White House comedy of errors. And downright ominous are the partisan attacks on the rule of law that the president continually deploys in an effort to free himself from his problems. “You have all these investigators; they’re Democrats,” Trump said of the special counsel’s team, some of whom have made campaign donations in the past to Democrats. “In all fairness, Bob Mueller worked for Obama for eight years.” That is not true; Mueller, a lifelong Republican and decorated Vietnam veteran with a reputation as a straight-shooter, spent 12 years as FBI director, overlapping for 4.5 years with Barack Obama and 7.5 years with George W Bush, who appointed him. Comfortable, clearly, in his contradictions, Trump said on Friday that he really wanted to sit for an interview with Mueller to help sort everything out, but his lawyers were counselling against it. “I would love to speak,” Trump said. “I would love to. Nobody wants to speak more than me – in fact, against my lawyers’ – because most lawyers, they never speak on anything. “I would love to speak, because we’ve done nothing wrong. There was no collusion with the Russians. There was nothing. There was no obstruction.” In the convention hall at the NRA meeting in Dallas, Trump got the roaring reaction he had come looking for, as he delivered red-meat lines about freedom and protecting gun rights. But then he lapsed into reflections on his favorite topic: himself. The president bragged about how Kanye West supports him, and claimed his popularity had “doubled” among African Americans as a result. “Kanye West must have some power,” Trump said, and the sea of gun owners cheered.
8||Ruffled feathers: feral peacocks split community in CanadaFor a decade, a group of feral peacocks have divided the community of Sullivan Heights. Some of the residents of this suburban neighbourhood outside Vancouver love the birds, who have taken up residence in the local trees; others say they are kept awake by the peacocks’ screeching. For Parminder Brar, the final straw came last year, when he says his father injured himself slipping on peacock excrement on Brar’s property. He formally issued a request to take down the tree where the peacocks had built a nest. The city turned him down. So, this week, Brar cut down the tree himself. The move has sparked a furore in Sullivan Heights, angering his neighbours and potentially earning Brar a fine of up to $10,000. “The majority of us love them. They add value to the neighbourhood,” says Katie Taylor, who has lived on the street for 12 years. Unlike their native counterpart, the Canada geese who periodically stop by and can be aggressive, the peacocks have proven to be peaceful neighbours. “We haven’t seen any aggression from the peacocks,” Taylor says. “You can feed them from your hands.” Many of the residents on the Sullivan Heights community Facebook page feel less warmly towards the birds. Complaints to the city authorities have been submitted since as far back as 2009, after a nearby farm where the peacocks used to feed closed down and the birds chose to relocate to Sullivan Heights. The city initially responded by sending animal control staff to round up the peacocks and release them elsewhere. But the birds kept returning. Ultimately, the issue was dropped because the community was split over whether to let the birds stay. “It’s a legal grey area,” says Jaspreet Rehal, the city’s public safety manager. “They don’t fall squarely into any animal control rules, regulations and bylaws.” Nevertheless, he says Brar’s decision to take the law into his own hands was wrong. “Cutting down the tree was not an option. It was a very healthy tree, it was important to the environment around it and we take tree removal very seriously.” The next step, Rehal says, is to convene a consultation with the community as a whole to decide what to do, with the likely result that the peacocks are relocated. For now, the birds have taken to perching on Brar’s roof.
0||ECB plans to allow Hundred teams to reserve local star playersEngland’s new 100-ball tournament could feature local marquee players to ensure the eight teams do not go without high-profile cricketers from their respective regions. The Hundred, which begins in 2020, will feature squads of 15 selected predominantly via a draft system, with budgets estimated to be in the region of the £900,000 salary cap in place for franchises in Australia’s Big Bash League. The thinking is to have up to four slots for overseas players – three in the playing XI – and the 15th squad member as a wildcard pick from the Twenty20 Blast that precedes it, allowing in-form but undrafted county players a late route in. Each team will have a designated general manager who will oversee their squad lists. Though the eight teams are expected to have names that do not reflect existing county or city identities, there is a growing belief among the boards that will run them, and those working on The Hundred’s regulations, that some local flavour is needed in the squads. To that end, plans are being considered that would allow teams to reserve one or possibly two local marquee players before the first round of the draft so that, say, the Edgbaston team could guarantee a Birmingham-born cricketer such as Chris Woakes or Moeen Ali in its ranks, or the Headingley side contains some Yorkshiremen. Teams who opted not to do this – the Cardiff side, for example, may not consider a Glamorgan player suitable for a top berth – would likely then get priority come the first round of the main draft, in which the general managers will take it in turns to select players using preset salary bands. With Test cricket set to be played at the same time, it remains to be seen whether England’s red-ball players are also allocated to their existing “home” teams or to another if their county’s is not one of the eight host grounds. Given their availability is expected to be greatly reduced, they may well sit outside the 15-man squads. As well as drawing on up to 96 of the 420 professional cricketers in the County Championship, depending on how many overseas players are drafted, The Hundred will also involve a number of county coaches and support staff seconded for the duration of the tournament even though their main employers will still be playing domestic cricket. International coaches who travel the global domestic Twenty20 circuit, such as Gary Kirsten or Tom Moody, will doubtless be sought out by some teams but the organisers hope the best of British talent gets a chance, too, by arranging their release. David Ripley of Northamptonshire, who has had success in Twenty20, is one example. Needless to say, while the competition does not start for another two years, the counties are keen to know as early as possible which players and support staff will be lost to it. They are pushing for an early draft, while the debate continues as to whether 50-over or championship cricket should be played during this time. The team behind The Hundred at the England and Wales Cricket Board, led by Sanjay Patel, will meet representatives of the Professional Cricketers’ Association at Edgbaston on Tuesday to explain the rationale behind the format. The latter will seek an explanation as to why this is occurring after the decision has been made. The PCA will have players from each of the 18 first-class counties, plus representatives of the England men’s and women’s teams, and intend to hold an in-house meeting in advance to ensure their primary concerns – such as the move away from T20 to a format that is not played at international level – are coordinated. The players’ union is under pressure from its members to provide strong leadership as the cricketing landscape shifts, not just in regards to The Hundred but during the continuing negotiations over the new county partnership that will kick in when the ECB’s £1.1bn five-year broadcast deal – which is worth more than double the one it replaces – begins in 2020. As with the Australian pay dispute last year, there will be strong emphasis on remunerating emerging players during talks over a new salary cap. During the week the PCA highlighted nine cricketers whose county terms have been under the national minimum wage in the past 12 months in what it called “widespread employment contract abuses”. English cricket has been advised to adopt a collective bargaining model by players’ union chief, Tony Irish. The executive chairman of the Federation of International Cricketers’ Association (FICA) is counselling a radical change in approach. “A number of countries have collective agreements between the board, the players’ association and the states or franchises operating in domestic cricket. These agreements regulate player contract issues such as player numbers, standard contracts, minimum and maximum contract amounts and so on. An agreement such as this involving the counties could be put in place.”
4||10 herbs you probably haven't heard of but should be growingIt is no secret that I think with my stomach. And as summer approaches, my thoughts turn greedily to herbs. But let’s be adventurous here: a single plant of something new can radically change your cooking, offering new pairings and flavours. So it’s time to think beyond parsley, basil and rosemary. I have another agenda for wanting more herbs in your life: I’ve become president of the Herb Society, founded by the magnificent Hilda Leyel in 1927, who believed passionately that herbs increased our health and wellbeing. If I wish anything for you this growing season it’s that you sow from seed, because the rarer stuff is often not available as plants at garden centres, where there’s limited space. Seeds take up no room and can be sent anywhere. Plus, there’s the satisfaction of seeing through the whole life cycle with nurture and love. Here are 10 herbs to expand your range: all, I promise, will bring joy to you, your garden and the bees. 1 Sweet bergamot, Monarda didyma Also known as bee balm or oswego tea, this is a North American prairie herb. It tastes of bergamot, with a hint of mint and thyme. If you like Earl Grey tea, you’d enjoy this as a great infusion and it’s a beautiful, bee-friendly addition to the garden. Buy from victoriananursery.co.uk or chilternseeds.co.uk. 2 Lettuce-leaved basil, Ocimum basilicum ‘Foglia di Lattuga’ I know, I know, basil doesn’t sound original, but this one is a monster. The leaves grow hand-sized, meaning a single leaf fits perfectly in a sandwich, with a flavour similar to sweet basil but slightly stronger. Grow in a pot, somewhere sheltered and warm; slugs love the large leaves when young, so mollycoddle it. I’d even consider growing inside on a windowsill until July. Buy from seedsofitaly.com. 3 Summer savory, Satureja hortensis If you use a lot of thyme in cooking, then you’ll love the tender tips of summer savory. This is the herb to pair with beans, with its sweet, spicy, peppery notes and pungent aroma. Or use under the skin of a roast chicken, in pork dishes and with cabbage. It is easy to dry for winter. It grows best in full sun, in free-draining soil, and is very happy in a pot. It is not frost hardy. Buy from sarahraven.com. 4 Mitsuba, Japanese wild parsley Somewhere between parsley and celery, and with a hint of sorrel and coriander, this is a subtle herb. Use the sprouts in salads and the leaves much like parsley. If your garden is shady, this is the one for you. Grow it in the sun and it will taste bitter. Buy from kingsseeds.com or chilternseeds.co.uk. 5 Tulsi, Ocimum tenuiflorum Holy basil makes for a wonderful tea and smells heavenly of peppermint, cloves, liquorice and lemons. It’s a tender, sun-loving plant and may need to be grown on a warm windowsill if you don’t have a sheltered garden. It’s a little tricky from seed: you need a heated propagator and good light. Buy young plants from victoriananursery.co.uk or pepperpotherbplants.co.uk, or seeds from jungleseeds.co.uk. 6 Korean mint, Agastache rugosa This is somewhere between mint and basil; the leaves smell distinctly minty, but there’s also an aniseed flavour present. It’s a very handsome plant, growing up to a metre and loved by bees. It can grow in sun or part shade, in humus-rich soil. Sow now on a sunny windowsill. It works well in spicy dishes and fish stews. Buy from realseeds.co.uk. 7 Houttuynia cordata If you have a pond, grow this strange and wonderful edible in its margins. There’s a variety called Chameleon, which is green, pink and white, or a more refined double white flowering form. I can best describe the taste as somewhere between fish sauce and something floral, and it smells of orange peel. You can eat it raw or use in a fish curry. Buy from mr-fothergills.co.uk or crocus.co.uk. 8 Par-cel, cutting celery If celery has alluded you as something impossible to grow well, try par-cel, a cross between parsley (easy to grow) and celery (not so easy). It’s grown for leaf production rather than stems, and is sweeter-tasting than celery leaves. Useful for stocks and soups, and healthy yet tasty so you can munch on it daily. Sow it now in sun or part shade. Buy from chilternseeds.co.uk. 9 Chop suey greens, Glebionis coronaria An edible chrysanthemum that is used as a leaf vegetable. Pick the leaves young and use immediately or they taste very bitter. Good with rice. Let a few grow tall for the lovely yellow flowers (also edible). Sow now, in full sun. Buy from kingsseeds.com. 10 Vietnamese coriander, Persicaria odorata A lemony, minty coriander that’s a doddle to grow in a pot, doesn’t mind if you forget to water it, and packs a punch in slaws, summer rolls, chicken and potato salads and in spicy soups. It’s not fully hardy, so will need protection and is best bought as a plant, as the seeds are not widely available. Buy from norfolkherbs.co.uk. • Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
23||Alabama's lynch mob memorial: reporting on an American tabooBy any measure, Bryan Stevenson has achieved incredible things during his career as a civil rights lawyer in the deep south of America. He has spared more than 128 people from the death chamber; brought the plight of children sentenced to die in prison before the US supreme court, which ruled the practice unlawful; and has been one of the country’s leading critics of mass incarceration of African Americans. And now, his years of legal work and activism have led him to create a national memorial in Montgomery, Alabama. It is America’s only memorial dedicated to lynching victims. Over six acres, 800 rusted steel cylinders suspended in the air represent the more than 4,000 men and women lynched at the hands of white people in America between 1877 and 1950. Each slab carries the names of victims and the county where their lynchings took place, most of them in southern states: Georgia, Tennessee, Mississippi, Louisiana ... As our journalist Jamiles Lartey observed, to walk through the site is to symbolically watch a person being hanged by the mob. Inscriptions give the public the deplorable reasons why victims were killed: for “frightening” a white girl, for standing around in a white neighbourhood, for organising coal miners, for daring to ask a white woman for a glass of water. Our task as editors and reporters was how to do justice to this remarkable story. How would we be able to capture the essence of what remains a daring proposition in today’s America? Should we show readers the horror of lynchings by using graphic pictures (we decided the answer was yes). Should we be as bold as Stevenson and use words such as “sadism” in our headlines, knowing that some readers would find that hard to stomach? (Again, we decided yes). We also wanted to underline an essential feature of the memorial and its twin Legacy Museum: that they are not academic pieces rooted in the past, but explorations of modern America that draw a direct line from slavery to the present day. Just last month a young man called Diante Yarber was killed in a hail of bullets fired by a police officer; two black men were kicked out of a Starbucks for “trespassing” (they weren’t); and a woman named Chikesia Clemons was arrested and tackled to the floor by a policeman, her breasts exposed, after a disagreement with a store employee. The Guardian shares Stevenson’s commitment to confront the battles of today by airing and understanding the sins of the past, which is why we were determined to portray his creation as powerfully and meaningfully as possible. For us, journalistically, that meant relating some of the highly distressing stories of what happened in the lynching era, as well as exploring some of the contemporary manifestations of racial injustice in the US. This resulted in our series Pain and terror: America’s history of racism The Equal Justice Initiative, Stevenson’s civil rights organisation, gave us full access as their media partners at the two-day summit that they held to mark the opening of the memorial and museum. Our first challenge was to find a special way of portraying the memorial itself, deploying the Guardian’s full range of journalistic tools, including video, reportage and photography. We wanted to find a relative of someone who had been touched by lynching to walk through the memorial grounds with the Guardian team. We were grateful, with EJI’s help, to be able to tell the extraordinary story of Vanessa Croft, whose uncle Fred was forced to flee Alabama as a teenager, having narrowly escaped his own lynching. On the day of the shoot, a storm brewed in Alabama. The weather forecast was so bad that it looked as though Croft, who lives two hours from Montgomery, would be unable to reach us. To our huge relief, she decided to brave it and having negotiated torrential rain spent an hour with us walking through the memorial. It was a moving experience for us: not only did she share her family’s most traumatic event, she also gave us a glimpse of what it’s like to be a black woman living in the deep south in 2018: just a few weeks ago, after work, she was followed by a huge truck sporting two confederate flags all the way home. You can read more about Croft’s story, as well as the odious crimes committed in the lynching period, in our feature The Sadism Of White Men: Why America Must Atone for its Lynchings. All in all, the Guardian spent four days on the ground, reporting from the EJI summit. We listened to, and interviewed, many of the most prominent advocates for racial justice in America today, including the reverends Jesse Jackson and William Barber, the US hip hop band The Roots, the film maker Ava duVernay, the former vice president Al Gore and a senator, Cory Booker. It was striking that thousands of people, black and white, had travelled long distances – including across the country – to mark this event. There was a sense, which we tried to convey in our journalism, that a major taboo in American cultural life had finally been broken. By acknowledging the fiercely uncomfortable truth of what white supremacy had done to so many communities, over so many years, the beginning of a process of healing had begun. By the end of Friday we felt we had helped, in some small way, to tell the story of America’s truth and reconciliation. That sense of something new was felt powerfully when standing in a crowd of thousands of young Alabamans in Montgomery’s Riverfront park for EJI’s final event: a concert of top musicians who support the mission. The surprise guest was announced by Stevenson himself. As Stevie Wonder made his way to the middle of the stage, a devotional silence fell in the crowd. With a hint of melancholy in his voice, the singer made an impassioned speech about the lynching victims, saying he shared their pain. He then performed an unscheduled, spine-tingling rendition of the Negro spiritual Swing Low, Swing Chariot. “Well now if you get there before I do, comin’ for to carry me home”, sang Wonder, whose mother was from Alabama, “Tell all my friends that I’m a comin’ too, comin’ for to carry me home.”
3||Identity politics has veered away from its roots. It's time to bring it backIdentity politics have become a convenient scapegoat for the deepening political divisions in the United States. Though evidence for the claim is thin, detractors blame Hillary Clinton’s presidential loss on her choice to provide a platform for discussions of identity and inequality during her campaign. In the months leading up to 8 November 2016, Clinton differentiated herself from her opponent by becoming the candidate who cared about America’s underserved groups: women, immigrants, the LGBTQ community, black and Latino voters, and the many people whose identities span multiple categories. Her supporters rallied behind the Big Tent slogan: “Love Trumps Hate.” But on election day, it did not. In an interview with 60 Minutes last fall, Steve Bannon, the former chief strategist for the White House and chairman of Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign, warned, “The longer they talk about identity politics, I got ’em.” A skittish left might view Bannon’s words as an imminent threat. But identity politics are not to be feared. Their effectiveness as a progressive political strategy, however, is undermined by their misuse. When a group of black feminists called the Combahee River Collective coined the phrase “identity politics” in 1977, they imagined that the “seemingly personal experiences of individual Black women’s lives” would provide the foundation for a politics that is “actively committed to struggling against racial, sexual, heterosexual, and class oppression”. Their ideology began with self, but it was not self-obsessed. Ultimately, they knew their work would benefit everyone. Since then, identity politics have veered away from Combahee’s foundational ideals. We should return to them, not to appease the right wing but to reaffirm the importance of a progressivism that touts liberty and justice for all. Identity politics become flimsy when they devolve into shallow back-and-forths that conflate lived experience with sound political analysis. A worldview that moves us closer to equality doesn’t stem from living in a certain kind of body. It emerges from pursuing a certain kind of politics. When identities can be invoked to assert an unquestionable authority, marginalized people can get by making dubious or completely false claims because of their “lived experience”. As secretary of housing and urban development, Ben Carson, has endorsed delays of anti-discrimination regulation in housing and called poverty “a state of mind”. Carson, himself, grew up impoverished in Detroit. He documented his journey to becoming a renowned neurosurgeon in a widely read autobiography, Gifted Hands. Because of his personal story, Carson is held up, by himself and his supporters, as a testament to the supreme importance of hard work. But the belief that grit is the key to escaping poverty is contradicted by decades of social science research. Poverty persists because of a crumbling social safety net not a culture of dependency. Carson’s anecdotes are compelling, in part, because our lives do matter. Marginalized people gain a unique insight into systemic inequality because we face it every day. For too long those stories have been doubted or dismissed by claims that only an “objective” or “dispassionate” viewpoint can be trusted. But lived experience is one form of knowledge that should be considered alongside others, and stories are most useful when assessed within a broader context of structural inequity. The Combahee River Collective argued that one’s political consciousness colors how one will interpret life events; thus, similar experiences can lead similarly situated people to draw divergent conclusions. For example, every black American who grew up like Carson and went on to be successful will not share his views. In fact, based on the racial makeup of the Republican party, most do not. So sweeping generalizations about the lives of oppressed people that are backed up only by stories of individuals should always be interrogated because so many of those conclusions collapse when examined more closely. A misuse of identity is not just a conservative problem. In the #MeToo era, women are empowered to call on their experiences with bias and sexual assault and create change within industries that facilitate abuse. But those traumas are not a pass for women to avoid difficult questions about the substance of their activism. Actor Rose McGowan emerged as a sexual assault activist in the wake of the Harvey Weinstein scandal that upended Hollywood’s silence on the mistreatment of actresses. When a trans woman confronted McGowan about her past transphobic comments at a book event, she responded angrily. On Twitter she charged that the audience and her staff failed to protect her during the exchange, and she refused to apologize for the statements. Instead, the actor-turned-author cancelled the rest of the book tour. Though McGowan’s identities as a woman and a victim of sexual assault are central to her activism, using them to shut down criticism is unproductive for the movement she advocates. Trans women are also victims of discrimination in employment, housing and healthcare, and an inclusive feminism must invest itself in recognizing all who are vulnerable. These sorts of oversights are easily correctable if acknowledged, but treating identities as credentials discourages critical self-reflection. Thoughtful conversations and meaningful activism require a measure of openness that the current paradigms for identity politics don’t always allow. We have to make sure that our exchanges do not reproduce oppressive power dynamics, but every challenge is not oppressive. An identity politics that is not principally concerned with dismantling all forms of inequality quickly devolves into a never-ending game of oneupmanship where self-satisfaction is all that’s won. For marginalized people, our power comes from seeing identity as a starting point, not the end. Kimberly Foster is a cultural critic and editor-in-chief of For Harriet, a digital community for black women
4||How to fix shady gardens, create shelter or hide the bins: tips from Chelsea starsThe challenge: a windy spot Juliet Sargeant A lovely view can come with a downside: exposure and wind. Wind is your garden’s enemy – it evaporates moisture from leaves, batters branches, and can uproot plants. And it makes sitting out deeply unenjoyable. If your plot is wide open on all sides, first decide which view you want to focus on and where the prevailing wind is coming from. Then work on framing that view and blocking the wind. In the case of one client, we built a wall to run the length of one side: don’t build a solid wall surrounding a garden, it may cause strong eddies in certain spots. It’s better to construct a partial wall with gaps, or use slatted fencing. If you can’t build a barrier, it’s surprising how much more sheltered your garden will be by just digging down a foot (try sitting on the ground to see for yourself). Trees can also provide a natural barrier; try Tilia cordata, Crataegus monogyna, Alnus cordata, or Sorbus aria. When planting on a windy site, think of your plants as providing different lines of defence. The first, most exposed ones need to take anything the elements can throw at them: try Griselinia littoralis, Elaeagnus x ebbingei, Tamarix tetrandra, Euonymus japonicus, Olearia macrodonta or Hippophae rhamnoides. Plants farther in don’t need to be quite as resilient: consider Pittosporum tenuifolium, Laurus nobilis ‘Angustifolia’, Nassella tenuissima, miscanthus grasses, mophead hydrangeas, larger, fleshy-leaved hebes, Rosa rugosa and figs. In the more sheltered heart of the garden, you could plant canna lilies, oleanders, Solanum crispum, scented pelargoniums, ornamental bananas, crinums, Agapanthus africanus, Trachelospermum jasminoides, giant echiums and Campsis x tagliabuana. Plants suited to coastal, Mediterranean, drought-resistant climates work well in exposed sites: for example, senecio, santolina, rosemary, lavenders, olives, phlomis, helianthemum, Trachycarpus fortunei and Euphorbia wulfenii. In any exposed site, make your plants as resilient as possible: stake them for up to four years, encourage them to be as healthy as possible by cutting back in autumn, and feed and water to build up their strength. Put down lots of manure, mulch with shingle to lock in moisture, and plant densely. Juliet Sargeant won gold and people’s choice at Chelsea in 2016 for the Modern Slavery garden; julietsargeant.com. The challenge: an awkward shape Nic Howard I love challenging plots. In fact, an awkward-shaped garden is often easier than a rectangle – with the latter you usually end up dividing up the space and putting in angles to make it more interesting. I recently designed a small triangle-shaped courtyard garden (pictured above) which was previously a gloomy, shady plot with overhanging ivy. I created several triangle-shaped beds, all abutting a paved floor and following the same line. It’s useful to think of a small space as a room: by doing this, I divided the garden into three zones – for dining, seating, and for plants. A right-angled fitted wooden bench forms an enclosed seating area, positioned at the same angle as the triangular beds. For small spaces, I usually opt for a paved surface over a lawn. A lawn is like a barrier, similar to a rug in a living room: people tend to edge round it rather than walk on it. I mentally divided the garden in two to lend it structure, and planted roughly half the site with green plants and shrubs, and the opposite side with colourful flowers. At the centre of this invisible divide is a large wall-mounted mirror that provides a focal point and reflects a different part of the garden when you look at it. It is mounted on an ugly wall that was built in the 1980s. Any messy wall or fence will look better painted black, and provides a stunning backdrop to white flowers. If you’re lucky enough to have a gorgeous old wall, make a feature of it. With a small plot, you have to embrace what space you have and plant accordingly. Keep your palette limited. I had only six or seven different plants on each side of the garden. Similarly, don’t introduce too much colour with garden furniture and accessories: choose an accent colour and use sparingly. Nic Howard designed sculptor David Harber’s garden at Chelsea in 2017, which won five stars as well as the RHS director general’s tradestand award; we-love-plants.co.uk. The challenge: a roof garden Manoj Malde Done well, a roof garden can be a wonderful extension of indoor space. Before you start, make sure the roof is structurally sound. It must be able to hold several people, furniture and soil-filled planters – remember, the latter are heavier when wet (to keep the weight down, fill the bottom of pots with broken polystyrene pieces). If you’re not sure whether your roof is load-bearing, do this simple test: does it have sides or balustrades and a door leading to it (as opposed to a window)? If so, the architects probably designed it for human use. If not, track down the architect’s drawings to see how it was constructed (an estate agent should be able to help) or get a structural engineer or surveyor to advise if extra support is needed. A roof garden also needs a slight slope so water can run off – it’s rare for a flat roof to have no gradient (they are usually imperceptible) and drainpipe; if yours doesn’t, a landscape contractor can compensate this in the build of the flooring or decking. Alternatively incorporate self-watering tanks into the containers – the plants use the water as and when they need it. Once you’re ready to start designing, work out which direction the prevailing wind is blowing; roof gardens can be exposed, and even if they’re surrounded by buildings, the wind will hurtle through gaps. Try to block these with larger planters or fencing. For one of my clients, there was no barrier around the edge of the garden, so I used the planters to form a “wall”. However small your roof garden, try to zone it: a sheltered area for relaxing, a space for cooking, a spot with a table. Aim for plants that thrive in exposed conditions – anything with small, waxy or hairy leaves, or silvery/grey stems help prevent evaporation. Go for olive trees and large cushions of Pittosporum tobira ‘Nanum’ for structure, lavender and rosemary for robust scent, Perovskia for scent and silvery stems, Panicum and Pennisetum grasses for lightness and movement, Verbena bonariensis for height (they also have strong stems). Finally, consider the logistics of getting large plants and trees on to your roof: think about door openings and ceiling heights. Manoj Malde won a silver gilt at Chelsea in 2017 for his garden, Beneath A Mexican Sky; manojmaldegardendesign.co.uk. The challenge: deep shade Tom Stuart-Smith When it comes to gardens in deep shade, the trick is to embrace it, rather than fight it. In the summer of 2013, I won a competition to design a tiny garden in a dark and dingy courtyard at the Royal Academy in London. Most of it gets no direct sunlight and is surrounded by tall sooted brick walls. Our solution was to embrace its drawbacks, and introduce a simple palette of plants to give it a really strong character. We used more dark brick to make the space even darker, and filled it with tree ferns. They are extraordinary, almost primeval. Ferns don’t need much light or soil, so we planted them through the paving. They irradiate even the darkest corners with an almost fluorescent light, so make a dark space feel brighter. We chose the tall tree fern Dicksonia antarctica, from south-east Australia. The first challenge with tree ferns is believing that the log you are delivered will actually grow; the next is getting it to stand up. We resorted to shoving a 12-inch steel pin up the trunk. As well as the ferns, the garden has the shade-tolerant evergreen Pittosporum tobira ‘Nanum’, the lush Hakonechloa macra grass, and Virginia creepers growing up the walls. Sedges and grasses add a soothing feel. Bamboo is another good plant for deep shade, particularly if you’re looking to divide up the space by creating “screens”. Similarly, spotted laurels and fatsias can survive with little natural light, but take up a lot of room. Tom Stuart-Smith has won eight gold medals and three best in show awards at Chelsea; tomstuartsmith.co.uk. The challenge: hiding bins and bikes Gavin McWilliam My design partner Andrew Wilson and I are getting more and more requests to design bin storage into our gardens. If storage has to be on display, then try to make sure it’s a good-quality finish. If you can hide it, then do – either by placing it behind a hedge, or planting in front of it. Any storage is better than having ugly plastic bins on show – just remember to leave enough room for access. We often design bespoke bin storage for clients, as part of a bigger garden design, but more affordable off-the-peg options are really good now – try wayfair.co.uk or, more top end, gardentrellis.co.uk. With wooden slatted bin storage, which is the most common, look for more open slats so they don’t smell too much. Look for top, lift-up lids, which are easier to access. If the finish is a little rough, stain it black. It’s a misconception that garden furniture and storage has to be green or brown – these colours actually stand out. Black recedes, and highlights anything planted in front of it. For one client, we designed a log screen – a steel frame that is filled with chopped logs, used for the fire. It’s used to hide all the gardening paraphernalia, from bins to tools. For another client’s Georgian terrace front garden, pictured above, we designed both bin and bike storage. The bins are stored in a simple bespoke western red cedar slatted store, designed to match the fence behind it. The bike storage is on the lower-ground level, accessed via a set of steps. We wanted to make a feature of it at ground-floor level, so built a bespoke planter above from Cor-ten, a steel that, over time, gains a lovely weathered, rust-coloured patina. We filled it with soil and planted it with Crataegus prunifolia ‘Broad-Leaved Cockspur Thorn’ tree, underplanted with Molinia caerulea subsp. caerulea ‘Heidebraut’ and Aquilegia vulgaris var. stellata ‘Black Barlow’. Gardening paraphernalia (hoses, tools, electrics) can be ugly. For the same client, we designed a wall-to-wall screen in black charred larch, that sits half a metre back from the rear wall of the garden. Behind it are pipes, drains, an irrigation system, hoses and gardening tools. The pleached trees provide privacy from neighbouring houses. Gavin McWilliam and Andrew Wilson won gold at Chelsea in 2017 for the Breaking Ground garden; mcwilliamstudio.com. The challenge: a small urban plot Kate Gould For city dwellers, a garden is often an extension of their home, and people want to use it all year round. One client, who had a garden about the size of a living room – 11m x 5m – accessible only through the house, wanted me to design an attractive space, as she and her partner entertain a lot. She wanted their young sons to enjoy it, too. It also had to incorporate some clever bin storage. We couldn’t lay a real lawn, as it’s concrete underneath with no drainage, so we went for artificial grass – a realistic, thatchy soft grass (easigrass.com) with a rubberised bottom, so the boys wouldn’t hurt themselves when they fell over. Alternatively, you could paint a concrete floor and put down outdoor rugs (Ikea has cheerful, affordable options). To provide an element of privacy from neighbouring houses, we kept wooden trellising, which surrounds the garden at shoulder height but doesn’t take away too much light. In a small plot, it’s better to have a few well-filled larger pots rather than a lot of smaller ones – it’s more dramatic and welcoming, and less bitty. So we positioned large steel planters around the perimeter, along with a bespoke steel and wood barbecue unit, and then rolled out the grass. We filled the planters with white hydrangeas, ferns, hellebores, and tiarella. We planted a green wall at the rear of the plot, with more ferns and herbs, incorporating an irrigation system. We trained a scented Chinese jasmine, Trachelospermum, up the walls and trellis: it flowers only sporadically in shaded spots but likes the warmth of an urban garden. At the house end, where there is more light, are foxgloves and penstemons. A wooden bench seat with cushions (from zarahome.com) doubles as recycling storage. Alongside it is a vertical wooden planter filled with herbs – perfect for when space is tight. We painted a black downpipe white, to blend with the walls. Good lighting prolongs use into the evenings. So we filled the garden with festoon lights strung on hooks, up-lights and fairy lights on a bay tree. Kate Gould won gold and best in category at Chelsea in 2017 for her City Living garden; kategouldgardens.com. • Interviews by Hannah Booth. This article was amended on 11 and 17 May to correctly accredit the work of Andrew Wilson and Gavin McWilliam. Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).
5||Genderquake: Channel 4’s non-binary answer to Big Brother“To those people who say we don’t exist, I’m right fucking here,” says Saffron, a non-binary 22-year-old and force of nature whose defiance masks a world of pain. In Genderquake (Monday, 9pm), Channel 4’s non-binary answer to Big Brother, 11 people of assorted sexuality and gender identity are parachuted into the Sussex countryside to live together for a week. In between barbecues, hot tub sessions and alarmed encounters with cows, life stories are swapped, differences thrashed out and tears – theirs and ours – shed. What looks on paper to be an exercise in the worst form of televised manipulation turns out to be a candid, eye-opening and frequently joyful study of lives across the gender spectrum. Among the housemates is Brooke, 24, who has Klinefelter syndrome, which means she has an extra X chromosome. Despite having been born a boy, she began growing breasts and developing female characteristics when she was 13, which went down like a cup of cold sick at her boys’ school. There is Cambell, a 22-year-old trans woman who has undergone hormone treatment since she was 16 and has recently completed gender reassignment surgery. There’s also Marcus, a gay man in Cruella de Vil makeup; Phoenix, a “freaky alien child” who identifies as 70% female; and 21-year-old Tom, a straight man from Barnsley who declares: “You’ve got a penis, or you’ve got a vagina. There’s no in-between, is there?” Reality TV convention dictates that, when strangers are thrust together, there should be a villain in their midst. At first, that role seems to be fulfilled by Tom who, despite having never encountered transgenderism, has clear views on the subject. In the event – spoiler alert – it takes less than a day for him to have his mind blown, to renounce his penis-or-vagina stance and assume the role of house agony uncle. “I’ve learned more in the last six or seven hours than I’ve learned in my whole life. It’s fucking crazy,” he sniffs. Less so the pale, stale males and overnight gender experts in the local pub whose eyebrows shoot into orbit as the visitors troop in for a pint. “It’s all become quite fashionable, it’s nothing more than that,” says one man to Saffron, who has just patiently explained her experience of gender dysphoria. There are those who will argue there are more serious ways to investigate transgenderism in the 21st century, possibly involving academics, medical experts and social commentators. But there can be no better way to get to grips with the trans and non-binary experience than meeting those living it. Here, there are open-hearted discussions about hormone treatments, surgery, sex, beauty regimes and what makes a woman. Bullying, bigotry and the fear of ending up alone are also recurring themes. In its ruminations on identity and selfhood, Genderquake is honest and open, and lays waste to notions of transgenderism as an extreme form of attention-seeking. “It’s never been more confusing to be young, free and single,” says the opening voiceover. But these fearless young people know exactly what and who they are. The confusion lies with the rest of us.
0||Arsenal v Leicester City: Premier League – live!Arsenal are ripped to shreds! Tielemens hits an excellent high pass over Xhaka, who was snoozing a bit, for Under, who runs into the area and half-volleys a cross for Vardy, on the edge of the six-yard box, to head into an empty net! 78 mins: Nearly a something! Vardy lifts the ball over the defence for Under, who was only a good first touch away from a great chance! It’s a bad first touch. 75 mins: Cengiz Under comes on, replacing Barnes. “Sorry you missed the end of Groundhog Day,” writes Niall Mullen. “*SPOILER ALERT* It turns out the secret to spiritual fulfilment is kindness and the ability to be present. Anyway, as I haven’t forked out for the PPV, I’ve had the time to put together a Bill Murray football XI: Broken Tim Flowers Caddyshackinfenwa The Life Aquatic With Steve Zizou Brian Lyttle Shop of Horrors Fantastic Ruel Fox Ian Rushmore Zombielandy Townsend Moonrise Kingdominic Solanke The Darjeeling Limiteddy Sheringham Marlon Kingpin Groundhog Damian Duff” Excellent idea. Um, Bas Dost in Translation? El [Grand Budapest Ho]Tel? 74 mins: A long Leicester move ends with Tielemans and Lacazette on the floor in pain and Evans in the book, apparently for being the only one of three players attempting to win the same header to walk away from it. 73 mins: Leicester are playing with more intent now, as if the idea from the start was to hold arsenal for an hour, bring Vardy on and feast on their frustration. 69 mins: That was Arsenal’s first shot of the second half, 22 minutes into the second period. 68 mins: Save! Aubameyang gets to the byline and crosses, and Bellerin runs onto it and volleys goalwards, but Schmeichel pushes clear! 67 mins: Maddison gets booked for manhandling Lacazette, who to be fair was in his way. 65 mins: Nicolas Pepe comes on for Saka, who has been bright in attack but insufficiently incisive, and completely missed his kick when he had a sight of goal. 61 mins: Remarkable scenes! The ball breaks free on the Leicester left. Bellerin commits and slides in, Justin gets there first, prods the ball away and goes down over Bellerin’s leg. It is as fouly a foul as you’re ever likely to see, and quite possibly a second booking for the Arsenal full-back. The referee, for some reason, waves play on! 60 mins: Jamie Vardy is back! Praet, meanwhile, goes off. 59 mins: A lovely pass from Saka to Tierney takes Castagne out of the game, but Fofana gets back to block the cross. 57 mins: Another Lacazette foul, and this time he’s booked for running into Evans as the defender leapt for a header. Meanwhile, Jamie Vardy appears to be preparing to enter the fray. 57 mins: The shot goes high and also wide. Still, Leicester have had more shots in the last five minutes than in the previous 50. 56 mins: Now Lacazette fouls Mendy, maybe 30 yards from goal, and another Maddison shot might be on its way. 55 mins: Another Maddison shot, this from only 20 yards or so, after Castagne tackles Xhaka on halfway. This one deflects wide off Gabriel. 54 mins: Maddison wins the ball from Gabriel and has a shot from the halfway line, which floats harmlessly into Leno’s arms. 52 mins: Fofana gets booked for kicking Saka in the ankle. A legitimate attempt to win the ball, but all he got was opponent. Saka eventually gets to his feet and hobbles away. 49 mins: David Luiz is off, and Shkodran Mustafi is on. 48 mins: Gabriel gives the ball away, and for a moment Praet has an opportunity to play in Maddison. He doesn’t take it, and both Leicester players react with frustration. Meanwhile, David Luiz goes down as he tries to get back into position, presumably with some kind of muscular something. 46 mins: Peeeeep! Arsenal get the second half started. Both sides are unchanged, at least in terms of personnel. Both sides will be looking for an improvement in the second half, as indeed will neutrals. On the plus side, one of the great benefits of this whole work-from-home business is that I can pop downstairs at the interval and get a glass of wine. 45+3 mins: And that’s all for now! Safe to say it has been cagey, but Arsenal have had a goal disallowed and missed a couple of other good chances, and will feel they should be leading. 45+1 mins: Into first-half stoppage time, of which there’ll be two minutes or so. “Lacazette is giving one of his impressions of a small elephant that can’t play football,” writes Charles Antaki, “while Aubameyang is twiddling his thumbs out somewhere on the right. A conundrum.” 44 mins: Leicester have the ball for a while, and Arsenal very quickly drop until all 11 players are within 30 yards of their own goal, and eventually a Fuchs pass is intercepted by Ceballos. 42 mins: Ceballos lifts the ball into the penalty area, and it dips onto Saka’s left foot, but it’s a swing and a miss! 41 mins: Another yellow card, Tielemans punished for tripping Saka as he led a break. I wonder what percentage of all yellow cards these days are for deliberately preventing an opposition break? 39 mins: Arsenal are having very little fun down the middle. Their best hope looks to be long passes to one or other full-back and then a decent cross. As I type that, Gabriel chips a nice pass over the middle of the defence and Saka is only just offside. 38 mins: Fofana is back on the pitch and looks to have fully recovered. 34 mins: Lacazette is a little later to challenge Fofana as he clears. There’s not a lot of contact, but Fofana goes down and seems genuinely sore as the physios come on to look at him. The break gives us a chance to have another look at the disallowed goal, which could have been allowed to stand by a more forgiving VAR even if the offside Xhaka had to jump out of the way of the ball as it headed towards goal. 32 mins: And another one! Fuchs slides through the back of Lacazette and is inevitably booked. 30 mins: Yellow card! Bellerin trips Barnes, and gets cautioned for his pains. 29 mins: Bewildering miss! Castagna misjudges a crossfield pass to Tierney, who is thus free to send in a cross to Lacazette. It’s at head height, but Lacazette, put off perhaps by Fuchs, who lifts his foot in an attempt to get something on it, makes terrible contact and from five yards fails to convert! 28 mins: Tierney sends in an excellent cross, which dips onto the head of Lacazette at the far post, but maybe just an inch or two high. The ball loops off his head, up into the air and down into Schmeichel’s gloves. 25 mins: Another ball over the defence to Bellerin, who volleys in a low cross but Lacazette hasn’t anticipated it, and it’s cleared for a corner. 24 mins: A quarter of the way through the game, and Arsenal have certainly looked the more threatening side. I’m remain to be convinced by Barnes as a solo centre-forward. 21 mins: An excellent pass from Xhaka releases Lacazette on the left, who holds it up and passes infield to Saka, whose shot from an acute angle is stopped by Schmeichel. The flag goes up, but Lacazette was onside and any goal would have stood. 18 mins: Leicester break and Barnes crosses from the right, but it goes just behind Justin and his is the only blue shirt in the penalty area. 15 mins: Arsenal have really thrown themselves into this game, and have shown plenty of attacking endeavour. They win another corner, but it’s not a good one and it bounces out of play on the far side of goal. 13 mins: Now Arsenal cross from the right, and Gabriel attempts an overhead that becomes a clearance, sending the ball out to the left. Arsenal cross again, and Gabriel gets up, dusts himself down and tries another overhead, which is only marginally better than the first. 11 mins: Chance for Arsenal! Bellerin is played through by David Luiz. He brings it under control and he need only square the ball to give Lacazette a tap-in, but Evans slides in to block! 9 mins: It’s a deeply rubbish free kick, hit slowly into the knee of someone in the wall. 9 mins: Lacazette is tripped, 23 yards from goal or so, and Xhaka will fancy his chances of influencing play again. 7 mins: I’m not sure anyone touched the ball after Lacazette flicked it on, so it must have been disallowed for Xhaka influencing play by standing in front of the goalkeeper. 4 mins: Goal! Bit it’s disallowed! Arsenal win a corner, flick it on at the near post, and it goes in at the far! There were three Arsenal players offside when it was flicked goalwards, and at least one of them in Schmeichel’s path, so the question was what the goal would get disallowed for rather than whether it would get disallowed at all. 3 mins: Good spot, this: 2 mins: Shot! Leono hits a limp clearance straight to Madison, who tries to lift the ball into the empty net from 40 yards or so, but it floats just wide. 1 min: Peeeeeeep! Leicester get the game started! The players come out! While we wait for kick-off, here’s Brendan Rodgers on Jamie Vardy: He’s trained the last couple of days and looked good, so that’s means he’ll be a possibility from the bench. With so many games ahead we didn’t want to take a risk, but I’m sure he’ll play a part. And here’s Mikel Arteta on Leicester: I think they are a very complete side, and tricky to deal with, because they are really good on the ball in positional play, but they are really good in transition as well. They can go high press, they can defend really deep as they did against City. I think they’ve come a long way, they’ve improved a lot as a team and it will be really tough tonight. I’m very much looking forward to this game, but while I waited for Sky’s expensive pay-per-view service to kick in I discovered that Groundhog Day is on Dave and I have a bit of a thing about it, and now I’m going to miss the end. I’m so annoyed I’m going to refuse to make the obvious joke about Leicester’s trips to Arsenal. Three changes for Arsenal, who bring in David Luiz, Alexandre Lacazette and, for a first league start since moving to the club, Thomas Partey. Two changes for Leicester, who bring in Christian Fuchs and James Maddison and leave out Ayoze Perez and Kelechi Iheanacho. The big news, though, is that Jamie Vardy is back in the squad but not in the starting line-up, restricted as he is to the bench. The team sheets have been handed in, and the key names tonight are these ones: Arsenal: Leno, Bellerin, Luiz, Gabriel, Tierney, Ceballos, Xhaka, Thomas, Saka, Lacazette, Aubameyang. Subs: Runarsson, Maitland-Niles, Pepe, Mustafi, Elneny, Willock, Nketiah. Leicester: Schmeichel, Fofana, Evans, Fuchs, Castagne, Tielemans, Mendy, Justin, Praet, Maddison, Barnes. Subs: Morgan, Vardy, Albrighton, Ward, Iheanacho, Under, Choudhury. Referee: Craig Pawson. Leicester haven’t won at Arsenal in any competition since 1973, and most recently lost to them in the Carabao Cup a month (and two days) ago. That strikes me as statistically unlikely. I mean, that is a seriously rubbish record, a history so dismal there is no sensible explanation except witchcraft. Arsenal haven’t lost a home league game in October in 32 matches since 2002, which also smells suspiciously like witchcraft. So though the teams start the game tied on nine points, the Gunners have history and some kind of magical protection charm in their favour. In addition, the Foxes have lost their last two league matches, at home to West Ham and Aston Villa, which isn’t encouraging, though they did win their last away game at Manchester City, which is. At stake today is a place in the top four, which will be enjoyed by whoever wins the game, if indeed anyone does. Welcome! Kick-off: 7.15pm GMT
1||Coronavirus lockdown in Melbourne extended as federal parliament returns – politics liveWelcome to the ninth-last week of the year. It starts, as so many have recently, in Victoria, where Melbourne remains under restrictions. Daniel Andrews had said as recently as Friday that there was cause for optimism, but with a new cluster of cases in the city’s northern suburbs, a very cautious approach is being taken to any reopening. The family whose child went to school while infectious has spoken to the Age and said they were cleared by Victoria DHHS to leave quarantine, and there were no specific instructions for any of the family members to remain in isolation. There will be more questions on that. In parliament, the House of Representatives will sit and estimates continues – it is Treasury’s time under the spotlight, so expect more questions on the Asic expenses controversy, following Friday’s shock revelations which led to James Shipton standing aside, pending an investigation. It is also Health’s time – not only will there be Covid updates, but also some questions on the CovidSafe app, which was meant to be like “sunscreen”, but hasn’t lived up to the hype (what a surprise). Elsewhere, the Queensland election has entered its final week of campaigning, with Labor facing serious losses in the north and far north – the election is anyone’s at this stage. Queensland is always hard to pick, being three distinct electorates in one, and the only safe prediction is to be prepared for any outcome. We’ll bring you all the day’s events as they happen. You have Amy Remeikis on the blog and the rest of the Guardian brains trust at your disposal. It’s going to be a four-coffee day. I can feel it. Winter has made a last gasp here in a dreary Canberra, so hot cups of something won’t be far away. Ready?
2||Coronavirus live: daily infections exceed 50,000 in France; global cases reach new recordA further 76 people who tested positive for coronavirus have died in hospital in England, bringing the total number of confirmed deaths reported in hospitals to 31,819, NHS England said on Sunday. Patients were aged between 43 and 100. All except three, aged between 71 and 83, had known underlying health conditions. The deaths occurred between 28 August 28 and 24 October, with the majority being on or after 21 October, NHS England said. One other death was reported with no positive Covid-19 test result. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) on Sunday called for global solidarity in the rollout of any future coronavirus vaccine, as the number of cases soared across the world. In a video address at the opening of the three-day World Health Summit in Berlin, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the only way to recover from the pandemic was together and by making sure poorer countries had fair access to a vaccine. “It is natural that countries want to protect their own citizens first but if and when we have an effective vaccine, we must also use it effectively. And the best way to do that is to vaccinate some people in all countries rather than all people in some countries,” he said. “Let me be clear: vaccine nationalism will prolong the pandemic, not shorten it.” Scientists around the world are racing to develop a vaccine against Covid-19, which has killed over 1.1 million people globally. Several dozen vaccine candidates are currently being tested in clinical trials, ten of which are in the most advanced “phase 3” stage involving tens of thousands of volunteers, AFP reports. The European Union, the US, Britain, Japan and a slew of other nations have already placed large orders with the companies involved in developing the most promising vaccines. But concerns are growing that countries with smaller wallets could be left at the back of the queue. The WHO has launched an international scheme known as Covax to help ensure equitable access to jabs, but it has struggled to raise the funds needed. France registered 52,010 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, following a record 45,422 on Saturday, the health ministry said in a statement on Sunday. It also said that 116 people had died from coronavirus infection over the past 24 hours, compared to from 137 on Saturday, taking the total confirmed death toll to 34,761. The new cases brought the total to 1,138,507, putting France now ahead of Argentina and Spain to become the country with the world’s fifth highest number of cases, after the US, India, Brazil and Russia. Turkish Airlines will be putting foreign national pilots on unpaid leave to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on its finances, Bloomberg reported on Sunday. Turkey’s national carrier informed some of its foreign crew staff by email that they are to go on leave from 1 November, and that the decision would be reviewed after six months. It wasn’t immediately clear how many pilots will be affected, and whether Turkish nationals would escape the cost saving measure. A spokesman for Turk Hava Yollari AO, as the airline is officially known, declined to comment. The company reported a loss of 2.23bn liras ($280m) in the second quarter, with passenger numbers down by almost two thirds this year. Israel will begin human trials for a potential Covid-19 vaccine developed by a research institute overseen by the Defence Ministry on 1 November after receiving regulatory approval. The Israel Institute for Biological Research (IIBR) began animal trials for its “BriLife” vaccine in March. The health ministry and an oversight committee have now given the green light to take it to the next stage. Eighty volunteers aged between 18 and 55 will be monitored for three weeks to see if virus antibodies develop, the ministry said in a statement. A second phase, expected to begin in December, will involve 960 people over the age of 18, Reuters reports. Should those succeed, a third, large-scale phase with 30,000 volunteers is scheduled for April or May 2021. If successful, the vaccine may then be approved for mass use. The vaccine, the ministry said, has already tested well on a number of animal models and the IIBR has produced more than 25,000 doses for the first and second phases of the clinical trials. “Our final goal is 15 million rations for the residents of the State of Israel and for our close neighbours,” said IIBR director Shmuel Shapira. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc, Johnson &amp; Johnson, AstraZeneca Plc and Moderna. Israel, with a population of 9 million, has begun easing a second nationwide coronavirus lockdown after a steady decline in the rate of daily infections. The country saw 692 new cases on Saturday - down from a peak of more than 9,000 several weeks ago. It has reported 2,372 deaths from the pandemic. The US saw its highest ever number of new coronavirus cases in the past two days, keeping the pandemic a top election issue as Vice president Mike Pence travels the country to campaign despite close aides testing positive. The US reported 79,852 new infections on Saturday, close to the previous day’s record of 84,244 new cases, as we reported earlier. Hospitalisations are also rising and have hit a two-month high and deaths are trending upwards, according to a Reuters tally. So far in October, 29 states have set records for increases in new cases, including five considered key in the 3 November presidential election: Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Hospitals are strained in several states including North Dakota, which is the hardest hit based on recent new cases per capita, according to Reuters. The city of El Paso in Texas is asking residents to stay at home for the next two weeks and the wider El Paso County closed its parks and recreational facilities for 14 days. Over the last three weeks, the number of hospitalised Covid-19 patients in the El Paso area has tripled to a record 786, according to state data. “If we continue on this trend, we risk detrimental effects to our entire healthcare system,” the city’s public health director, Angela Mora, said in a statement. “For the sake of those hospitalised and the frontline healthcare workers working tirelessly each day to care for them, we ask you to please stay home for two weeks and eliminate your interactions with those outside your household until we can flatten the curve.” The Czech government will almost certainly have to tighten its anti-coronavirus measures again as current curbs have not halted a surge in infections, prime minister Andrej Babis said on Sunday. Cases are up across Europe, but the Czech Republic has recorded the sharpest rises in infections on the continent in recent weeks, Reuters reports. The government on Wednesday ordered most shops and services to close and sought to limit movement to essential trips only. “The measures which we have taken, aren’t working yet,” Babis said in a video message on his Facebook page. “The next week will be the key one, and unless a miracle happens, we won’t have any other choice than to tighten our measures further,” he said. Babis said that he wanted Christmas to be celebrated as normal, but that he could not promise anything for now. “I don’t know what will happen with the virus. I don’t know,” he said. The total number of coronavirus-related deaths doubled to more than 2,000 over the last two weeks. The Philippines’ coronavirus tally surpassed 370,000 on Sunday with 2,223 new confirmed infections, while the death toll edged nearer to the 7,000-mark. The department of health said confirmed cases now stand at 370,028 in total, of which 35,015 or nine percent are active cases. Of these currently ill patients, 82% experience mild symptoms, 11.3% have no symptoms, 2.4% are severe cases, while 4.2% are in critical condition, the latest report detailed. The department clarified, however, that 16 laboratories were not able to submit their case reports on time and were not yet included in the latest count. The Philippines is now joining countries such as the United States, the UK, France, Saudi Arabia and Finland in starting to train specialist sniffer dogs to identify Covid-19 carriers, CNN Philippines reports. “Based on the study from other countries, the accuracy rate of Covid-19 detection dogs is 95 to 97%,” said Ryia Tabares, a representative of Universal K-9 Training and Services Inc, the company working to replicate the same efforts in the country. His colleage Gerry Tabares said the company is currently training at least 12 dogs to detect the virus by sniffing. Gerry said while such a task isn’t limited to certain kinds of dogs, their students are of the Belgian Malinois, Labrador, and German Shepherd breeds. “Those are the current breeds that we are training right now. So far, we are successful,” Gerry said. “As you can see in the demonstration, they can really detect the face masks of Covid-19 infected patients.” The UK recorded 19,790 new coronavirus infections and 151 deaths on Sunday, official data showed. New cases dipped from Saturday’s 23,012, and the number of deaths within 28 days of a positive test was also down slightly from 174 the previous day. The Welsh government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. Health minister Vaughan Gething told The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday that the restriction, which has seen aisles cordoned off and plastic sheeting placed over products, had been applied differently in stores across Wales. Guidance previously published by the Welsh government said certain sections of supermarkets selling electrical goods, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares, among others products, must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public” during the lockdown. More than 50,000 people have signed a petition submitted to the Welsh Parliament calling for the ban to be immediately reversed. Supermarkets have been told they must only sell essential items to discourage people from spending more time than necessary in shops and be fair to retailers selling non-essential items only who had to shut shop. The ban on selling non-essential items was announced in the Senedd on Thursday after Conservative MS Russell George said it was “unfair” to force independent clothing and hardware retailers to shut while similar goods were on sale in major supermarkets. Gething told the BBC the Welsh government had worked with supermarkets on the ban and discussed which items were affected by it. “It’s also about reducing the opportunity for contacts. That’s what we’re really trying to do – we’re asking people to stay at home to stay lives, that really is right back where we are,” he said. The Welsh Retail Consortium called for the ban to be “dropped quickly” and warned it could result in the “safe flow of customers” being undermined due to changes in store layouts, the PA reports. Italy reported a new daily record of 21,273 coronavirus cases with 128 deaths, health ministry figures showed on Sunday, up from the 19,644 new infections reported on Saturday. Earlier, the Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, announced a package of new restrictions to combat the pandemic. Hello everyone, I’ll be bringing you the latest key developments in all things Covid-19 for the next few hours. As ever, don’t hesitate to get in touch if you have relevant updates or comments to share, either via Twitter @JedySays or via email. I won’t always be able to respond, but I read everything. That’s it from me this Sunday - my colleague Jedidajah Otte will take over shortly. Here’s a summary of events so far today: •The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. •An official from China’s Xinjiang health commission said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. •The United States saw 83,718 new cases reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the reord 83,757 infections reported on Friday. •The prime minister of Italy Giuseppe Conte announced a raft of new restrictions and warned that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. •Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. He said: “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic.” •The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas in the United States said it was “extremely disappointed” after the Trump administration pulled out of a deal offering the Christmas legends early access to a Covid-19 vaccine in exchange for promoting it. Earlier reports from Kashgar in the Chinese province of Xinjiang described flights being cancelled in and out of the region, with 15 new cases across the country and 405 asymptomatic patients under observation. Now an official from Xinjiang health commission has said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. The parents of a 17-year-old girl who was found on Saturday to have the virus but showed no symptoms worked there, an official from Xinjiang health commission told a press briefing. Kashgar launched a testing programme on Saturday night covering the region’s 4.75 million people. As of Sunday afternoon, more than 2.84 million people had been tested and the rest would be covered by Tuesday, the city government said in a statement. Four towns in the Kashgar region were identified as “high-risk” areas, according to a statement from Kashgar city authority on Sunday night, and stringent controls such as travel restrictions are expected. 1,104 new cases of Covid-19 have been diagnosed in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 42,681. Public Health Wales said five further deaths had been reported, with the total rising to 1,777. The Welsh government has imposed a 17-day “firebreak” lockdown which started on Friday in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boiko Borisov, has become the latest political figure to test positive for the new coronavirus. “After two PCR tests from today I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page, adding that he had mild symptoms and would quarantine at home. Borisov, 61, self-isolated on Friday evening when a deputy minister of regional development he had been in contact with five days before tested positive for the virus. Bulgaria, a country of under 7 million people, weathered the first wave of the coronavirus relatively well, but the number of cases and hospitalisations surged over the past weeks, reaching a total of over 37,500 cases and 1,084 deaths on Sunday. On Thursday, the government made masks mandatory in crowded outdoor spaces, in addition to all inside public areas and transport in a bid to curb the number of infections that threaten to break the country’s severely understaffed medical system. The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard on Sunday showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. AFP reports that the WHO’s complete figures for Saturday showed that 465,319 cases were confirmed to the UN health agency during the day, topping the 449,720 recorded on Friday and the 437,247 logged on Thursday. The WHO has warned that some countries are on a “dangerous track”, with too many witnessing an exponential increase in cases. According to the WHO’s figures, there have been more than 42.3 million confirmed cases of the respiratory disease, while nearly 1.15 million people have lost their lives, including 6,570 on Saturday. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. In total, more than 9m cases have now been registered in the region. “We are at a critical juncture in this pandemic, particularly in the northern hemisphere,” WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Friday. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track.” Qatar has signed an agreement with drugmaker Moderna Inc to buy its potential Covid-19 vaccine as soon as it is approved and released for global use, state news agency QNA reported on Sunday. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc , Johnson &amp; Johnson and Moderna. “Negotiating early and securing a number of agreements enhances our chances of getting sufficient quantities of the vaccine early,” Reuters quoted Abdullatif al-Khal, chair of a national Covid-19 health group, as saying. He did not say how many doses Doha was requesting. Earlier this month, al-Khal said Qatar signed an agreement with Pfizer and BioNTech to supply Qatar with their vaccines. Moderna said last month it was on track to produce 20m doses of its vaccine by the end of the year, while maintaining its goal of readying 500 million to 1 billion doses in 2021. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in the United States: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). Hospitals in the Swiss city of Geneva on Sunday issued a call for medically trained volunteers and recently retired staff to help tackle a record number of Coronavirus patients anticipated in the coming days. AFP reported that Geneva University Hospitals (HUG) said the number of coronavirus patients was expected to be “far higher” than at the peak of the pandemic’s first wave in March. According to the latest figures released Friday by the Swiss health ministry, 5,057 new cases of the respiratory disease were registered in Geneva over the previous 14 days - an incidence of 1,012.5 per 100,000 people. Cases, hospitalisations and deaths in Switzerland have doubled from one week to the next throughout October. The government is expected to decide Wednesday on new measures to control the spread of the virus. “It is highly likely that the peak of 550 hospitalised Covid-positive patients that we recorded during the first wave will be greatly exceeded in the coming days,” said HUG director-general Bertrand Levrat. “We anticipate that the number of beds and professionals needed to treat Covid and non-Covid patients will be far higher than what we experienced this spring.” •This post was corrected at 3:25pm. A previous version said that Geneva is Switzerland’s capital. Still in the UK, NHS chiefs have denied claims that thousands of frail, elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic, Denis Campbell reports: NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts.” The newspaper claimed that the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. You can read the story in full here: In the UK, the Royal Mail has announced that around 33,000 temporary jobs will be available this year over the Christmas period - over 10,000 more than its usual seasonal average. The postal service typically employs between 15,000 and 23,000 extra staff between October and January to help sort the additional Christmas volumes of parcels, cards and letters. Royal Mail says that such a high number of workers is needed this year because of elevated parcel volumes due to an increase in online shopping caused by the coronavirus crisis. The United States came close to setting a single-day record of coronavirus cases in the latest figures, having already done so 24 hours earlier. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Read more on that story here: In Italy, Conte also said that taking strict measures now would allow for a relaxation before Christmas. “We think that we will suffer a bit this month but by gritting our teeth with these restrictions, we’ll be able to breathe again in December,” he said. Italy’s prime minister has now given his press conference (see earlier post) announcing new restrictive measures and warning that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. Giuseppe Conte’s government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums will stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been strongly advised not to leave their homes unless for work, health or education purposes. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the new decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the new measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. Still in Spain, Sánchez said that his government will use the state of emergency to impose an 11pm-6am nationwide curfew, except in the Canary Islands. The prime minister says that Spain’s 19 regional leaders will have authority to set different hours for the curfew as long as they are stricter, close regional borders to travel and limit gatherings to six people who don’t live together. “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic,” Sánchez said after meeting with his Cabinet. The leader added that he will seek the endorsement of the Parliament this week to extend the state of emergency for six months, until May. Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency (see earlier post) in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. The Socialist leader told the nation in a televised address that the extraordinary measure will go into effect on Sunday, AP reported. Sánchez had called a cabinet meeting to prepare the measure, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. The National Institute for Public Health reported 10,203 confirmed cases of Covid-19. The daily case count in the country has risen steeply since the beginning of September. This is the first time the figure has been above 10,000. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Here’s a clip of Anthony Fauci’s interview with Andrew Marr which we reported on earlier. Here’s a summary of the key developments of the last few hours. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections. •In Italy, the government was reported to have agreed a raft of new measures to combat the spread of the virus, with prime minister Giuseppe Conte due to make a statement at 1.30pm local time. •In Poland’s capital, Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus. •In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. He also said the government was reviewing the length of the 14-day isolation period for travellers coming to the UK from abroad. A second firebreak lockdown could be required in Wales by January or February next year, Wales’ deputy minister for economy and transport has said. Lee Waters said the Welsh government was trying to “flatten the curve” of the second wave of Covid-19 but could not stop the virus from spreading entirely. Waters told BBC Wales’ Sunday Supplement: “This is not the last lockdown we’re likely to see. I think the projections in the papers we’ve published on our worst-case scenarios shows it’s likely we’re going to need to have another firebreak in January or February. “It’s important that we can show that we are being rational, we’re being evidence-based and we are being transparent. We are trying our best to do that.” Earlier, Welsh health minister Vaughan Gething told the BBC’s Andrew Marr show that the Cardiff government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items. “We’re reviewing with supermarkets the understanding and the clarity and the policy because there’s been different application in different parts,” he said. Waters echoed those remarks, saying: “We’re going to sit down with the supermarkets to review how this has gone over the weekend. “We’re not reviewing the requirement for supermarkets not to sell non-essential, we’re going to review how it’s working in practice because clearly there are some bumps.” The government in Italy has now agreed on measures (see 10:01am) to limit the spread of coronavirus, reports in Italy suggested. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is due to make a statement at 1:30pm local time. Reuters said that measures agreed between Conte’s government and regional authorities ordered bars and restaurants to close by 6pm and shut public gyms, cinemas and swimming pools. The decree encourages people not to go out and to limit contacts at home with anyone outside their immediate family, but does not impose a mandatory nationwide curfew or lockdown and allows shops and most businesses to remain open. However, service in bars and restaurants will be subject to a series of controls to limit contagion, and cinemas, theatres, gaming halls and discotheques will be closed. The decree also directs that up to three-quarters of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in school buildings. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah rejected on Sunday a proposal by prime minister Muhyiddin Yassin for him to declare a state of emergency in response to the coronavirus crisis, saying that he did not see the need. Critics say Muhyiddin’s request for emergency rule, which would include suspending parliament, is an attempt by the premier to stay in power amid a leadership challenge. Malaysia is experiencing a resurgence in virus infections and on Saturday saw its biggest daily jump in cases with 1,228 new cases, Reuters reported. The palace said Muhyiddin made the request for emergency rule to deal with the coronavirus pandemic, but that the government has been handling the crisis well. “Al-Sultan Abdullah is of the opinion that there is no need at the moment for His Majesty to declare an emergency in the country or in any part of the country of Malaysia,” the palace said in a statement. “His Majesty is confident in the ability of the government under the leadership of the prime minister to continue to implement policies and enforcement efforts to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic.” The constitution gives the king the right to decide if an emergency should be declared, based on threats to security, economy or public order. Muhyiddin has been in a precarious position since he took office in March with a two-seat majority. Uncertainties deepened after opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim said last month he had the parliamentary majority to form a new government. In Poland’s capital Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus, a police spokesman said. Police said demonstrators had attacked policemen, throwing stones, glass bottles and fire crackers during the demonstrations. Police used tear gas on several occasions during the protests in Warsaw in which people demanded that new restrictions be repealed. “We have 278 detainees … We were dealing with a clear manifestation of aggression, these people came to fight us,” Warsaw police spokesman Sylwester Marczak told reporters on Sunday, according to Reuters. The demonstrations also broke a ban on gatherings of more than five people, which came into effect on Saturday as part of new measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus. Despite the ban on gatherings, Poland also separately continued to see demonstrations on Saturday against a ruling on Thursday by the Constitutional Tribunal that imposes a near-total ban on abortion in the Catholic country. Poland is seeing a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases, with new infections on Friday hitting a daily record of 13,632. New curbs imposed on Saturday include a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. Schools will remain open for children up to third grade, with older students moving to distance learning. Older people can leave their homes only in special cases. The health ministry reported 87 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, taking the total death toll from Covid-19 to 4,438. The country recorded 11,742 new cases on Sunday, with total infections approaching 253,700. France’s new Covid-19 contact-tracing app needs to be downloaded by at least 20% of the population to be effective but is far from reaching that level for now, the minister for digital affairs said on Sunday. On 22 October, France relaunched its “StopCovid” tracing app and renamed it “Tous Anti-Covid” (all against Covid), which has since seen an additional 1.2m downloads for a total number of about 4m. “For the application to be efficient, about 20% of the population, or 15 to 20 million people, need to download it,” digital affairs minister Cedric O said on FranceInfo radio, according to Reuters. He said similar apps were working well in Britain, Germany and Canada but gave no examples of successful contact tracing in France with the app. Many in France have been reluctant to download the app over privacy concerns, despite the government’s reassurances that the data will not be used for any other purpose than stopping the pandemic. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. AP reported that Sánchez’s government said on Saturday night that a majority of Spain’s regional leaders have agreed to a new state of emergency and the meeting on Sunday was to study its terms. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain’s government has already declared two state of emergencies during the pandemic. Health minister Salvador Illa has said his agency and regional health officials are studying how to apply nightly curfewssimilar to the curfews already in place in France’s major cities. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. Spain on Friday reported almost 20,000 new daily cases and a further 231 deaths, taking the country’s death toll in the pandemic to 34,752. In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. The total number of cases rose to 59,247 in the country of 10 million, with 35 new deaths taking the total to 1,425, Reuters reports. Although coronavirus cases have been rising sharply since late August, Hungary’s nationalist Prime Minister Viktor Orban is seeking to avoid a repeat of the spring lockdown that sent the economy crashing by 13.6% in the second quarter. Hungarian schools are operating as normal, and apart from closing borders to foreigners, the government has not imposed significant limitations on events. Orban’s cabinet chief Gergely Gulyas said on Thursday that the government planned no new restrictions to curb the spread of the virus. In Italy, the government has been accused of “playing with fire” ahead of the announcement of new Covid-19 restrictions that will heavily penalise the hospitality industry. Hospitality workers will protest outside parliament on Sunday as ministers debate measures that could include the closure of bars and restaurants from 6pm. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is expected to announce the restrictions, which might also include the closure of gyms and swimming pools, on Sunday afternoon. People will be “strongly advised” not to travel beyond their home towns unless strictly necessary, according to a draft of the decree. The plan to close restaurants and bars from 6pm has been hotly contested by regional administrations. “We ask that they close us down completely and give us the famous financial support that Conte keeps talking about,” said Paolo Bianchini, a restaurant owner in the Lazio town of Viterbo and spokesperson for MIO, the hospitality movement organising the protest. “It’s useless staying open at all, and being left to have an agonising death – our companies are dying. There will be civil war as people no longer have money – [the government] is playing with fire.” There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the whole Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme right group, Forza Nuova, also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew also in place since Friday. Italy registered 19,644 new coronavirus infections and 151 more fatalities on Saturday. The virus is rapidly spreading in Lombardy, Campania and Lazio. There are 1,128 people currently in intensive care with Covid-19 across the country, more than double the figure of two weeks ago. Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in the US, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behaviour,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. In Ireland, the Irish Independent reports that any move towards a third national lockdown would be heavily resisted by ministers with the government coalition. The newspaper reports that “senior Fine Gael ministers have insisted everything must be done to avoid the need to impose the highest level of Covid-19 restrictions for a third time”. It quotes one minister as saying that Taoiseach Micheál Martin “needs to be careful with this rush for a third lockdown, the people might not buy it”. You can read the full story here. Here’s the latest edition of the Guardian’s tracker of coronavirus cases and deaths around the world. The US continues to have the highest number of total cases and deaths, and cases and deaths in the last fortnight. In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. Speaking in response to an article by Tory MP Bernard Jenkin and an interview in which he said the programme should be led by “a very senior military person”, he says she has done a “very good job” and that the programme has “come on so much”. Another of Ridge’s interviewees, shadow mental health minister Rosena Allin-Khan, says that Harding’s position is “untenable”. Lewis also says that reports that the government is looking at cutting the 14-day isolation period for travellers returning to the UK from abroad are accurate. But he says that “we’re not ready to make a final decision or announcement on that yet” and the decision will be “scientifically led”. He denies an accompanying claim that business leaders will be exempt and says that any changes “will apply to everybody”. In Indonesia, the health ministry has reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths. The total number of infections now stands at 389,712, with 13,299 – on both counts, the highest totals in south-east Asia. The government of Indonesia’s capital city Jakarta said in a statement earlier on Sunday that it will extend mass social restriction measures introduced to curb the spread of the virus until 8 November. Meanwhile, the Jakarta Post reported that more than 100 inmates at a prison on the island of Bali had tested positive. There have been 11,000 cases in total in Bali, which has seen its economy devastated by the sharp decline in tourism. • This post was amended at 8.37am to correct the total infection count. Good morning from London, where I’m picking up from Helen Davidson. You can reach me on Twitter or email with any comments, tips or suggestions. If you’re looking for some Sunday morning reading, you could start with Robin McKie’s report for the Observer on fears in the scientific community that the early adoption of an only moderately effective coronavirus vaccine could hinder attempts to find a better one: Or take a look this piece, also by colleagues at the Observer, about the danger that a sense of arbitrary restrictions could contribute to ‘Covid fatigue’ in the UK: I’ll be handing over to my colleagues in London shortly. Here is a quick round up of the most recent developments: Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. US vice-president Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus. Pence and his wife tested negative, his office said. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for Covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup horse race. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as police clashed with far-right protesters in Rome. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases and 229 deaths on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired teargas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Authorities said 229 people had died in the last 24 hours, bringing the official death toll to 26,050. AP: Just weeks after India fully opened up from a harsh lockdown and began to modestly turn a corner by cutting new coronavirus infections by near half, a Hindu festival season is raising fears that a fresh surge could spoil the hard-won gains. Nearly 1 billion Indians will soon celebrate Diwali, the Hindu festival of light, and the country’s biggest. Socializing is key part of the most highly anticipated event of the year, with malls and markets buzzing with shoppers. It also traditionally brings in a massive increase in consumer spending across India. Even though the government is expecting the festival to help resuscitate the ailing economy, it is also worried about people packing together, foregoing social distancing and masks. Such concerns prompted Prime Minister Narendra Modi to address the nation in a televised speech earlier this week, warning people of “any laxity” during the festive season that “could strain India’s health system.” India is second to the United States with the largest coronavirus outbreak. Last month, the country hit a peak of nearly 100,000 cases in a single day, but since then daily infections have fallen by about half and deaths by about a third. Some experts say the decline in cases suggests the virus may have finally reached a plateau but others question the testing methods. India’s testing rate has remained constant but it is relying heavily on antigen tests, which are faster but less accurate than traditional RT-PCR tests. Even as the reasons behind the decline are not fully clear, India is still clocking more than 50,000 cases a day, making any new surge all the more important. These fears stem largely from India’s initial success story — until it wasn’t. In June, the southern coastal state of Kerala was cheered for flattening the curve, generating worldwide appreciation, even from the United Nations. But in a stunning reversal, it now fares as the second-worst state in active coronavirus cases in the country. Health Minister Harsh Vardhan blamed “gross negligence” during the 10-day Onam festival celebrations in late August for Kerala’s virus surge. Since then, reported infections there have jumped by five times, far outpacing the nationwide trend. Kerala’s story has alarmed health experts who fear similar problems in the runup to Diwali that could reverse the gains. “If we don’t avoid socializing during the upcoming festival season, I fear we will be back to where we started,” said Dr. T. Jacob John, a retired virologist. “There is a significant risk ahead of us.” More than 1,000 test results have come back from the northern suburbs of Melbourne, finding no new cases of the virus. It’s significant because the area is the site of a current outbreak which prompted premier Dan Andrews to delay announcing reopening dates for the city’s retail and hospitality sector. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 are understood to be included in the 1,135 tests returned today. 1400 tests conducted taken today are in the labs and testing will proceed throughout the evening, the health department said. “This testing enables us to get a very clear picture of how many cases there are and ensure there is a plan in place for everyone who tests positive along with the close contacts,” said Jeroen Weimar, the state’s head of testing and community engagement. “There will at times no doubt be delays as more people come forward, but we are so appreciative of everyone making the effort, particularly during these colder spring days.” Tasmania will on Monday reopen to much of mainland Australia, with the island state’s government insisting it is well prepared to handle any coronavirus cases. The state was the first Australian jurisdiction to close its borders in March and hasn’t recorded a case in more than 70 days. It will open to low-risk regions Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia, the Northern Territory and ACT, plus New Zealand. It remains closed to Victoria and is slated to open to NSW on 2 November, with a firm call on that date to be made this week. All arrivals at airports and sea ports will be health screened and anyone with virus symptoms will be tested and ordered into quarantine until their result is known. “While it’s exiting to be able to see restrictions ease and life getting to a Covid-normal, we also need to remember there is always a risk of coronavirus in our community,” health minister Sarah Courtney said. She said “extensive work” had been put into the state’s contact tracing systems and aged care preparedness. Ms Courtney said social distancing and personal hygiene were critical in the weeks ahead. “It’s important that we continue this vigilance so our healthcare workers remain safe and we have capacity in our hospitals,” she said. Tasmania has more than 200 ventilators and is planning to acquire another 100. A rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccines, scientists have said. Scientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Read more here: The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 11,176 to 429,181, data from the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases showed on Sunday. The reported death toll rose by 29 to 10,032, the tally showed. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup “in light of the ongoing situation around government restrictions”. “While we are very disappointed not to be able to welcome our members and racegoers to Cup Week, we understand the government’s commitment to keeping our community safe. We also recognise the need for certainty and clarity for our patrons, being only six days out from Derby Day,” said VRC chair Amanda Elliott. “We are still in discussions regarding the potential return to the track for a small number of owners, as is currently permitted in regional Victoria,” Mrs Elliott said. “We will play our part in supporting Victoria’s emergence from this pandemic as Melbourne moves closer to a normal environment over summer.” The VRC will run an interactive Cup website for people still wanting to enjoy the festivities of Australia’s famous race day. The testing of entire cities whenever there is a new outbreak in China is overkill, the country’s chief epidemiologist has said. About 11 million people were recently tested in just five days in Qingdao, after 12 new cases were linked to a hospital. But the testing regime found no new cases, and Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist with China Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, told China Newsweek the transmission would have been confined to the hospital. “Qingdao has the determination to [test everyone], but it’s overkill,” Wu said. Mainland China has avoided seeing more massive outbreaks since it got control of the original Wuhan epidemic, even as new clusters have emerged in cities and provinces as populous as Beijing, Qingdao, and Jilin. As well as swift lockdowns, strict contact tracing, and travel restrictions, authorities in each case also embarked on ambitious drives to test every single resident. Wu said while citywide testing may be reassuring to officials and residents, “the social cost was too big and unnecessary”. A harrowing report from CNN on the rise of child trafficking in India during the pandemic. In recent years, India has strengthened its lawson child labor, but in the past six months - with Covid-19 taking a toll on the economy - that work has started to unravel. “Children have never faced such crisis,” said 2014 Nobel Peace Prize winner Kailash Satyarthi, whose organization Bachpan Bachao Andolan (Save the Childhood Movement) works to protect vulnerable children. “This is not simply the health crisis or economic crisis. This is the crisis of justice, of humanity, of childhood, of the future of an entire generation.” When India went into a strict lockdown in March, schools and workplaces closed. Millions of children were deprived of the midday meal they used to receive at school and many people lost their jobs.Traffickers have exploited the situation by targeting desperate families, activists said. See the full report here. Still in Australia, the country’s prime minister, treasurer and health minister have again criticised the Labor government in Victoria for the continuation of lockdown measures in Victoria. In a joint statement they said the decision to keep some businesses closed was a “profound disappointment”, and called on the Victorian government to utilise mirror tracing and restriction measures used by the neighbouring state of New South Wales. At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave. Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening. This is a profound disappointment. Of course, Victorians do not want to face another lockdown and of course they don’t want all of this to have been for nothing. That is why ensuring the state government’s capability to deal with outbreaks through their public health response is so essential. This is what you need for Victoria to open up safely and stay safely open. Borders and closures are not indicators of public health success. They are the opposite. The Australian state of Western Australia has reported three new cases recorded on Saturday. The one male and two females all aged in their 20s had all returned to Perth from overseas. WA is monitoring 57 active cases remaining from its total of 760. Brazil has registered 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours and 26,979 new cases, the health ministry said on Saturday. The South American nation has now registered 156,903 total coronavirus deaths and 4,817,898 total confirmed cases. The diagnosis of Pence’s chief of staff has been confirmed by their office. “Vice-president Pence and Mrs Pence both tested negative for Covid-19 today, and remain in good health,” said Devin O’Malley, a Pence spokesman, on Saturday, adding that Donald Trump’s running mate would maintain his schedule “in accordance with the CDC guidelines for essential personnel”. Full report here. Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus, Bloomberg is reporting. The diagnosis of Marc Short, the closest advisor to the US vice president, follows that of another senior staffer Marty Obst earlier on Saturday. Pence delivered a campaign speech in Florida on Saturday evening. Bloomberg reported he was aware of Obst’s positive test result prior to departing, and that Obst was not seen on the plane with him. Despite being a close contact of Short, Pence is not quarantining and is maintaining he schedule as an “essential employee”. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. The Jakarta Post reports today on a growing cluster inside the notorious prison, detected after complaints of symptoms by some inmates prompted mass testing earlier this week. Of 106 positive test results so far, 84 are men, the Post reported. They have been moved to an isolated block of the prison, it said. “[The number of confirmed cases] might still be increasing because we are still waiting for more test results,” said I Putu Surya Dharma, spokesman for the law and human rights ministry’s Bali office. The prison is under lockdown and receiving no visitors or new prisoners. Bali has recorded more than 11,000 cases of Covid-19 during the pandemic, which has also devastated the island’s economy which depends almost entirely on tourism. Indonesia has recorded more than 380,000 cases. Here is our full report on the latest from Victoria, Australia, where the country’s largest outbreak and which sparked one of the world’s strictest lockdowns, is being brought under control. From Calla Wahlquist: Daniel Andrews has delayed an announcement about easing coronavirus restrictions in Melbourne pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs, prompting criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. In a heated press conference, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. Read more: From the wire services in Europe: Italy saw a second night of street protests against curfews as it reported another daily record on Saturday. After clashes in the southern city of Naples on Friday night, police again faced off against dozens of masked protestors in the centre of Rome after the far-right Forza Nuova group called for a protest against the curfews. Some 200 masked militants belonging to the neo-fascist group hurled projectiles at police and set rubbish bins alight in the second night of street protests. Police arrested seven protesters and reported two officers injured, according to the Repubblica daily. The government is planning further restrictions to contain a resurgence of the pandemic, and prime minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a repeat of the blanket lockdown earlier in the year. But a number of regions - including Campania, the area around Naples, Lazio around Rome, and Lombardy - have imposed overnight curfews. The northern region of Piedmont and Sicily in the south will follow next week and other regions are expected to match them. The central government is expected to announce more measures soon. Earlier, health ministry data showed 19,644 new Covid cases and 151 dead as the disease surged in areas like Lombardy, Milan, Campania and Lazio. Conte pledged to speed up help for businesses suffering in the crisis but said the weeks ahead would be very difficult. “We cannot lower our guard,” he added. According to a draft decree circulated on Saturday, public gyms and swimming pools may be closed and bars and restaurants told to shut from 6 p.m., while people will be encouraged not to travel outside their home districts. Like many authorities across Europe, the Italian government is desperate not to close down the economy completely but is facing growing public anger at renewed restrictions being imposed to limit public gatherings. With public health services coming under strain, authorities have reopened temporary intensive care facilities built during the first phase. Despite this, Italy’s top public health body warned on Friday services were approaching crisis point. Mainland China reported 15 new cases on Saturday, all imported from other countries. There are 405 asymptomatic patients currently under observation, including a teenage girl in Kashgar. The city has imposed travel restrictions while health authorities test the population. The South China Morning Post cited an unnamed official, saying residents are allowed to leave the city if they have a negative test result. Overnight there was a bit of confusion among Kashgar residents and visitors, as flights in and out of the Xinjiang region city were suddenly cancelled, and police authorities posted and then deleted a social media message reminding people to wear masks. “Everyone wear your masks properly and pay attention to personal safety. Don’t believe or spread rumours to avoid unnecessary panic. All is subject to official notification,” the Weibo post said. Videos shared online also appeared to show traffic banking up at checkpoints. Xinjiang health authorities announced on Saturday night that an asymptomatic case had been found during a routine screening in Shufu county, and the patient - a 17-year-old woman - had been transferred to hospital. The case would be the first inside Xinjiang since mid-August, when an outbreak sparked a “wartime state” of lockdown in the capital Urumqi. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Saturday 6,025 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 431 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 886,800 and the death toll to 88,743. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours, surpassing last Sunday’s record of 871 cases. The country has recorded at least 700 daily cases for eight consecutive days. The health ministry said more than 72% of the new cases were in the state of Sabah, the centre of the current spike in cases. Much of the blame for the current surge has been focused on the East Malaysian state, after people spent two weeks campaigning for an upcoming election before returning to other parts of the country, the Straits Times reported. At around the same time there were outbreaks in Sabah’s detention centres for illegal migrants. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. Citing an email from a NHS Trust chief to his staff, the report said a national vaccination program rollout was being accelerated, with healthcare workers prioritised. Writing to staff earlier this month, the head of a hospital NHS Trust in Warwickshire said they and other NHS organisations nationally had been told “to be prepared to start a Covid-19 vaccine program in early December”. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff priorities prior to Christmas,” the email said, adding that the vaccine was expected to be given in two doses 28 days apart. The Mail also reported that the UK hopes to fast track production if a vaccine is ready before the end of December. •This post was edited at 10:31am to remove an extraneous reference to European medical approvals. Hello, this is Helen Davidson here to take you through the next few hours of global updates. Thanks to Calla for everything so far. First, a quick look around the world for the latest top line developments, with more to follow: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. With that, I’ll hand over to Helen Davidson who will take you through the day. The press conference in Victoria has become a series of reporters putting agree/disagree statements to the premier, and Daniel Andrews rejecting the premise of the question and saying, on repeat: “That is not a question, that’s a statement.” I won’t repeat them here, because there isn’t a lot of information to be gleaned. The gist: reporters are attempting to get Andrews to comment on the frustration felt by business owners, and the broader community, that the roadmap is not being followed and that the end of the lockdown has not been announced on the day the announcement was promised. Andrews is getting frustrated, challenging the premise of questions, and then repeating the line of the day: we have to wait until the test results come back. However the date of opening up has shifted forward. Andrews said he will have “more to say tomorrow and Tuesday” and “we will be opening up before the weekend”. And, after 80 minutes, the press conference is over. A clarification from the premier: Just going back to a question James asked. I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt. November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening, have opening up before then, by on that day, in fact, earlier than then. We had intended to be able to make announcements today, but it’s just not appropriate while we wait for these test results, to be assuming we know what the results are. We don’t know how many positive cases, we don’t know whether they are going to be linked, but we’re still well on track to announcements and begin the process of opening up before the first. Reporter: Why didn’t you say that an hour ago, as directly as that? Andrews, with a deep sigh: Well ... James, I’m sorry if I have not been as clear as I tried to be, it was a very long night and a very early morning and I have been trying to find an opportunity to come back to the podium, as your question indicated to me I perhaps have not been as clear as I should have been. The Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, was asked if it was awkward that his advice was that Victoria could not yet announce details of a reopening, when the former Victorian health minister, the Australian health minister, the NSW premier and the WHO were suggesting it could be reopened. Sutton said: Amongst that list of individuals and organisations, none of them are in the tent. All of the data we have come up with all the understanding we have of each and every case, who the close contacts are, how they are linked, the specific complexities of each household, they are of a united view that as frustrating as this is, this is an appropriate 24-hour period to go through. Reporter: Did you mislead Victorians? Andrews: I did not. A reporter asked Andrews: “You said in your opening remarks that this is not a setback. People when they woke up this morning believed it would be at worst on November one but you are not committing to that so we have gone backwards today.” Andrews: I don’t believe we have. In any event, we have no choice but to wait for these results and they will be here well before November 1. Some results will come through later today and some will come through on Monday, well into the evening. On that basis we will be able to call it and be confident that these are linked cases, not a large number of mystery cases which would speak to the fact that it was much more widespread than we believe it is. Again, we have asked these people to come forward and be tested for a very good reason. They have done that and the lab does take time. It is not a matter of workflow, the test just takes time. We’ll get those tests done as quickly as we can and then analyse the results and update you. Is it fair to call it a “cautious pause” when thousands of [businesses] have been closed for months? But they were not to open today. They were opening Tuesday night at the earliest and we still may be able to make that deadline. It is not appropriate for me to pretend I have a test result I do not have. It is not responsible ... I cannot announce things and I cannot speak to the scope of the opening until we get these test results back and we know exactly the enemy we are facing and the challenge we are facing. Andrews said it was not his strategy that every outbreak should result in a new lockdown, but said Victoria has “an opportunity to essentially get ahead of this virus”. Asked if Melbourne was “just lucky” to already be under lockdown when this outbreak occurred, Andrews said: I don’t think that is right at all. What we would have to do for a long period of time is manage and live with this, but it will be easier, it will be much easier the lower the numbers are at the point you open up. And, as well, the more you know about those cases the more confident you are that you have a public health response around all those people. As it stands now we do not have the complete picture because the labs are processing test. Other tests will be taken through today which will come to us tomorrow. This is nothing more than simply waiting to get the results before ... Put it another way, waiting to get results instead of pretending we know what the results are. We do not and that would not be responsible nor a safe thing to do. And if we are criticised for that, so be it. A reporter said that NSW had been open for months with daily average cases hovering around 10. “If our contact tracing is as good as they are and we have as much faith in the Victorian community as the New SouthWales government has, why can’t we reopen?” Andrews: I don’t accept the conclusions you are drawing at all ... This is a pause, nothing more than that and it is appropriate that we wait to get those results. The reason we have literally hundreds of people locked in homes at the moment is because of the work that contact traces are doing, so I do not accept that criticism at all. Another reporter asked Andrews to acknowledge that “the way the public is feeling must be a rollercoaster. You have mentioned that you understand that people are frustrated, do not think it has gone past frustration today? Today is a different level for the community in terms of what they thought would happen and what has happened.” Andrews said he knew that it was frustrating. Of course people are frustrated and of course everyone would like these rules to come off as quickly as possible but we only get one chance to do this properly and we intend to wait for those results to come back from the laboratory. Once they have we will be able to make further judgment and then we will be able to update people tomorrow and hopefully make some announcements if not tomorrow then Tuesday and then push on from there. Back to Victoria, where this press conference is still going on. Premier Daniel Andrews was asked to respond to his former health minister Jenny Mikakos’ comment that not going ahead with a planned easing of restrictions today was an example of “paralysis in decision making”. Andrews said: I have nothing to say about those comments. Reporter: “She has been a respected member of your government.” Andrews: I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them. That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything. Another reporter asked if it would not have been “less unsettling for Melbournians” if Andrews had stuck to the initial roadmap dates, set out in September, rather than announcing they would be brought forward, then pushing them back again. The reporter called it a “rollercoaster effect”. Andrews: There has not been a rollercoaster. Numbers have come down steadily and we are all about making sure we get them to the lowest level before we open up safely. But what I say to every Victorian is that people have given and done too much for us to ignore the fact that there are thousands of results that have been processed in laboratories as we speak and we need to wait and see those results, we will get them today and tomorrow and hopefully we are able to make, not only announcements but to take the big steps safely around the middle of this week ... We cannot make decisions appropriate to the challenge if we do not have the results and we have not seen them. We don’t know what stories they will tell. Until we get that, which is today, tomorrow and potentially into Tuesday, it is just not safe and responsible for us to say we think we know better. We think that these will all be negative. And if there are some positives they will be linked to known cases. We cannot be certain. What does Andrews think about federal health minister Greg Hunt’s comments, that the only reason you would hold off reopening if you didn’t have faith in the contact tracing system. Andrews says that “is completely wrong”. New South Wales has recorded no new locally-acquired cases for the third consecutive day. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. Some 12,465 tests were conducted in the past 24-hours. Andrews was asked what he would do if this outbreak had occurred after pubs and retail stores were reopened. Would Melbourne be locked down again? Isn’t dealing with outbreaks just the way it’s going to be? Andrews initially didn’t respond, saying he was doing “exactly what we intend to do”. Then he said he would “not necessarily” put the state back into lockdown if an outbreak like this occurred after the state had opened up. But you only get one chance to get it to the lowest point possible and then it will be a management and containment task every day, every week, every month until we get a vaccine. Reporter: So what is the lowest point possible? Andrews: Lowest point possible is difficult to know but the lowest point possible in the northern suburbs will be waiting to see these tests and make sure that they are all linked cases and that there is not some wildfire burning out there that is not visible to us. It is the absolute key. While the Victorian government has been holding its press conference, the former health minister Jenny Mikakos, who resigned last month following the premier’s appearance before the hotel quarantine inquiry and later hit back at premier Daniel Andrews and suggested she had been made a scapegoat, has tweeted that she thinks the easing of restrictions should go ahead. Mikakos said that with the target of less than five cases per day met, and six of the seven new cases connected to known outbreaks, “the set reopening is gradual &amp; safe so any delay is unnecessary”. It’s paralysis in decision-making. The chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, said Mikakos was “entitled to that opinion”. Andrews refused to comment on it, becoming short with reporters. He said: We will not open up today, there has never been a suggestion that we would. We were to make announcements today that would come over the following days. I’d don’t quite know the point you are making. One reporter said Andrews had promised that he would announce an easing of restrictions today every day for the past week, except for yesterday. “You dangled a carrot at Victorians and today it feels like you have produced a stick,” one reporter said. Andrews said he rejected that characterisation. What I would say to you is that I think in this room and across the state there has been a perfectly legitimate request to have targets and dates, and all the way along I have tried to be as clear as I can be that nothing can be guaranteed. Nothing can be guaranteed, except the fact that we will be guided by the data and the science. We have come a long way, we all have in the last thing any of us need to do now is to ignore the fact that there are cases in the northern suburbs, there are results that are pending and we do not have those processed tests. As soon they are and as soon as we can establish that they are cases linked to each other, rather than some much bigger problem, potentially across the northern suburbs, then we will be able to not only announce the next steps, we can confidently take them and rather than that being midnight Tuesday, it may be midnight Wednesday. As soon as we can confirm that we absolutely will. Ducking to the UK for a moment, PA has this report: Officials on the UK government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. There were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” Last week Test and Trace hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. Senior Tory backbencher Sir Bernard Jenkin launched a scathing attack on the performance of the system, saying public consent and co-operation was “breaking down”. Writing in The Sunday Telegraph, he said there was a “vacuum of leadership” at the top of the organisation and called for a change that was “visible and decisive” with a senior military figure being put in charge like they did with the foot and mouth crisis. In response, the Department of Health and Social Care acknowledged there were areas where the service needed to improve, but said people should be “talking it up, not down”, and the leadership had built “the largest diagnostic industry the UK has ever seen”. Weimar rejected the suggestion, made by Australian federal health minister Greg Hunt this morning, that the decision to delay the easing of restrictions was a sign of no confidence in the testing and tracing system, which he manages. Weimar said: I refute that. If you look at the swiftness and comprehensive nature of what we are dealing with, and I think it is right that when we are about to make a momentous decision to ease restrictions, that we have to have confidence that we do not have any active unknown cases in our community. Asked if he recommended the delay to government, Weimar said: When I was asked a question, is there value in seeing more evidence and do you understand every dynamic of the outbreak, my advice was we need at least one more day to make sure we have tracked down so we have another big day ahead of us today and I want to see the results from today. They will come out through the day tomorrow and that is what I have asked for. Weimar said there were five public health teams targeting the close contacts of known cases and of the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school communities. Those teams are knocking on the doors of known contacts and encouraging them to get a test. People who refuse to get a test have been ordered to quarantine for longer. We’ll be asking to test them and the people they were with because they are most directly associated with the cases we know about. And that is how we identified three or four of the cases we saw yesterday through the close contact group. Weimar said public health teams contacted 250 close contacts yesterday to get those door-to-door tests, and have a list of 60 people to contact today. We are very interested in the close contacts because we want to establish if there are any positive cases in that group because they are the ones most likely to, if we’re going to find any more cases, that is the area where we are most likely to find them. The purpose of the wider community testing approach ... [is] we want to understand if there are any other index cases out there or any other links that have not been established. And that is why the wider test program is so important. There are now 20 households that are quarantined in alternative accomodation, the rest are quarantined at home. Weimar said he needed several thousand people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne to get a Covid-19 test today. We saw a fantastic response yesterday with 3,500 people getting tested. I need to see a similar number coming out today that we have got enough depth of understanding about any cases that might be out there. We want to be confident that we understand these chains of transmission and that it doesn’t jeopardise any other activity we want to do in the state. Victoria’s commander of testing and community engagement, Jeroen Weimar, says almost 2,500 tests were conducted in the northern suburbs of Melbourne yesterday. He said there had been a “strong community response”. Testing numbers are up 60% on last week, and he urged anyone in the northern suburbs with any symptoms, and anyone connected with the two schools even without symptoms, to get tested. We are now also really following up the close contacts. We tested, again, four close contacts yesterday who were associated, potentially, with three schools. I am pleased to say this, close contacts of all tested negative twice. And that means we are no longer regarding Dallas Brooks Primary School, Ilium College and Sirius College as part of this outbreak. They are part of no chain of transmission that we have identified between households we are focusing on these three schools, and these three schools are now disassociated ... That means many hundreds of families, many hundreds of people now associated with those three schools are now free to continue on as before. We also tested 250 close contacts, primary and secondary contacts of this cluster yesterday by visiting them at home. A lot of underground activity over the last two days to reach those people at home, to test them and their household members, all those results are coming in overnight. We have some of those results in already and more results are coming in during the course of this morning. So far we have identified one positive contact out of that come out of those close contacts. He added: We have also identified a link to the Regis MacLeod aged care facility with two staff members there testing positive. They are associated with this cluster in the northern metro area that we have been working on. We tested all staff and residents of that facility yesterday, all 108 and all of those results have come back negative. We will continue to watch that facility very closely of the coming days and we will speak about that later if necessary. This continues to be a very complex and rapidly developing case. We now have 11 households [and] chains of transmission between those households. There has been significant progress in the last 24hours as we have identified two new households as part of that 11, and some of the linkages that sit between them. We also have five children at East Preston Islamic College were tested positive. They are well and have all been a part of the initial close contact circle. So this has not spread out, the case any further. Weimar said they had set up a special testing station at Croxton Specialist school, in partnership with the Royal Children’s Hospital specialist paediatric team, to help test its 120 students. We now have 17 [testing] sites across the northern suburbs that are ready to go. They will be open for business and will be ready for you and open today. It’s very important that we establish if there are any remaining positive cases in the community so we can ensure that you are safely isolated and get the treatment you need and protect your family and friends from any further transmission. We are confident that we understand how this work but there is more work to do. Andrews did announce some changes for regional Victoria, which is already several steps ahead of Melbourne in terms of easing of restrictions. From 11.59pm on Tuesday: Gyms in regional Victoria will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with space rules applying. A maximum of 20 people, again with spacing rules, will be allowed to attend a religious service with one faith leader. Outdoor funerals will be allowed to have 50 attendees. Indoor non-contact community sport for people under the age of 18 will be allowed. Indoor swimming pools will be open for all ages, to a maximum of 20 people. Greater Shepparton, which had a coronavirus outbreak earlier this month, will be brought back in line with the rest of regional Victoria from midnight tonight. Daniel Andrews said they had found “linkages” and “chains of transmission” between new cases in the northern suburbs. He also said hundreds who were under self-isolation orders have now been allowed to leave their home after testing negative. The system is working, the processes are working, we just have to wait until we get the results. It is no good doing targeted testing if you then don’t wait to see what the results of those tests are. I do hope to make definitive announcements about opening up metropolitan Melbourne in a couple of days’ time. We will keep people updated today, tomorrow, and those test results will come back and hopefully what they will show us is not just some additional cases and there are bound to be a few in that mix, but that those cases are linked, and that we know that there is a chain of transmission and we have our arms around those people and they are not spreading it to anybody else. He added: If they are random, if they are not linked to each other, if they are mysteries, that will be a real cause for concern. We are hopeful, more than that in fact, we are confident that we have found many linkages. There may be others, there may be other cases that come forward as a result of those tests that are in the labs right now. Andrews said he was not in a position to announce an easing of restrictions today, as promised for several weeks, because they are awaiting at least 1,000 Covid-19 test results from contacts of the outbreak in northern Melbourne. He said: We had hoped today to be able to announce that metropolitan Melbourne would take significant steps, not from today but from mid-week, round retail, hospitality and a whole range of other, important next steps. We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs. We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and they will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there are, whether there is more virus there than we think. Ultimately, if we can link these cases together, if we can link different outbreaks, then we have confidence that we have contained it and we can move forward. This is not a setback. It is simply waiting and being led by the data, being led by the science, and following public health advice. That is what has seen these numbers go from thousands of active cases to now, 100 active cases. That is the approach that has seen us go from 700 plus cases per day to seven cases. He said he hoped to be in a position to make an announcement in “a couple of days” and said he knew the delay would be frustrating. Andrews says there are now 100 active cases in Victoria, that’s seven new cases since yesterday. Eight of those active cases are in healthcare workers, four are in aged care. There are seven people in hospital, none in ICU. 12,894 tests were conducted yesterday. Back on the UK’s test and trace system quickly. PA reports: Contacts of people infected with coronavirus may have to self-isolate for as little as seven days amid concerns in Whitehall about the levels of public compliance with the Test and Trace system. Officials on the Government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. The move — which would not apply to those who test positive for the disease - comes amid growing dissatisfaction with the performance of the system from ministers and MPs. Boris Johnson was said to have become “disillusioned” with statistics provided by the service after they proved to be wrong, according to The Sunday Telegraph. At the same time, there were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” It comes after Test and Trace - headed by the Conservative peer Baroness Harding - last week hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, says the only reason the Victorian government would hold off opening up would be if the state did not have confidence in its contact tracing system. He made the comments just before the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is due to announce (or not announce) a change in restrictions. Andrews is due to begin speaking in a few minutes. After months of increasing tension between the two levels of government – and with the state premier due to front the media shortly – Hunt said the case levels in Victoria were low enough to justify an easing of restrictions. At a press conference in Canberra this morning, Hunt was asked what his reaction would be if the Victorian state government did not announce a significant easing of restrictions today. He said: I think many people would be deeply disappointed given the mental health impacts, given the health impacts, given the profound consequences for people who have invested their life savings. We’ve reached the time when Victoria said that they were looking to move forwards, their own timeframe, their own timetable. We always said that there’s a commonwealth definition of 10 cases, according to the chief medical officer, a rolling average. It’s below five cases, on the rolling average, which is the Victorian government’s own definition. The only reason they wouldn’t open up is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system. We have confidence that the Victorian contact tracing system has improved significantly. It could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine depending on the type required, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews, the minister for industry and science, said CSL would be able to immediately start making a vaccine if a protein-based candidate proved to be safe and effective. However, she said “significant work” would be required if it was another type known as an mRNA vaccine. Pressed during an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program to give a timeframe to get production up and running if it was an mRNA vaccine, Andrews said: I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe. But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range. Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades. In the United Kingdom, a senior conservative MP has called for Baroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the UK government’s test and trace program, to be removed and replaced. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, he said: Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace. You can read more on this story here. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, has urged the Victorian government to ease restrictions to bring the state in line with neighbouring New South Wales. Hunt, whose electorate is in Victoria, was speaking in Canberra ahead of Victorian premier Daniel Andrews’s announcement. He urged the state: ... to take the next step to opening up safely, and we hope and commend to Victoria that the commonwealth will support them in moving to those next levels of reduced restrictions, in line with New South Wales. We have seen how a strong testing, tracing and isolation system can allow a state to manage through the challenges of this. [There have been] over 400,000 cases a day for the last four days, consecutively, globally. In Australia, seven states and territories, zero community cases, yesterday. One state, with seven. And that means we are in a strong position, and there should be no barrier to Victoria taking those steps in line with New South Wales. And they have improved their systems and we want to commend and acknowledge that improvement. Obviously there is more to go, but they have significantly improved to a level where, in our view, they are capable of managing small case numbers, because if we do not do that, then we see the risks to mental health and health which have been so sadly evident in the numbers. But all up, it is a day of great hope. Moreland City Council, which covers an area of Melbourne’s northern suburbs, this morning sent an alert to residents warning that coronavirus cases had been identified in the suburbs of Fawkner, Preston, West Heidelberg, Dallas, Roxburgh Park and Broadmeadows. Anyone who lives or works in that area is urged to gets tested if they experience even mild symptoms. The council alert also urged anyone connected to the East Preston Islamic College and the Corxton school in Northcote to get a test even if they had no symptoms. Fifteen testing sites have been set up in the area. It added that Sirius College (Meadow Fair campus), Ilim College, and Dallas Brooks primary school “have also been identified as potential risk sites. Anyone from these school communities who is a close contact or who is experiencing symptoms needs to get tested and stay home”. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and health minister Martin Foley, will give a press conference at 10.30am Melbourne time (so in 30 minutes). A reminder that according to the roadmap released back in September – which has since been significantly re-written – Melbourne was due to get the following freedoms from tomorrow if the rolling 14-day average had fallen below five and there were no more than three “mystery cases” in that period. As of today, the rolling 14-day average in metropolitan Melbourne is 4.6, and there were nine cases with an unknown source in the 14 days to 22 October. So, according to that roadmap, there would from tomorrow be no restrictions on reasons to leave your home, no travel limit (Melbournians are currently not allowed more than 25km from their home without a permit), up to five visitors from another nominated household allowed in your home, and a reopening of retail stores and hospitality for outdoor seated service. Let’s wait to see what’s actually announced. Good morning, Welcome to our ongoing live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic. France reported a record 45,422 cases in one day on Sunday and 138 new deaths. The country has now recorded 1.08 million cases. Italy has also set a new daily record, with 19,644 cases, and Luxembourg has also recorded a record rise, with 862 new cases. The United Kingdom recorded 23,012 new cases and 174 deaths, as anti-lockdown protests were held in London. In Australia, the focus is on Melbourne where the premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to make an announcement on the easing of restriction. On Friday, he said there would be “significant” changes. On Saturday, he backtracked and said “I just want to caution people from banking that tomorrow I’ll be making a whole series of detailed announcements about opening up.” The Victorian government has reportedly been briefing that changes will be delayed. The reason for the change is an outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs, including a number of cases connected to the East Preston Islamic College. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday and seven on Saturday, up from one on Friday. Almost 10,000 tests have been conducted in the area and hundreds are under self-isolation orders. Andrews has said that they will need to see those tests results, and see whether new cases can be connected to known outbreaks, before the changes are finalised. Importantly for Victorians the rolling 14-day average has now dropped below five cases per day – the milestone set back in September for easing restrictions – but that might not be enough. Andrews has said decisions will be made on where the cases are and whether they are linked, not on numbers alone. Let’s crack on. You can follow me on Twitter at @callapilla or email me at Calla.Wahlquist@theguardian.com
3||White House chief of staff says 'we're not going to control pandemic', after Pence staffers test positive – liveAt least 58 million Americans have voted in the 2020 general election through early voting, according to Michael McDonald, a professor at the University of Florida who is running the US Election Project that’s keeping tabs on early voting count. Using individual state reports with ballot counts, the project estimates that 39.7 million Americans have voted by mail while 19 million have voted early in-person. Over 19 million of the total early votes come from California, Texas and Florida – the states with the highest population. Across 19 states that provide party registration with their reports, 13 million have been Democrat while 7 million are Republican. Another 6 million are registered independents. On Twitter, McDonald pointed out that Texas has hit nearly 80% of the total turnout in the state in 2016. McDonald has suggested that this election could have the highest voter turnout since 1908, with an estimated 65% of eligible voters participating in the election. Joining the group of early voters is this interesting group of Joe Biden supporters in Nevada. From the Guardian’s Richard Luscombe in Miami: Born in Hawaii with deep roots in Chicago, Barack Obama is far removed from the traditional image of Florida Man. But with two appearances here in four days stumping for Joe Biden, the former president is relishing the atmosphere of the Sunshine State in the final days of the 2020 campaign. On Tuesday, Obama will follow up Saturday’s skewering of Donald Trump at a drive-in rally in North Miami with a similar gathering in Orlando, the exact details yet to be released by the Biden campaign. But the event means that, inside 96 hours, Obama will have made the same number of Florida appearances campaigning for his former vice-president that he did for Hillary Clinton in the last weeks of her run for the White House four years ago, “Oh, it’s good to be back in Florida,” Obama told the crowd in North Miami, shortly after paying a surprise visit to thank campaign workers in the nearby city of Miami Springs who helped him carry the state in 2008 and 2012. “You delivered twice for me, Florida. And now I’m asking you to deliver for Joe and deliver for Kamala.” Obama’s role in flipping Florida back blue after Trump seized the state by barely 1.2 percent in 2016 is more than just symbolic. Popular with Hispanic voters to a level that Biden has not been able to achieve, his messaging in a state where 2.5 million Latinos make up 17 percent of the electorate is crucial. On Saturday, he attacked Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic, and noted it had “hit African Americans and Latinos harder than anybody in Florida.” It is a point he is certain to press again on Tuesday in Orlando, the heart of the I-4 corridor with a significant Hispanic population, including about 300,000 Puerto Ricans. The demographic also offers Obama another opportunity to slam Trump. Criticism of the president’s handling of 2017’s Hurricane Maria, which devastated the island, was loud among Central Florida’s Puerto Rican community, with images of Trump casually tossing rolls of paper towels to suffering residents still fresh. “When a hurricane devastates Puerto Rico, a president’s supposed to help it rebuild, not toss paper towels [or] withhold billions of dollars in aid until just before an election,” Obama told the crowd in Miami. Expect more of the same in Orlando on Tuesday as Trump, the ultimate Florida Man, gets roasted by his nemesis once again. Joe Biden released a statement in response to White House chief of staff Mark Meadows’ interview with CNN today where he said that the White House is not going to control the pandemic. “We’re not going to control the pandemic. We’re going to control the fact that we get a vaccine, therapeutics and other mitigation,” Meadows told CNN’s Jake Tapper. Biden said that the interview wasn’t a slip-up, but “a candid acknowledgement of what President Trump’s strategy has clearly been from the beginning of this crisis: to wave the white flag of defeat and hope that by ignoring it, the virus would simply go away. It hasn’t, and it won’t.” Vladimir Putin has made it clear that he’s happy with Donald Trump’s coziness with Russia, but the Kremlin today contradicted Trump and said that he doesn’t believe Joe Biden’s ties with Ukraine are criminal. Trump used Thursday’s debate with Biden as an opportunity to accuse Biden’s son of having unethical ties to Ukraine, accusations that have not been verified and that Biden has denied. According to Reuters, Putin said today that he is willing to work with any US leader, but noted that Biden has “sharp anti-Russian rhetoric”. Here’s more from the Reuters report: Putin appeared less friendly towards Trump in remarks broadcast by Russian state TV on Sunday. In what may be seen by some analysts as an attempt to try to curry favour with the Biden camp, the Russian presdient took the time to knock down what he made clear he regarded as false allegations from Trump about the Bidens. “Yes, in Ukraine he [Hunter Biden] had or maybe still has a business, I don’t know. It doesn’t concern us. It concerns the Americans and the Ukrainians,” said Putin. “But well yes he had at least one company, which he practically headed up, and judging from everything he made good money. I don’t see anything criminal about this, at least we don’t know anything about this [being criminal]”. Mike Pence, who as vice president is technically the president of the Senate, is coming under criticism from Democrats for planning to come into the chamber to preside over the vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s confirmation to the Supreme Court. At a rally in Florida yesterday, Pence said “I wouldn’t miss that vote for the world”. Pence’s appearance would be symbolic as he does not need to be physically present in the Senate for the confirmation to go through. Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer denounced Pence’s plan to attend the vote tomorrow, saying it sets “a terrible, terrible example for the American public”. “It is clear to me that their closing message is that they’re going to personally deliver Covid to as many people as possible,” Brian Schatz, a Democratic senator for Hawaii, told a reporter. At least five people close to Pence, including his chief of staff, have tested positive for Covid-19. A White House official said Sunday that Pence and his wife have tested negative for the virus. His office said that the vice president does not plan to quarantine. Guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) say a person should quarantine for 14 days if they were in close contact with a person who tested positive, even if they themselves do not have symptoms or tested negative. Pence, who is head of the White House’s coronavirus task force, has said that he can bypass CDC guidelines because he is an essential worker – a claim that has been questioned by health experts. Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York state, is having a field day over the comments of the White House chief of staff Mark Meadows this morning. In a rare moment of transparency, Meadows admitted to a Sunday political talk show that the Trump administration had no intention of containing coronavirus, saying: “We’re not going to control the pandemic”. Cuomo said that thinking was tantamount to giving in to the virus. “They surrendered without firing a shot. It was the great American surrender,” he said on Sunday, as reported by the Daily News. The New York governor said that the Trump administration’s approach to Covid was summed up from the start by such capitulation. “They have believed from the beginning that they can’t control the virus,” he said. By contrast, Cuomo prides himself on having wrestled coronavirus to the ground. After a bad start to the pandemic, which saw New York City become the world’s top hotspot, the rate of infection has been reduced to one of the lowest in the country through an aggressive program of testing and contact tracing. There have been a total of almost 500,000 confirmed cases in the state, and 25,730 deaths. About 120,000 New Yorkers are being tested every day. “What we learned in New York was, if you put up a fight you will have won. Because New York won,” Cuomo said. After the Senate voted to move forward with the final vote to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court, Mitch McConnell spoke on the Senate floor, celebrating the lasting influence of the vote for posterity. “By tomorrow night, we’ll have a new member of the United States Supreme Court,” he told the chamber. McConnell acknowledged that this election could change the tide in Washington but said that not much could be done to change the nature of the court “for a long time to come”. One Capitol Hill reporter noted that it appears the bruising on McConnell’s face and hands that were seen on Friday appeared to have gotten better. Apparently, getting three judges onto the Supreme Court in four years can do wonders to one’s health. The Senate just made a 51-48 vote to move forward with the final vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s nomination to the Supreme Court. Republicans overrode a Democratic filibuster with today’s vote, and the final vote for her confirmation will take place tomorrow night. With the Republican majority in the Senate, Barrett’s nomination is pretty much a guarantee, despite weeks of criticism from Democrats about a Supreme Court nomination weeks before the presidential election. The NFL has fined the Tennessee Titans $350,000 for violating protocols leading to the league’s first Covid-19 outbreak during the season, multiple outlets are reporting. The Titans had 24 people, including 13 players, test positive for the coronavirus between 24 September and 11 October. The outbreak led the NFL to postpone two Tennessee games and the rescheduling of a game against Pittsburgh from 4 October to today and the second against Buffalo from 11 October to 13 October. The league and its players association sent officials, including infectious disease experts, to Nashville where they reviewed video and interviewed players, coaches and other personnel. ESPN reports the NFL informed the Titans last week that their review had concluded and the organization would face a potential fine. Individuals would not be disciplined and there was no discussion of forfeiture of draft picks. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). The US Senate has started day two of a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. More from Richard Luscombe… Joe Biden’s deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield, was grilled on NBC’s Meet the Press about the Democrat nominee’s “light physical footprint”. To the backdrop of a graphic comparing Biden’s appearances since September in four key battleground states – North Carolina, Arizona, Florida and Pennsylvania – to Trump’s (the president leads 19-14), host Chuck Todd wanted to know why Biden was concentrating heavily on Georgia instead of more northerly swing states. The answer: Biden is “focused on maintaining as many paths to 270 electoral votes as we possibly can.” Bedingfield also pointed out that at a scheduled appearance in Warm Springs, Georgia, on Tuesday, Biden would deliver his closing arguments at a place “which obviously has historical significance in this country”. Warm Springs is the resort town where the 32nd president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, built his Little White House, a cottage he used while suffering from polio in the 1930s. “Vice-President Biden has visited all of these battleground states multiple times,” Bedingfield said. “He was in Pennsylvania yesterday, doing two events, along with Dr [Jill] Biden. So no, we have been very aggressively campaigning. “Here’s the difference between what we’re doing and what Donald Trump is doing, we’re doing it safely.” Bedingfield noted that the president’s rallies feature large, mostly maskless crowds with no social distancing. A new CBS poll, meanwhile, showed Biden tied with Trump in Georgia and holding narrow leads in other southern battlegrounds, including Florida and North Carolina. Todd also pressed Bedingfield on Biden’s comments at last week’s final debate about the oil industry. Why, he wondered, would oil workers in Texas or elsewhere support a candidate who supports a transition away from the industry at a risk to their jobs? “There is only one person in this country who Joe Biden thinks should lose his job and it’s Donald Trump,” she said. “Joe Biden … is not going to end the fossil fuel industry, he’s going to end subsidies for the oil industry. He believes your taxpayer dollars should go to education. Donald Trump believes they should go to Exxon. That’s a conversation we’re willing to have any day.” A CBS News/YouGov poll of three southern battleground states finds Joe Biden in a dead heat with Donald Trump in Georgia with slight edges in Florida (by two points) and North Carolina (by four). Some other key findings from CBS News: • Early voters in each told us they favored Joe Biden, but those who have not yet voted favor Donald Trump, setting up a key turnout test running now through Election Day for both parties. • Very different views on the coronavirus outbreak still shape the race in all these states. In all, most Biden voters are very concerned about getting it, and Trump’s voters, by comparison, are far less concerned. Biden also gets better marks overall on how he would handle the outbreak. • Biden voters are more likely to say the outbreak and a candidate’s personal character are major factors in their vote. For Trump voters, the economy and immigration are the biggest factors. • In splits among key demographic groups, Biden currently leads among White women with college degrees in Florida and North Carolina; and across all three states it’s shifts from 2016 that are helping Biden. In Georgia, White voters without college degrees – both men and women – tend to like how Trump handles himself personally and dislike Biden’s approach. Biden is cutting into Trump’s 2016 margins with seniors in Florida and Georgia, cutting Trump’s 2016 advantage in half. In North Carolina Biden has a two-point edge with seniors. Last week Trump was forced to play defense when he staged a prime-time rally in Georgia, which no Republican presidential candidate has lost since George HW Bush in 1992 – a far cry from his original designs on expanding the map into Democratic-leaning states. After Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said there were some senators he could not and did not want to help, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Joe Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. In fact senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have recently sought to put daylight between themselves and the unpopular president as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour; McSally dodged attempts to make her express support for Trump during a campaign debate; and Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on key policy issues. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election in Nebraska but McSally faces defeat in Arizona and Cornyn is in an unexpectedly tight race in Texas. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday. “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeated statements that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” McDaniel also said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Calmer seas returned to CNN’s State of the Union studio following the tempest of the Mark Meadows interview. House speaker Nancy Pelosi told host Jake Tapper she remains “hopeful” of a coronavirus relief bill perhaps this week, despite Republicans “moving the goalposts”. A week ago, Pelosi insisted only 48 hours remained for Democrats and Republicans to strike an agreement that would bring relief before election day. That didn’t happen, but Pelosi said they are still open to talking. “We’re ready. We can change some words in the bill, should they come back with some modifications,” Pelosi said, claiming her side was still waiting for answers over some of the differences. “Why would we even be talking to each other if we didn’t believe that we could reach an agreement? So again, it could happen this week, but that’s up to Mitch [McConnell, the Senate majority leader] as to whether it would happen in the Senate and go to the president’s desk.” Republicans in Congress have been trying to negotiate downwards the $2.2tn Democrats are proposing, and saw their $500bn bill blocked this week. Donald Trump, meanwhile, has said he’s open to more. “It only takes more money,” Pelosi said, referring to a key aim of the relief bill, namely the safe reopening of schools. “That is for separation, for ventilation, for technology, for more teachers and the rest. Children learning, parents earning. Education is another policy piece where we have some disagreement, otherwise we can negotiate. “We’re waiting. Every time they say we move the goalposts, that means they’re projecting what they did, but let’s just be hopeful. We’re nine days before an election. We’re trying to unify the country and one way to do it is to come together to crush the virus, so that we can open our economy, open our schools and feed 17 million children who are food insecure in our country.” The speaker said she sent questions to McConnell on Friday, and is expecting answers Monday. “In our bill, science dictates what we do,” she said. “We can lower the incidence of the virus in certain areas, open schools, open businesses and the rest. If we don’t, we’re just giving money to the president to spend any way he wants, and that has not been in furtherance of crushing the virus.” Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behavior,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. White House chief of staff Mark Meadows has just made one of the most revealing comments to emerge from Trump’s inner circle about the president’s historic mishandling of the coronavirus crisis. On a Sunday political talk show, Meadows admitted that the federal government was not focusing on trying to control the pandemic. “We’re not going to control the pandemic,” he told Jake Tapper on CNN’s State of the Union. “We are going to control the fact that we get a vaccine, therapeutics and other mitigation.” Tapper pressed Meadows to explain why the administration was not going to control Covid-19, given the massive surge that is pummeling the Midwest and mountain states. He replied: “Because it is a contagious virus.” Meadows’ statement would be astonishing at any time during the pandemic. It gives an unusually candid insight into the mindset of a White House that from the outset has played down its role in marshalling a federal effort to bring the virus under control. The remark was all the more astounding given it’s timing. Marc Short, chief of staff to vice president Mike Pence, has just tested positive for coronavirus, as have three other VP staff and an adviser. Yet Pence continues to travel the US, unmasked, holding campaign events, the White House avoiding the recommendation to quarantine set out by the administration’s own public health agency, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, by calling the vice-president an “essential worker”. Pence is in charge of the White House coronavirus task force, which a key member, Anthony Fauci, said on Friday has seen its meetings “diminish” while President Trump has not attended in “several months”. Around the country, confirmed cases are on a steep upward curve, with Friday and Saturday recording the highest levels since the pandemic began. Hospitalisations and deaths have also begun to rise. In a heated exchange with Tapper, Meadows repeatedly sidestepped the administration’s responsibility for this surge in numbers just nine days before the presidential election. He kept on stressing the role of therapeutics and a future vaccine in “mitigating” the number of deaths, while implying the federal government had no responsibility for the rampant spread of the virus. Tapper asked why the vice-president continued to travel to campaign events without wearing a mask, despite having been exposed via his closest staff. Meadows tried to redirect the blame to China as the source of the virus, but Tapper continued to challenge him. “Would you agree this is very serious, people need to take precautions?” Tapper asked. “I agree it is very serious, but we continue to test more and more so the cases will go up,” Meadows replied. In fact, the number of new confirmed cases is rising significantly faster than the quantity of testing. Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff, is currently conducting a fiery interview with Jake Tapper of CNN, voices raised about the White House’s attitude to coronavirus mitigation measures and campaigning instead of steering efforts to combat the pandemic. It’s not going well. More soon. In the meantime, here’s the White House pool report: It’s a brisk, rainy fall day at the White House. White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows spoke to reporters briefly in the driveway after a Fox News interview. He was asked about VP Pence chief of staff Marc Short’s positive coronavirus diagnosis, and was very brief in his remarks. He said only: “We wish him well – he’s been quarantining these last few days…” Another reporter shouted: “Why is Pence traveling – that seems insane?” And another asked: “Should anyone who is in close contact with the vice-president be quarantining?” Meadows ignored the questions. We’re expecting a 10.30pm Trump departure, traveling to New Hampshire and Maine. He is scheduled to be back at the White House for a Halloween event at 6.15pm. This pooler was tested for coronavirus and is awaiting results. The Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards the group put up in Times Square. The billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, showing apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president in cases involving allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing among other things their first amendment rights of free speech. In a legal response released on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson wrote: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticize freely”. Sanderson cited supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting on 20 March, as the pandemic gathered terrible speed, New York reeled and Kushner attacked Governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”, Sanderson wrote. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” Sanderson also said “This isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian, that seems unlikely. Ivanka Trump’s “father has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Barring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? More from the Associated Press: “A day after the US set a daily record for new confirmed coronavirus infections, it came very close to doing it again. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Close to 8.6m Americans have contracted the coronavirus since the pandemic began, and about 225,000 have died. Both statistics are the world’s highest. India has more than 7.8m infections but its daily numbers have been declining. US health officials have feared the surge of infections to come with colder weather and people spending more time indoors, especially as many flout guidelines to protect themselves and others such as mask-wearing and social distancing. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington currently forecasts that the country’s death toll could exceed 318,000 by 1 January.” …and welcome to another day on the campaign trail, nine days out from election day now, with Joe Biden holding his polling leads, Donald Trump campaigning hard at rallies which do not adhere to Covid-19 mitigation measures and Mike Pence… seeing multiple members of his team, including chief of staff Marc Short, test positive for the coronavirus. The VP is not altering his schedule: This while Covid case numbers are shooting to record levels nationally and in many states, and as one study predicts a death toll of 500,000 by February. As the AP reports, “Oklahoma, Illinois, New Mexico and Michigan were among states announcing new record highs in daily confirmed cases on Saturday, a day after a nationwide daily record of more than 83,000 reported infections, according to Johns Hopkins University. “Dr Joneigh Khaldun, Michigan’s chief medical executive, said it’s ‘now more important than ever that people take this seriously.’ The 3,338 new Covid-19 cases in her state topped the old record by more than 1,300. Michigan is of course a swing state, fought over by Trump and Biden – who is more than seven points up there. Kamala Harris, Biden’s running mate, will be in the state today. The same Johns Hopkins count now puts the caseload at 8.5m and the death toll at more than 224,000. Trump had a four-state campaign day on Saturday, voting in Florida before staging rallies in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin. Today he’s speaking in New Hampshire – where the fivethirtyeight.com average puts Biden more than 11 points ahead. Trump has a habit of speaking in places where it might not seem worth the bother – he is also having to campaign in states, such as Georgia, where no Republican president would usually have to tread. More to come, of course. In the meantime, here’s David Smith with hopeful news for Democrats:
1||Morning mail: Doha strip-search outrage, record US early voting, Kerr's 'betrayal'Good morning, this is Imogen Dewey bringing you the main stories and must-reads on Monday 26 October. Top stories Australia is demanding answers after women were taken from a Qatar Airways flight and subjected to a strip-search and medical examination at a Doha airport. Female passengers, including 13 Australians, were ordered to disembark the plane and undergo the medical examination after a newborn baby was apparently found dead in the Hamad International airport. Most of the women were “very upset” when they returned, a fellow passenger on flight QR908 to Sydney said, following intrusive inspections to see if they had recently given birth. The Australian government has registered “serious concerns” with Qatari authorities over the incident. Qatar Airways told Guardian Australia it could not comment. Australia’s biggest companies are being run by a “directors’ club”, a major new study has found, and proves boards are not punished for poor performance. More than a third of vacancies on the boards of the top 300 listed companies in Australia are filled by directors of other companies in the same group, according to data compiled by proxy advice firm Ownership Matters. It comes as corporate Australia readies for an annual shareholder meeting season that got off to a torrid start last week with the AGM of the troubled casino group Crown. Nearly 60 million Americans have cast an early vote, with a record-shattering turnout expected by next week’s election. Activists and analysts say the almost certain confirmation of Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court on Monday represents a “power grab” by Republicans facing possible wipeout at the ballot box, though a party chair has rejected the president’s doubts Republicans can hold the Senate. “We’re not going to control the pandemic,” a Trump aide blithely admitted, as the country’s top infectious diseases expert raised hopes of an approved virus vaccine by the end of the year. Meanwhile the group behind contentious billboards in Times Square featuring Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner is refusing to cave to legal threats. Australia Tens of thousands of hectares of bush could be at risk under a “gratuitous” New South Wales land-clearing plan, making life even harder for koalas already under threat. The Victorian government has built less than 10% of the new public housing units it pledged by 2022, as analysis suggests there are nearly 30,000 children among the 100,000 people on the ballooning waiting list. The Morrison government is expected to come under pressure over its delay in progressing a national anti-corruption commission this week, with an independent MP introducing her own bill and Labor likely to intensify its question time attack. Labor holds a two-seat majority in Queensland and the most recent polls suggest a close contest on 31 October. But Queensland is a deeply complex state. More than 20 seats could flip this Saturday and minor parties are likely to shape the next parliament. The world A revolver found in a raid on the Spanish villa of convicted Irish drug trafficker John Gilligan may have been used to murder Veronica Guerin. A Dublin court acquitted Gilligan of ordering the journalist’s murder in 2001 despite “grave suspicions” about his involvement. France is recalling its envoy to Turkey after Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan made “unacceptable” comments, suggesting Emmanuel Macron, his French counterpart needed mental health treatment. The attempted hijacking of a Liberian-registered crude oil tanker has been reported off the Isle of Wight, where police and coastguards are currently dealing with the incident. The Spanish government has declared a six-month state of emergency and ordered a nationwide curfew in an effort to contain the second wave of the coronavirus, while Italians have been strongly advised to stay at home. Recommended reads Newly released letters written by the former Australian governor general show he regarded his forced resignation under the Fraser government as the ultimate betrayal. Sir John Kerr’s letters to the Queen’s private secretary are “a raw display of devastation”, writes Jenny Hocking. “A common theme emerges: the involvement of the palace in every step Kerr took, and every decision he made, regarding the dismissal of Gough Whitlam and its gathering aftermath, including even his own resignation … They tell a poignant story of personal decline.” “Most food wasn’t made to be sealed in plastic and bounced on the back of a scooter for 20 minutes before it gets to you.” Still, Adam Liaw is prepared to admit we need to take the changes 2020 has forced on our eating habits in our stride. He rates the best and worst dishes to order in, with several surprises and one universal truth: “Getting burgers delivered generally sucks.” Australia’s theatres are slowly reopening, but will subscribers return? “Production costs of putting on a show remain the same, whether you’re playing to 50 people or 500,” writes Fiona Gruber. “This is a crucial factor influencing theatre companies’ programming and projection of box office revenue for 2021. How many tickets can they reasonably expect to sell? Covid has disrupted the subscription funding model a majority of companies rely on … and it hasn’t helped that the only money spent from a $250m rescue package for the arts has gone to the screen industry.” Listen Port Augusta once supplied 40% of South Australia’s electricity through its huge coal-fired power station. But the town saw the writing on the wall for fossil fuels and began to campaign for a transition to renewable energy to secure jobs for future generations. In this episode of Full Story, Jake Morcom and Adam Morton discuss what went wrong for the town’s promising renewables projects. As Tom Morton explains, “the Upper Spencer Gulf has become a social laboratory for Australia’s energy transition.” Despite the problems, he says there’s no doubt a major transformation is happening. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport “If it is true that grand finals do not build character but instead reveal it, then Dustin Martin is the quintessential man for the moment,” writes Scott Heinrich. “We always suspected it, but now we know there has never been anyone like him.” It started with an illegal outstretched leg and finished with a frantic flourish that was very nearly a Penrith comeback for the ages. Ultimately, though, last night’s grand final confirmed Melbourne Storm as the dominant NRL team of this century. Britain’s Tao Geoghegan Hart has sensationally claimed Giro d’Italia glory, gaining time gradually but inexorably on Australian Jai Hindley after they entered the final stage almost level. Media roundup The IMF is urging Australia to embrace “long-standing recommendations” in its economic recovery from Covid-19, reports the Australian Financial Review. Analysis from the Australian suggests Melbourne’s lengthy lockdown is costing taxpayers $200m and 1,200 jobs per day. And Gladys Berejiklian’s approval rating is still high but her reputation has taken a hit, says a new poll for the Sydney Morning Herald and Nine News. Coming up The House of Representatives will sit and Senate estimates will return. Follow all the latest developments with our live blog A coronial inquest will resume into the death of Nathan Reynolds, a 36-year-old Aboriginal man who died from an asthma attack in a minimum-security section of a jail on Sydney’s outskirts in 2018. And if you’ve read this far … A chilling find shows how Henry VIII planned every detail of Anne Boleyn’s beheading. In an obscure, newly discovered passage in a Tudor warrant book, the king specifies that Boleyn should die by having her head “cut off”. Some say this shows real kindness – as far as having one’s head cut off might be less awful than being burned alive. On the other hand, stipulations now revealed for the first time make it unpleasantly clear how thoroughly he wanted his wife to be killed. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.
4||Outsider Nuts Well brings big success to Ann Hamilton's small stableThe romance of jump racing was on full show here as the plucky, prolific but nevertheless unsung Nuts Well battled his way to victory in the Old Roan Chase for the tiny Northumberland stable of Ann Hamilton. This was the biggest success in the long career of the 73-year-old Hamilton, who still schools horses over fences at her base in the village of Capheaton, about 20 miles north-west of Newcastle. “It means the world to us,” Hamilton said, “because he’s been so good to us and we just thought he couldn’t do it, with all that weight on his back. We thought we didn’t have a chance, so to beat the top trainers is amazing. We thought he might struggle in this ground. He’s really taken us by surprise.” That thought will have been shared by almost everyone who had a bet on the race, as Nuts Well was returned at odds of 18-1. Though he has improved since Danny McMenamin became his regular jockey, a series of wins at Wetherby, Musselburgh and Kelso cut little ice with punters when weighing up a major handicap like this, in which the opposition was trained by the likes of Paul Nicholls, Colin Tizzard and Jonjo O’Neill. After a short chat with reporters, Hamilton insisted on rushing off to attend to her horse, leaving her husband, Ian, to fill in the blanks. The pair are sheep and cattle farmers, he explained, and she has enjoyed training five or six horses on the side since about 1980. There have been some fallow spells, like the six consecutive seasons in the 1990s when their stable had not a single winner. But it was worth it for well-remembered days like the one in April 2003, when Divet Hill won the Fox Hunters over the Grand National fences, despite his jockey’s breeches splitting at the rear as they cleared The Chair. “It’s always been a lucky place for us, Aintree,” Ian reflected. “Absolutely brilliant.” But he was not tempted by the thought of trying Nuts Well over the famous green fences here, in a race like the Topham in the spring. “He’s not very big, you know. We wouldn’t put him over the big ‘uns.” Finding the right target for Nuts Well might now be the biggest problem facing the Hamiltons’ training operation, as opportunities are scarce for highly rated animals and he will be just outside the top 20 in Britain after this. It is an unusual sort of problem for a stable whose staff amounts to “two great girls” who help out in their lunch breaks. How will the couple celebrate this notable victory? “Go to bed early, I suppose. I’ve got cattle to feed when I get back, Ann’ll have six horses to see to. Then we might have a drink.” Robbie Power, who was unseated from Vision Des Flos during the Old Roan, hopes to be back in action this week, despite initial fears that he might have suffered serious injury. “I’m fine,” he reported. “I’ve just got a bit of soft-tissue damage in my knee, but it feels all right. I’ve got plenty of movement in it, just plenty of bruising. Hopefully, it will be fine in a couple of days or so.”
1||'Could do better': top Australian economists grade the 2020 budgetAustralia’s leading economists have struggled to grade this month’s budget. Challenged by the Economic Society of Australia and The Conversation to rate it on a scale of A to F when judged by its stated aims of rebuilding the economy and creating jobs, none of the 43 economists who responded gave it the lowest grades of E or F. But most who gave it a pass were unhappy. Financial markets expert Kevin Davis praised “the willingness of a conservative government to adopt needed large deficit spending at variance with its ideology”. Economic modeller and former Reserve Bank board member Warwick McKibbin said he would give it an A for scale. But Davis said tax cuts “to the better-off employed” weren’t the best way of achieving desired outcomes, and McKibbin said the composition could have been much better designed. “There was an opportunity to invest in green infrastructure as part of a fiscal response and a climate/energy policy response that would have longer-term economic and environmental payoffs,” McKibbin said. “For spending support, transfers to low-income households rather than income tax cuts would have given a bigger bang for the buck. Greater support of childcare would support incomes and labour supply.” Bob Breunig said the design of the childcare benefit created a well-documented income cliff for second earners making it difficult for them to work more hours. It was a known problem and would have been easy to fix. Hard hats instead of soft skills The Grattan Institute’s Danielle Wood said it was “absolutely the right call to change course on fiscal strategy and recognise the need for sizeable stimulus, so marks for that”. But the budget “very much bet the house on a private sector-led recovery”. Where it had spent money directly, it mostly went to “hard-hat” professions such as infrastructure, construction, manufacturing, defence, utilities and energy. “Some of these sectors haven’t even seen job losses during Covid,” Wood said, “and there is already a healthy pipeline of work for transport infrastructure projects, so why spend your stimulus dollars here?” Renee Fry McKibbin noted that the burden of Covid-19 fell on frontline workers in health, caring industries, hospitality, tourism, arts and education, yet she said the budget focused on sectors “traditionally dominated by men”. Climate change overlooked Wood said the price of those blindspots would be a weaker recovery than otherwise, unemployment higher for longer than it could have been, and women’s economic disadvantage entrenched. Labour market specialist Sue Richardson said relying on incentives such as instant asset write-offs and hiring subsidies was risky because the private sector might not respond in the way that had been hoped. What direct spending there was seemed “intended largely to recreate the economy of the past, rather than invest in the economy of the future”. “The economy of the future will, among other things, need to have much lower greenhouse gas emissions and much greater ability to cope with the unavoidable damage arising from climate change.” How we handle the recovery will either set us on a path towards net-zero emissions or lock us into a fossil fuel system from which it will be hard to escape. Saul Eslake gave the government “great credit for being willing, explicitly, to recalibrate its budget strategy” and run up what (for Australia) were large amounts of debt. On average, a bare pass But he said the measures chosen would be less effective in delivering jobs and recovery than others available including vouchers for spending in sectors hard-hit sectors and spending on social housing and childcare. All but one of the 43 economists who responded to the survey also responded to the pre-budget survey which nominated spending on social housing, education and training and permanently boosting jobseeker as the top budget priorities. Assessing the budget, 16 of the 43 (37%) awarded it either an A or a B. Almost half (49%) awarded it a C, or “bare pass”. Six (14%) gave it a D. Some of the economists who awarded a B said it was really a “B-minus”. One of them, Lata Gangadharan, said when it came to opportunities for women (those worst affected by the downturn) the budget “failed miserably” and would attract a D. James Morley said he might have been “too easy of a marker” by awarding a B, but that it was “possible to lose the forest for the trees when only evaluating the budget on its specifics”. ‘B’ reflects the big picture, not the details The big picture was that deficit-financed stimulus was needed and that the budget provided much more than might have been expected given the previous positions of the treasury and the Morrison government. He said the forward guidance that put off “budget repair” until after the unemployment rate fell below 6% was welcome, even if one could ask why the threshold of 6% number had been chosen. The more one looks at the details, the more one wants to significantly mark down the grade for budget. But I will still give it a “B” because the big picture is on the right track and I will just hope the Treasurer somehow becomes an “A” student in the future. Rana Roy said he would have to grade the budget a C rather than an A or B, “more in sorrow than in anger”. While he approved of the deficits and the tax cuts and the focus on infrastructure, he strongly suspected the measures would not be enough. “For example, in an immediate sense it is likely that the negative impact of tapering and terminating jobkeeper will overpower the positive impact of the new wage subsidies for new hires.” Two of those surveyed awarded the budget a B primarily because it had shown restraint. Tony Makin said too much spending would have pushed up the dollar and drawn resources away from the private sector. Geoffrey Kingston said it was important to avoid “maxing out the national credit card”. Chris Edmond awarded it a C primarily because its assumptions relied on hope. By simply assuming a widespread effective vaccine will be available next year and not otherwise thinking hard about how to beat the pandemic, the government is being very optimistic. Others said it had ignored the one thing recommended by most economists, which was to invest in social housing to make housing affordable and create jobs. A permanent increase to jobseeker would have given a million Australian confidence in the lead-up to Christmas. Higher education, a major export earner with a direct impact on productivity, was being left to shrink. John Quiggin said the budget pursued “cultural/ideological vendettas against perceived enemies like renewable energy and the university sector”. But he said it was still worth a C. The government was right to budget for a large deficit, and deserved continuing credit for JobSeeker and JobKeeper. This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons licence. Read the original article, including economists’ individual grades and responses. Peter Martin is a visiting fellow at the Crawford school of public policy, Australian National University
2||Australia is part of a Black region; it should recognise Kanaky ambition in New CaledoniaKicking the can down the road is a time-honoured solution to deadlocks over statehood and identity: hoping time, consultation and money can end up in agreement. But in New Caledonia, the French territory of 290,000 people in the Melanesian island chain to Australia’s north-east, the road is running out after more than two decades of can-kicking. The time is coming – perhaps has come – for Australia to take a clearer position. On 4 October, the second of three referendums on independence promised after 20 years of peace-building saw a sharpening divide in popular sentiment about staying under the French tricolour. Just over 53% of voters said “non” to independence, down from 56.7% in the first referendum in 2018. The trend suggests that a third referendum expected in 2022 would see the “oui” vote rise from this month’s 46.7% to parity or even a narrow majority. Such a prospect has some observers fearing a return to the communal violence seen in the late 1980s, when indigenous Kanaks sought to follow their Melanesian counterparts in Vanuatu, the Solomons, and Papua New Guinea into independence, and French settlers mounted armed resistance. It culminated in 1988. Kanak militants took French police as political hostages on the small island of Ouvéa; French special forces went in, with significant loss of life. The horror led to a 10-year peacemaking effort, the Matignon accords, signed by French loyalist and Kanak leaders, extended by the 1998 Nouméa accords. This month’s vote saw the territory still largely split along the indigenous-settler divide. The “oui” vote dominated in the northern part of the main island and the Loyalty Islands to the east, where Kanaks are concentrated. The “non” vote prevailed in the main island’s south around Nouméa and a smaller settler enclave. The question is, where to now? Under the accords, a third referendum must be held if requested by at least a third of the New Caledonia congress, its legislature. The earliest request can be in April, for a vote in 2022. The pro-independence Kanak parties have the required numbers and say they will demand it. Loyalists, seeing where the numbers are trending, are starting to baulk at it. Sonia Backès, a conservative loyalist who is president of the southern region, has said it even carries the risk of civil war. Some loyalist elements are now urging new negotiations on some kind of middle way, to avoid holding the third referendum. A more hard-line element wants a vote on scrapping the accord in 2022, bringing the 40,000 more recent settlers onto the local electoral roll and thus outvoting the Kanaks for good. But some compromise is stirring on the Kanak side too. This week, Roch Wamytan, a Kanak who was a signatory to the 1998 accords and is now president of the territory’s congress, floated the idea of independence in association with France. This would perhaps resemble the ties of the northern Pacific states of Palau, Micronesia and Marshall Islands with the United States, which extends defence, funding and social services, while still holding their own United Nations membership. France itself looks ready to adjust. In 2018 president Emmanuel Macron visited New Caledonia before the vote, and expressed pride in the decision to remain with France. This time he stayed away, and afterwards, as noted by Denise Fisher, a former Australian consul-general in Nouméa, just referred to the “success” of the “second democratic rendezvous” as a sign of “confidence in the Republic.” He promised to organise a third referendum if that was requested, and urged the territory’s people to think hard about all scenarios after 2022. The French territories minister, Sebastien Lecornu, appeared set on encouraging flexible thinking when he arrived in New Caledonia this month. “This binary question of a yes or no to independence is not the answer to all the questions raised in society today.” New Caledonia’s region is also stepping into the debate. Vanuatu’s opposition leader and recent foreign minister, Ralph Regenvanu, this week urged more contact with loyalists to convince them New Caledonia can be a viable state. He noted that this camp often cites Vanuatu, a former British-French condominium, as a dire example of independence. “For us, it is quite amusing because we think we have got a very good development model happening here,” Regenvanu told Radio New Zealand. In this context, Australia is looking oddly more pro-French than the French. In a statement on the referendum result, foreign minister Marise Payne said “we recognise the choice made by New Caledonians to remain a part of France”, declaring “Australia values its close relationship with France as a likeminded partner in the Indo-Pacific region. We welcome France’s ongoing commitment to the Pacific, and its significant contribution to regional security and prosperity.” Not a word about the Kanaks and their aspirations. Two things are at play here. China has Australia spooked about the Pacific, to the point where it is open to French duchessing that they are a significant counterweight, through such things as the recently proposed France-India-Australia “axis” and the appointment of a French ambassador for the Indo-Pacific. Both India and Australia are of course big customers for the French arms industry. From a narrow military power-balance perspective, it might seem attractive to keep a significant Western naval power like France watching over a vast stretch of the Pacific, where France has about 80% of its present exclusive economic zone. But it runs counter to the Morrison government’s signature initiative placing Australia in the Pacific “vuvale” (family, in Fijian). The Melanesians are this family’s most numerous people, perhaps outnumbering Australians later this century. They take decolonisation of their Kanak brothers very seriously. We should show that we do too. A more constructive approach would be to join regional leaders like Regenvanu in trying convince loyalists that a new independent state of Kanaky, with continuing French support and encouraged Australian investment in its struggling nickel industry, might not be a bad thing, certainly better than otherwise inevitable conflict. For Australia, it would pre-empt malign influence from elsewhere and show our recognition that we are, as Regenvanu told me earlier this year, “part of a Black region”.
0||'The red card was a joke': Ancelotti fumes over Digne dismissal as Everton slip upCarlo Ancelotti has denied Everton have a disciplinary problem and has accused the referee Kevin Friend of being swayed by the furore surrounding Jordan Pickford’s challenge on Virgil van Dijk in the Merseyside derby in his decision to send off Lucas Digne as Everton’s unbeaten start to the season ended at Southampton. The Everton manager suggested criticism of Pickford’s tackle, which went unpunished and left Van Dijk with a long-term anterior cruciate ligament injury, was an aggravating factor in Digne being given a straight red card in the 2-0 defeat. Ancelotti said the officials’ decision to send Digne off was “a joke” and confirmed Everton would appeal against the red card. Asked if he was concerned his players have a discipline issue following successive sending-offs – Richarlison was absent at St Mary’s after being sent off late on against Liverpool – Ancelotti said: ““No, I don’t think so. The red card was a joke. It was not intentional. Maybe it could be a yellow but for sure it was not violent conduct. They could check better. “Maybe all the rumours all week against Pickford, against Richarlison, affected the decision and if it is like this, it’s not right, it’s not fair. We will appeal, for sure. He did not have the intention to hurt the player, or to use violent conduct. It was not the right decision. To lose Digne for three games is too much. “We didn’t complain about Richarlison. But here, we have to appeal, because this was not the right decision.” Digne’s sending off, which will result in a three-match ban unless it is overturned by the Football Association, compounded a difficult afternoon as Everton slipped to defeat. James Ward-Prowse, the Southampton captain, opened the scoring before Che Adams doubled Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side’s advantage after 35 minutes. Four minutes later Stuart Armstrong thought he added a third but Adams was ruled offside in the buildup. “We don’t have to be too disappointed, we are still at the top of the table, which is an unbelievable achievement for us and we have to try to stay there,” Ancelotti said. “It was not a good day, it was not a good performance, we are here to talk about the first defeat and I think we have to look forward because of course we don’t like to lose games but in football it happens. It has arrived after a fantastic start. We have to move forward in this game with the belief we made here.” Hasenhüttl, the Southampton manager, said: “He tried before also to kick him and then finally he hit him from behind so, for me, it was a clear red card.”
4||Lewis Hamilton still ambitious after breaking Schumacher's win recordLewis Hamilton believes he can go on to even greater heights having surpassed Michael Schumacher’s record of Formula One race victories after his win at the Portuguese Grand Prix. The British driver took a commanding victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve and is also now within touching distance of Schumacher’s record of seven world championships. Hamilton won in Portimão despite having lost the lead in the opening laps but came back with a masterful display, taking the flag 25 seconds from his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas. The British driver was ultimately in a league of his own in Portugal and enjoyed an emotional celebration of his 92nd win as he finally surpassed Schumacher as the most successful F1 driver across race victories. The world champion praised his Mercedes team, and insisted he and they were eager for more. “I don’t believe in the saying ‘the sky is the limit’,” he said. “It depends how much we want it, how much we want to continue to raise the bar and going by our history together, the way we work, we don’t sit back on our results, we keep working, we keep elevating. Every race feels like the first one. I don’t know how this is possible after all these races but it does.” Hamilton now leads Bottas by 77 points in the world championship. If he is 78 points ahead after the Turkish Grand Prix, which takes place after the next round at Imola, he will secure his seventh title. The Briton has yet to sign a new contract with Mercedes but is clearly motivated to continue. He has enthusiastically embraced the anti-racism cause and has been a driving force in pushing F1 and Mercedes to push for greater diversity. Initiatives which have only left him enthused to continue in F1. “We are having to utilise our position as a business, as a leader in the business for inclusivity, for diversity, there is a lot of work to do, that keeps me inspired,” he said. “It keeps my teammates continuously growing, my fans learning through this process with us all and our sport is slowly changing. It’s a real special time. I definitely wonder, well I am 35 years old. I still feel physically strong but of course you wonder when is it going to tip over and you start losing performance but going by today it is not yet.” Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was third, believes Hamilton will go well past Schumacher’s records. “It’s an incredible achievement 92 victories and he will go to over 100,” he said. “It’s incredible, he looks like he will also get seven world titles as well which is very impressive.”
0||Jacob Murphy rescues point for Newcastle with late leveller at WolvesAfter 80 minutes that felt like a slog deep in midwinter rather than Premier League game No 6, Wolves and Newcastle awoke. Raúl Jiménez’s strike from a poorly cleared Pedro Neto free-kick seemed to have made it a third consecutive 1-0 win for Wolves, only for Jacob Murphy to rewrite the script. Steve Bruce’s side had barely moved beyond the centre circle in the second half. Yet after claiming a free-kick to the left of Wolves’ area, up stepped Murphy to curl the ball around the wall and past Rui Patrício’s fingertips for the equaliser. If this was a touch unfair on Wolves they have to accept some culpability for taking the match to Newcastle only sporadically. For Nuno Espírito Santo blame lay with the wall’s construction rather than his goalkeeper. “We made a mistake with the set-up,” the Wolves manager said. “The ball cannot go in [via] the near side. We made a mistake in the final moments that punishes us.” Bruce was happy for Murphy, a 25-year-old who had been a fringe player, being previously loaned to West Bromwich Albion and Sheffield Wednesday. “It was good to see Jacob repeat what he’s done on the training ground with the free-kick – he was arguably our best player,” the manager said. “He’s found it difficult to work himself into the team the past two years so I’m delighted for him. He’s worked hard. I never contemplated it [loaning him out again]. He’s really grasped the situation – looked a different player, had a different attitude from him.” Certainly physically he looked in condition – and looked like he wanted to be a Newcastle player. When in flow Wolves are a medley of gold shirts running to and off the ball and from kick-off they had the visitors chasing. Daniel Podence, playing off Jiménez, drifted into space at will, one of these moves saw him turning and unloading a shot at Karl Darlow, who saved low down. Three more attacking moves followed. First, Neto hit a corner straight into Darlow’s gloves; then Jiménez twice miscued when he should have connected cleanly. It meant Wolves had failed to convert from four opportunities and Newcastle quickly posed their own threat. Callum Wilson raced on to a long ball before Max Kilman’s challenge conceded a corner. The fluidity of Wolves’ play is complemented by tenacity, though. It was illustrated in a response that once more had Newcastle pinned back as possession was tapped around them. Yet Bruce’s side were able to stymie the ball being moved into the danger area. This ensured that as half‑time approached entertainment had become as rare as any actual attempts on goal. When Ryan Fraser ran along the right and floated in a cross aimed at Wilson this pattern might have been broken but the ball was too close to Patrício, who gathered with ease. And, when Miguel Almirón skated through the middle to cause a Wolves backpedal, the pass might have been weighted perfectly for Allan Saint‑Maximin but the No 10’s shot was skewed. Finally Podence, at the other end, twisted and turned to leave two Newcastle defenders spectators. The subsequent ball possessed menace – Jiménez rose and only a well-timed Jamaal Lascelles intervention prevented the Mexican heading at goal. The mood caught on. Tempo was upped and quality elevated. Suddenly Saint-Maximin was doing his own swerve-and-slalom to cut in from the left before letting fly from 20 yards: the ball ricocheted off Willy Boly so Patrício was grateful to save. Still, as the second half began the sides remained in deadlock. And the fare was back to being soporific. After Jiménez again snatched at a shot and Murphy hacked away from under Newcastle’s bar Podence returned to creator mode. This time a dip of the hips took him into yards of clear grass and he teed up Rúben Neves with precision. But the midfielder became the latest to lack composure, slashing the ball wildly over. Podence was undeterred. A little later he danced once more inside Newcastle’s area and when he shot the ball appeared to hit the arm of Federico Fernández; yet VAR checked and ruled no penalty which seemed odd as numerous similar incidents have been penalised this season. Soon the Newcastle bench were themselves shouting handball when an Almirón effort pinballed around the area but this did not interest VAR. When Nuno took off Podence for Adama Traoré on 67 minutes it appeared quaint as this removed the best performer. But, now came a finish that did at least feature goals – each highlighting what had previously been missing. Afterwards Bruce said Jonjo Shelvey did not feature because of a “sportsman’s hernia” and may be available again after the international break next month.
0||Kevin McCarra obituaryKevin McCarra, who has died aged 62 of Alzheimer’s disease, was football correspondent for the Guardian from 2002 to 2012 and prior to that a football writer for the Times, Sunday Times and Scotland on Sunday. One of Scotland’s finest sportswriting exports, he was blessed with original thinking, a deep and genuine understanding of football, and an extraordinary talent for phraseology that allowed him to turn what might otherwise have been mundane match reports into works of art. He was born in Glasgow, the youngest of three children, and grew up in Clarkston, on the outskirts of the city. His mother, Adele, was a pharmacist who later went into science teaching, and his father, Joe, was also a teacher. Having attended Holyrood secondary school in Glasgow, Kevin took a degree in Scottish literature at Glasgow University, becoming heavily involved in the Third Eye Centre, a contemporary arts venue. At that stage lecture halls looked to be his natural domain, and after graduation he enrolled for a PhD. However, an invitation from the Third Eye Centre to curate an exhibition about Scottish football was followed by a commission to write a book entitled A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, which was published in 1984. In turn that led to writing work with Scottish Field magazine. Kevin’s deft touch and sharp observations quickly caught the eye of the newly established Scotland on Sunday, which in 1988 took him on as a staff writer – and the PhD was ditched. When the entrepreneur Fergus McCann saved Celtic football club in 1994 Kevin was at the forefront of reporting on the story and shortly afterwards he accepted a move to the Times, initially as Scottish football correspondent but later covering English matches after the direct intervention of the newspaper’s editor prevented a move to the Scotsman. It was at the Times during one particularly raucous European football night at Ibrox that Kevin dictated to the copytaker down the phone that the Rangers manager Walter Smith had “returned to his previous central defensive pairing of Richard Gough and Gordan Petric” – only to find the phrase rendered into “tedious central defensive pairing” when it appeared in the paper the following morning. There was, however, never any prospect of Smith, Petric, Gough or anyone else in the football world becoming angry with Kevin. Similarly, even in such a tribal environment as Glasgow, where support for either half of the Old Firm is generally kept under wraps, he had no fear of revealing his lifelong allegiance to Celtic, as even Rangers fans knew he would not allow that to cloud the judgment in his work. His writing was of sufficiently high quality and balance to render such thoughts redundant. In 2002 he succeeded David Lacey as the main footballing writer at the Guardian, moving with his wife, Susan Stewart, an investment banker, whom he had married in 1986, to Stoke Newington in north London. During his time at the Guardian Kevin was a constant source of support to other journalists, both established and aspiring. Self-deprecating about the scale of his own talent, he felt uncomfortable at receiving so many emails from inquisitive teenagers keen on pursuing a life in the sports media. He regarded his own route as too unorthodox to be helpful and was perhaps unaware that even just a return communication from someone of his standing – which he always gave - would nonetheless be gratefully received. Support was not reserved for the young: in the late 2000s, when Hugh MacDonald, then a sportswriter with the Herald in Glasgow, arrived in London to preview a Champions League tie involving Arsenal, Kevin drove him to the club’s rural pre-match press conference and then back to his hotel. It only emerged later, and by accident, that all of this took place on Kevin’s day off. He also allowed me to stay in his home after being instrumental in arranging some work experience at the Guardian. Many years later a ticking off arrived by email for my use of “plethora” in relation to opportunities missed during a football match. True to the word’s definition, which relates to a larger amount of something than is needed, he reminded me that “teams cannot create too many chances”. If such a note had arrived from any other journalist, ego would have led to annoyance, but from Kevin it produced only a smile. In an industry where cynicism is embedded, he stood out for his kind, gracious and graceful approach. No one had a bad word to say about him, and that spoke volumes. In 2012 his book Celtic: A Biography in Nine Lives was published; he had written several others over the years, mainly about Scottish football and beginning with One Afternoon in Lisbon (co-written with Pat Woods in 1988) about Celtic’s European Cup glory in 1967. In 2012 he left the Guardian to return to Glasgow. Susan gave up her job and spent more and more of her time helping him as his health deteriorated. Season tickets at Partick Thistle and Celtic allowed for plenty of football to be watched, and there were trips, too, to Venice, their favourite city – but nothing like the time for travel that they had planned. He is survived by Susan and his brother, John. • Kevin James McCarra, journalist, born 1 February 1958; died 24 October 2020
5||The Guardian view on the social care crisis: fix a broken systemCoronavirus has yanked back the veil that had obscured the crisis in social care. The unfairness, confusion and humiliation felt by people using the system is out in plain sight. The public intuitively grasps that something needs to be done. When Boris Johnson arrived in Downing Street, he claimed to have a plan to fix a broken system. If a week is a long time in politics, then last July feels like an aeon ago. Mr Johnson’s plan has yet to appear. The worry is that it has been swallowed up by the gaping maw of the pandemic. That is why ministers should listen to the Commons health and social care committee. Last week MPs painted a picture, in England, of an underfunded system, stretched to breaking point, with a low-paid workforce who need more than clapping. The committee said, at a minimum, £7bn extra should be spent by 2023-24 on the system, with roughly 60% of the money used to cover demographic changes and lift pay in line with the national minimum wage. The rest of the cash would be used to introduce a cap on care costs to protect people against catastrophic bills, first suggested by the economist Sir Andrew Dilnot in 2011. This is an “oven-ready” plan. MPs have set aside policy differences to make the offer digestible for the Treasury. Select committees in both the Lords and the Commons had argued for introducing free personal care to help people with daily tasks such as bathing and dressing. Parliamentarians are now more muted in their support for this policy, aware the £5bn price tag would be too large for the chancellor to swallow. The state should be more generous because we are all living longer. The consequent higher demand for long-term care exposes more people to the “lottery” of the system. It is becoming harder to argue, on ethical grounds, that the NHS will treat long-term conditions such as cancer for free while dementia can cost a sufferer the family home or life savings. The system is plainly malfunctioning when the elderly occupy hospital beds because of a shortage of care places. The state is a crucial prop in the English social care system, providing private operators with a subsidy, via councils, that allows them to open their doors to rich and poor alike. Without adequate funding, local-authority-funded places in private care homes dry up. The upshot is, say experts, a growing divide: with only the very poorest and most incapacitated able to access council-funded beds in a shrinking number of care homes while affluent seniors buy spots in Florida-style retirement villages which come with private nursing care. Anger over such divisions may quickly turn into an electoral “grey-quake”. Ministers cannot say they haven’t been warned. Yet a government solution remains elusive. There is little consensus, especially in the ruling Conservative party, on how the “in year” cost of social care should be apportioned between its current and future beneficiaries. Some Tories think government intervention is unpopular and hanker for more market-led solutions. Yet there is already a social care precept on council tax and there has been no revolt in the shires. The state is best positioned to pool risks and insure people against the catastrophic costs because it is impossible to tell who will need long-term care in old age. Other modern democracies like Germany and Japan have introduced levies on older workers. A wealth duty might also be another way of meeting the cost of a national benefit. The select committee’s chair, Jeremy Hunt, was the longest-serving health secretary and the first ever health and social care secretary. In office he did win a significant increase to the NHS budget but he failed to do the same with social care. This was partly because, in the absence of a debate, social care taxes polled badly. But also because George Osborne, when chancellor, ducked the issue and Theresa May blew it up on the campaign trail. Mr Hunt, who lost the chance to lead the Tory party to Mr Johnson, has urged the government to keep its word and mend social care. No one would wish otherwise.
5||The Guardian view on plant-based food: nothing wrong with a veggie burgerThe European parliament has not always had the best press. A peripatetic assembly with a messy remit and a decidedly unenthused voter base has allowed critics to misrepresent, often lazily, its deliberations. Thus were myths such as the ban on bendy bananas born, and we all know where that led in 2016. But things are looking up in Brussels (or is it Strasbourg?) because the parliament has reached an eminently sensible decision in the great battle over whether plant-based products can be labelled as burgers, sausages, escalopes and steaks. On the surface this is a rather arcane debate, so it was remarkable how much coverage last Friday’s vote got in the British media, especially as we are no longer even part of the EU. It is odd that we are now taking a close interest in the parliament while for decades, as a member, we ignored it or mocked its portentous rulings. The parliament was addressing an attempt by the EU’s farmers to have terms such as burger and sausage banned when the contents were made of plant-based alternatives to meat. MEPs decisively rejected the move, delighting the environmental lobby, which argues that a switch away from meat is essential to make the food industry more sustainable. Green MEPs were dining out on veggie burgers on Friday evening, but this was not just a victory for environmentalism. It was really a triumph for logic. Yes, a sausage is usually made of meat, but it doesn’t have to be. The term is synonymous with shape rather than content. Glamorgan sausages, made of cheese, leeks and breadcrumbs, are a traditional Welsh delicacy, and no one challenges their appropriation of the term. Rice burgers are popular in Asia; vegan steaks are now part of the culinary landscape; and while the French would no doubt insist that an escalope should be made of veal, there is nothing inherently misleading about selling a vegan escalope made of Quorn as long as the ingredients are made clear. The terms usefully describe shape, texture and what the product is being substituted for. Farmers groups demanded that “veggie discs” and “veggie tubes” be used instead, but that would only sow confusion and needlessly reduce sales of plant-based products. MEPs seem to be inconsistent in matters of labelling. “Veggie burger” and “vegan sausage” have been allowed, but they have come down hard on dairy substitutes. The European parliament had already banned “almond milk” and “vegan cheese”, and has now extended that to “cheese-like” and “yoghurt-style”. But there is no inconsistency. Cheese, milk and yoghurt are specific products, not generic names. It is right to ban these for plant-based substitutes, just as a hard line should be taken on such oxymorons as meat-free meatballs. Consumers need protection from over-enthusiastic marketing. The two sides should call a truce. Neither the farmers nor the environmentalists have a monopoly of wisdom. Many an allegedly meaty sausage is decidedly lacking in meat, and plenty of plant-based products are heavily processed. Whether they are committed carnivores or vigorous vegans, consumers need to be encouraged to read the ingredients on packs to understand what they are eating and how their food has arrived on their plate. This is about nutrition, not politics.
6||Free school meals: the Tory MPs defending refusal to support campaignFollowing last week’s parliamentary vote against backing Marcus Rashford’s campaign to extend free school meals (FSM) over the holidays to stop children going hungry, the government has faced heavy criticism for refusing to support the footballer’s proposal. However, despite the growing backlash, some Conservatives have spoken in defence of ministers’ continuing refusal to perform a U-turn on the policy: Ben Bradley The Tory MP for Mansfield tweeted on Friday: “At one school in Mansfield 75% of kids have a social worker, 25% of parents are illiterate. Their estate is the centre of the area’s crime. One kid lives in a crack den, another in a brothel. These are the kids that most need our help, extending FSM doesn’t reach these kids.” Responding to a user who replied saying “£20 cash direct to a crack den and brothel really sounds like the way forward with this one”, Bradley tweeted: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did …” Following heavy criticism, Bradley subsequently deleted the tweets, claiming they had been taken out of context. Mark Jenkinson Defending his Conservative colleague after Bradley’s comments were seized on by Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, Workington MP Jenkinson tweeted on Friday: “I know in my constituency that, as tiny a minority as it might be, food parcels are sold or traded for drugs.” He added: “And that’s parcels, not vouchers – which have greater monetary value. As I said, a relatively minuscule number – but we can’t pretend it doesn’t happen. Pretending, to score political points, helps no one.” Paul Holmes The Tory MP for Eastleigh, in Hampshire, posted a statement on his website on Saturday in which he argued it was unfair to paint Wednesday’s vote as a choice between “feeding hungry children and not feeding hungry children”. He argued that “no child should go hungry”, highlighting the £9bn invested in the welfare system, mainly via universal credit, as well as the £63m hardship fund for local councils. But he also sought to point the finger at the opposition, adding: “The hardship that campaigners like Marcus Rashford experienced happened under a Labour government. Furthermore, the Labour party when in government in 2008 specifically rejected proposals to extend free school meals to children during holidays. “This is not a comment on the rights or wrongs of that decision. I highlight it because surely the level of need during the financial crisis was comparable to this pandemic but I didn’t see the same levels of outrage or abuse then as I do today. This includes threats to female colleagues of mine.” Danny Kruger The Tory MP for Devizes, in Wiltshire, wrote in his local paper, the Gazette &amp; Herald, on Sunday: “This is a really important and emotive topic and I understand why so many people are up in arms about it. Many families across the country are struggling to get by. Benefits provide hardly enough money to live on, and for some people they do not provide enough. “The problem is that generous, unconditional, universal benefit entitlements trap people in dependency on the state and rightly enrage people who are working hard for themselves. That’s why I believe in a more flexible, community-led approach to welfare.” Brandon Lewis The Northern Ireland secretary defended the government’s position on Sunday, telling The Andrew Marr Show that the situation had changed since the summer. He said: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed, so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.”
7||On the US campaign trail: 'We are watching democracy unfold'Lauren Gambino, political correspondent, Washington DC The political year really began for us in Des Moines, Iowa. What felt like every aspiring Democrat in the party was running for the party’s nomination – and then there was Joe Biden, the frontrunner right up until the games actually began. The Iowa caucuses are always a quirky affair: Iowans gather in gyms and churches to support and persuade others to join their candidate – but this year a disastrous and unprecedented reporting meltdown delayed the results for weeks, effectively nullifying the relevance of the whole byzantine affair. And just like that, the wildest campaign season in modern history was under way. Weeks later, Biden staged an incredible comeback to overtake Bernie Sanders, disappointing Republicans who hoped Democrats would nominate a democratic socialist. The primary was cut short by the arrival of the pandemic. Campaign events ground to a halt. Biden’s headquarters moved from Philadelphia to his basement, where his campaign set up a TV studio. The Trump show began, with the president leading extraordinary briefings on coronavirus, during which he famously suggested disinfectants as a potential cure. (He insists it was a joke.) I was one of just a handful of reporters in Wilmington, Delaware, to see Biden deliver his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention. There was no audience, just us. The fireworks display afterwards was a brief reminder of what it used to feel like to be on the campaign trail – but those moments were few and far between. Now I cover the presidential debates from my living room and only travel with Biden when it’s our turn as part of a pool of reporters who follows the candidate. Protests against racial injustice, the death of supreme court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Trump’s coronavirus diagnosis have all threatened to upend the presidential race and yet they haven’t. With days left before the election, Biden continues to hold an advantage over Trump, despite all that has happened over the last 10 months. Whether Trump can again pull off a stunning upset remains to be seen. Four years ago, I waited for Hillary Clinton at the glass-ceilinged Javits Center in New York, surrounded by women and girls in pant suits. (She ultimately never came.) This year, I may be covering the end of this wild election from a hotel room in Wilmington – or, very possibly, my couch. Oliver Laughland, southern bureau chief, New Orleans Covering this election has been one of the most challenging assignments of my career. And it’s not just because I am driving thousands of miles during the pandemic to visit swing states around the country. Presenting our Anywhere But Washington series, with film-maker Tom Silverstone, has been an eye-opening experience taking me to some of the most fascinating but deeply fractured communities in America. From the bitter fight to win the suburbs of Dallas to the retirement communities of central Florida, where political golf-cart rallies often turn nasty, the divisiveness of the Trump era has been plain to see. Pervasive disinformation has also been a disturbing factor in most of our video dispatches. In Georgia I watched first-hand as voting rights activists battled against QAnon conspiracy theories taking root among some voters, and I interviewed a Republican congressional candidate who stormed out as I asked her about the misinformation she was pushing as part of her campaign. But the consequences of Donald Trump’s war on facts were most poignant when I visited the old offices of the Vindicator newspaper in Youngstown, Ohio, which closed in 2019, making the city the largest in America now without a daily paper. It’s a region that Trump promised to deliver for, and there is now almost no one holding him accountable for his failures there. But in every community I’ve gone to, the enthusiasm and passion for politics has been just as evident. Take Ebony Carter, a 25-year-old first-time candidate running in a rural Georgia seat that Democrats have not contested in six years. She’s out canvassing with her de facto campaign manager – her mum – knocking on every door in her area in a bid to flip the district. “Why am I doing this?” she said during a day of campaigning. “Because somebody has to.” Kenya Evelyn, breaking news reporter The presidential race underscores that “Representation Matters” isn’t some meaningless mantra. Rather, it reflects the urgency to authentically capture the pulse of the people most affected by policy. Black Americans are disproportionately affected by three national crises – a coronavirus pandemic, recession, and racial uprising – yet are still most often the people left out of policy, the communities excluded from news coverage, and the perspectives that are most easily stereotyped and overgeneralised. But Black and brown voters are stepping forward to hold parties and politicians – and anyone else who conflates proximity to a community with being for and of that community – more accountable to their vote. As a member of America’s most reliable voting bloc – Black women – I hope to have captured that demand for African American agency with our Black Voting Power series, highlighting the Black men and women at the forefront of the fight for voting rights and calls for institutional change. We’ve reached the point in the 2020 race when everyone from reporters and pundits to politicos now parachutes in to these same neglected communities. But if this election cycle shows us anything, it’s that proximity to a community doesn’t guarantee a commitment to it, and that call for change will ring out well past election day. Ankita Rao, voting rights editor When we launched our voting rights project, The Fight to Vote, last year, the obstacles facing voters already seemed menacing. A supreme court ruling in 2013 had opened the door for states with deeply entrenched racism to enact new policies around elections without checks and balances. Thousands of polling stations closed, often in majority-Black areas, new voter ID laws introduced confusing restrictions, and voter intimidation was rampant. In 2016, when Donald Trump was elected, the impact of these voter suppression tactics were clear. Then 2020 happened, and with it the pandemic and economic devastation. Suddenly the question was not just will all voters have equal access to voting, but will the country be able to pull off an election at all? Congress fought over money for local officials , leaving the presidential election thoroughly underfunded. Trump railed at mail-in voting, one of the few safe ways to vote as Covid-19 cases continued to rise across the country. Voters scrambled to register in states such as Texas where online registration still isn’t allowed. When the election officially started a few weeks ago, with mail-in voting and early voting starting across the country, we were ready for anything. We mapped out scenarios where Trump refused to concede, and where Democrats unleashed an army of lawyers to make sure each vote was counted. We launched a tracker to count mail-in ballots in battleground states, in an attempt to locate and analyse how ballots were being sent, accepted, rejected and counted. We enumerated the active court cases that will decide when and how votes are counted – cases still going on with just days until 3 November. And we prepared ourselves, and our readers, for a reality in which we would not know who the new president was on election day. We are watching democracy unfold in front of our eyes, despite every effort to stop it. A record number of Americans have voted early, most of them Democrats, in an effort to safeguard their choice and their health. States such as Texas, where politicians have tried to make it as difficult to vote as possible, are seeing record turnout, with new voters casting ballots for the first time. Does this mean the people’s will has succeeded over voter suppression? Definitely not. But after months of scrutinising an election process that’s often taken for granted, it’s a sign that our country values the right to vote above all, and will fight to protect it.
8||Lawyers call for apology from Johnson and Patel for endangering colleaguesThe UK prime minister and the home secretary are accused of endangering the personal safety of lawyers through their abusive attacks on the profession and should apologise, more than 800 former judges and senior legal figures have said in a letter sent to the Guardian. Boris Johnson and Priti Patel are additionally accused in the letter of displaying “hostility” towards lawyers, undermining the rule of law and effectively risking the lives of those working in the justice system. The signatories include three former justices of the UK supreme court, five retired appeal court judges, three former high court judges, the lawyer heads of four Oxford University colleges, more than 80 QCs, 69 law professors from leading English universities, the directors of Liberty and Justice, as well as hundreds of law firm partners, barristers and solicitors. The letter is the largest coordinated response so far to increasingly vehement rhetorical attacks on the legal profession by the two Conservative politicians. In August, the Home Office published a video on Twitter blaming “activist lawyers” for frustrating the department’s efforts to deport people with no right to remain in the UK. The video was later withdrawn. Earlier this month, at the Conservative party conference, Patel broadened her targets, claiming that among those defending the “indefensible” and “broken” immigration appeals system were “do-gooders, lefty lawyers, the Labour party”. In his conference speech, Johnson went further, declaring he would prevent “the whole criminal justice system from being hamstrung by what the home secretary would doubtless – and rightly – call the lefty human rights lawyers, and other do-gooders”. Last week, a man appeared in court charged with carrying out a racist attack on a firm of immigration lawyers in London. Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow, faces six charges including preparing an act of terrorism. He has not yet entered a plea. The roll call of signatures protesting against the vilification of lawyers represents an extraordinary host of prominent legal experts united in a common purpose. Among the former judges are Lords Collins, Dyson and Walker, who recently left the supreme court, as well as onetime appeal court judges Sir Richard Buxton, Sir Anthony Hooper, Sir David Keene, Sir Alan Moses and Sir Stephen Sedley. The letter states: “We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. “Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law, which ministers and lawyers alike are duty-bound to uphold. “We invite both the home secretary and the Prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future.” In support of the letter, former director of public prosecutions Lord Macdonald QC said: “The home secretary may not grasp the indecency of her language, but the prime minister should know better. “Lawyers who represent demonised people are always attacked by populist politicians, but it is demeaning to our country and its institutions that the government itself is now dipping into this disreputable playbook. “It is precisely this sort of ugly authoritarianism that the rule of law is called upon to counter. The entire legal profession is proud of those lawyers who are being so crudely and dangerously vilified.” The former supreme court justice Lord Dyson told the Guardian: “What’s worrying is the inflammatory language used by the home secretary and supported by the prime minister. It was irresponsible and dangerous and quite unjustified to use inflammatory language of the sort. The language is almost the language of a demagogue. “We all now what happens when people in high places and in power resort to language of that kind … They are whipping up emotions without justification. It’s dangerous.” Dinah Rose QC, the president of Magdalen College, University of Oxford, said: “The people at the heart of government whose role it is to ensure that the legal system and the rule of law are respected have either decided to remain silent or their voices are not being listened to. “Where lawyers are abusing the system, they deserve to be criticised, but the problem is that the government’s attack is on any lawyer who is using the system to represent their clients. There’s an attempt to whip up hatred against lawyers for simply doing their job.” In a judgment last week upholding the right for migrants to have access to lawyers, the lord chief justice, Lord Burnett of Maldon, also stated: “It is a matter of regret that a minority of lawyers have lent their professional weight and support to vexatious representations and abusive late [immigration] legal challenges.” A government spokesperson said: “The government rejects the underlying insinuation in this letter and is clear any form of violence is unacceptable. Lawyers play an important role in upholding the law and ensuring people have access to justice. They are however not immune from criticism.”
3||A political populism far removed from Donald TrumpAndy Beckett presents an entirely negative picture of populism (This is a moment of truth for rightwing populists – but don’t celebrate yet, 23 October). There are many unfortunate examples in our present age of how destructive populist movements can be. However, he appears unaware of earlier and more positive episodes of populism, in particular the founding of the People’s party in 1891 in the US. This became a significant political party, gaining 8% of the popular vote when it fielded a candidate in the 1892 presidential election. The origins of the People’s party, also known as the Populist party, lay in the exploitation of sharecroppers and tenant farmers by business monopolies and the banking elite. These agrarian workers had been plunged into debt, after taking on loans to fund investments in new farming equipment, when they were hit by droughts and falling crop prices, together with extortionate loan terms and interest rates. The Populist party agitated for massive political reforms, which included the recognition of unions, regulation of the railway industry, the direct election of senators, progressive income tax, and women’s suffrage. These ideas were considered radical at the time, and still are! The current problem with populism is that most of it is not genuine, but is either generated by cynical groups with a hidden interest, or is hijacked by unscrupulous politicians for ulterior purposes. However, there still are populist movements that serve a higher purpose. Be careful not to diss populism per se, as it has a distinguished pedigree. It is the pseudo-populists who need to be challenged and brought to heel. Dr Stephen Blomfield Sheffield • Andy Beckett’s piece on populism was a brilliant discussion of one of the most pressing questions of our time. I only have one small quibble. He says we should remember that populists do sometimes “get re-elected”. But that’s not the point. Populism is democracy’s ugly sister. It flourishes when the primordial democratic promise of political equality is negated by a dysfunctional political system. The answer is the maximum possible diffusion of power. It’s not an accident that federal systems are less likely to be infected by the populist virus than centralised ones. A radical overhaul of our dysfunctional political system is the only way out of the populist trap. David Marquand Penarth, South Glamorgan • I disagree that the “predictable and cautious politics” of the 1990s and 2000s provoked an outburst of populism. It was because these political periods were unstable that there was a backlash. The administrations of John Major and Tony Blair produced boom and bust, two massive recessions with widespread unemployment and widening inequality. The Blair government was still essentially Thatcherite even though it tried to fiddle around the edges to make things a bit better for the least affluent. The inevitable crunch came in 2007 precisely because banking and housing remained unreformed. Then came David Cameron, George Osborne and austerity. Populism is the muddled reaction against 40 years of Thatcherism. David Redshaw Gravesend, Kent • David Runciman highlights the need for politicians with experience and judgment when faced with a crisis like the Covid-19 pandemic (Boris Johnson is learning that in politics you cannot simply ‘follow the science’, 24 October). The problem is that our pluralist democratic system is not designed to produce politicians with the wisdom and practical experience to use facts in a relevant way, but only ones that can gain resonance at the ballot box. Both Boris Johnson and Donald Trump exemplify the deficiency. Derek Heptinstall Westgate-on-Sea, Kent
2||Feeling the heat over Arctic sea iceThe delayed freeze in the Laptev Sea is consistent with the entire Arctic Ocean, which is set for the slowest recovery in the extent of sea ice this autumn, if the current daily trend continues (Alarm as Arctic sea ice not yet freezing at latest date on record, 22 October). This follows on from this summer having the second lowest minimum since 1979, with the early decades significantly above the annual trends during the last few years. Other feedback mechanisms are now starting to take hold of global heating, as current atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations are well beyond the normal Quaternary levels over the last 800,000 years – usually 170 to 280 parts per million, between ice age maximums and interglacial stages, compared with a still accelerating anthropogenic 410 ppm, coupled with the impact from a significant rise in methane and other warming gases. This is why mitigation policies are all we have left. Extinction Rebellion would be better off insulating homes, running public transport cooperatives and campaigning for major economic reforms to pay for this. Starting with taxing carbon intensity, abolishing non-dom tax status and establishing an overseas tax liability for British citizens like the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) does for US citizens wherever they are living. Even in Monaco where too many of our honoured tax exiles live. David Nowell Fellow of the Geological Society, New Barnet, Hertfordshire • Late Arctic ice formation should surprise nobody. Rising temperatures melt ice so less solar energy is reflected and darker surfaces absorb more heat. Trapped greenhouse gases escape, causing more warming and more ice to melt while fires and dying vegetation worsen matters further. Even if net emissions from human activities somehow became negligible, this positive feedback will accelerate heating. Many ideas essential to combat expected heating would make sense even if temperatures were static, fell or if a major food crop failed. Examples include restoring fish stocks, less waste, alternatives to fossil fuels, silviculture, regenerative agriculture and combining conservation with careful use. Instead if adopting such win-win policies, decades have been wasted bickering about who was right. Future generations will find this very difficult to forgive. Iain Climie Whitchurch, Hampshire
9||Ministers must end their attacks on lawyersThe undersigned are practising barristers (some working for central and local government), solicitors, legal academics and retired judges. We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law which ministers and lawyers alike are duty bound to uphold. We invite both the home secretary and the prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future. Lawrence Collins Retired justice of the supreme court, John Dyson Retired justice of the supreme court and former master of the rolls, Robert Walker Retired justice of the supreme court, Richard Buxton Retired lord justice of appeal, Anthony Hooper Retired lord justice of appeal, David Keene Retired lord justice of appeal, Alan Moses Retired lord justice of appeal, Stephen Sedley Retired lord justice of appeal, Theodore Huckle Former counsel general for Wales, Ken Macdonald Former director of public prosecutions, and warden of Wadham College, University of Oxford, Helen Mountfield Principal of Mansfield College, University of Oxford and 791 others
8||Is Rishi Sunak just Osborne in disguise?Reviewing Exit Management by Naomi Booth, Nina Allan writes: “In a genre … traditionally … dominated by men, it is particularly gratifying to read a London novel written by a woman” (Review, 23 October). Has she never heard of Maureen Duffy’s London novels, or, in this century, Zadie Smith and the late Andrea Levy? John Wilson London • I was delighted to read that “guising” is still practised in Scotland (Be ready for digital Christmas, says Scotland’s public health adviser, 22 October), but it is not entirely synonymous with trick or treat. Guising traditionally involved some effort by the participants, eg singing a song or telling jokes, rather than just turning up – an approach that would doubtless win the approval of many government ministers today. Elaine Rowland Chester • It’s a bit rich for Bernard Jenkin, a member of the party that frequently accuses its opponents of political opportunism, to say they have “misunderstood the mood of the country” re free school meals (Report, 25 October). Where is Charles Dickens when we need him? David Marcer Gloucester • Is it just me? If I close my eyes when Rishi Sunak is speaking, I hear the voice of ex-chancellor George Osborne. Derek Beaumont Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire • Re Durham student experiences (Letters, 21 October), when I was there in the 70s at a formal dinner, I cut off the nose of the cheese. The way they all started harrumphing, you’d have thought I’d said: “Bollocks to the Queen.” Ian Garner Keighley, West Yorkshire
6||Scores of councils in England activate half-term food schemesMore councils in England are offering food support for struggling families over the half-term holiday amid public discomfort over the government’s refusal to offer help and growing support for the footballer Marcus Rashford’s campaign At least 78 councils had announced by Sunday evening that they would be activating half-term food schemes, either by offering food vouchers or providing extra financial and logistical support to local food banks and charities. The majority of councils offering help were Labour-run, including Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham, Newcastle, Bristol, Leeds and a number of London boroughs, with a small but growing number of Conservative-run councils breaking ranks over the issue. Tory-run Staffordshire county council, which covers the education secretary Gavin Williamson’s South Staffordshire constituency, said it would provide half-term help to up to 18,000 children, joining Hillingdon – in Boris Johnson’s constituency – Medway, and Kensington &amp; Chelsea, all Conservative-run. Staffordshire’s cabinet member for children and young people, Mark Sutton, said: “We know that times are hard for many families at the moment, with increased pressures on household budgets, so we wanted to help those in greater need to ensure that children can get a decent meal through the holiday.” However, a handful of Conservative-run councils said they would not be offering any help over half-term beyond any existing local safety net schemes either because they did not have the money or because it was not their role to provide food support. Walsall council’s Tory leader, Mike Bird, said: “Unfortunately, I have to be the gatekeeper for Walsall council because we have not got the money … When you keep going to a well and taking water it will run dry.” Jonathan Nunn, Tory leader of Northampton council, said: “We’ve considered it as a council but the costs would be prohibitive for the council to fund it… We don’t currently have a plan to lobby the government so that will probably stay as it is. We’re happy for others to step in and help those who need that help.” Others appeared ideologically opposed to the council stepping in. Responding on Friday on Twitter to a resident who said it was shameful for the government to pay consultants £7,000 a day but not feed poor children, the Tory leader of Rushmoor council, David Clifford, replied: “The shame is the day government rather than parents feed their children – if I were in need I would go to our food bank – it works extremely well and not run by government.” The issue appeared to be dividing municipal Conservatives: opposition councillors in Sutton urged the Liberal Democrat-controlled council to provide meals over half-term for children who received them at school, and the Conservative party branch in North Tyneside praising its local Labour-run council for taking similar action. Conservative-run Hampshire county council said that although it oversaw schools and children’s services, responsibility for helping families in hardship over half-term was the responsibility of district councils in its area. Tory-run Kent also said it would not offer extra support. Wandsworth, which is Conservative-controlled, was questioned by a local charity for restricting its half-term help package to children receiving social work support. Wandsworth food bank tweeted: “So far this scheme only helps children with a social worker. It doesn’t help all the 5,700+ Wandsworth children who receive free school meals.”
2||Belarus 'people’s ultimatum' protest met with violent crackdownBelarusian riot police launched another violent crackdown in Minsk on Sunday evening, throwing stun grenades into crowds of peaceful protesters, chasing people through courtyards and making arrests as they attempted to curtail the 11th consecutive Sunday of protest in the country. At least 100,000 people marched through the centre of the Belarusian capital earlier in the day to give what they called a “people’s ultimatum” to Alexander Lukashenko: step down, or face a nationwide strike that could cripple the economy. Long columns of protesters, wrapped in the red-white traditional Belarusian flag that has become the symbol of the protests, streamed through the city centre, shouting “resign!” and “strike!” As usual, authorities cut off mobile internet across central Minsk, closed metro stations and placed cordons of riot police at key sites. Military and riot control vehicles were positioned throughout the centre and officers in balaclavas and wielding shields stood at almost every intersection, but they did not attack the crowds until the evening. The current wave of discontent was prompted by Lukashenko declaring an overwhelming victory in August presidential elections that were widely believed to be rigged, and then cracking down ruthlessly on those who came out to protest. In the first big rallies in August in response to the crackdown, euphoria and disbelief combined to create a heady excitement that Lukashenko’s days were surely numbered. The authoritarian leader, who has been in charge for 26 years, has since made it clear he does not intend to give up power without a fight. A number of opposition leaders have been forced out of the country or arrested over the past two months, and authorities have threatened to use live ammunition on protesters.The crowds on Sunday were still largely buoyant though, with several bands of drummers providing a thudding musical accompaniment and many people flashing victory signs. Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, who stood against Lukashenko after her husband was imprisoned, was able to act as a lightning rod for protest voters but was forced to flee to neighbouring Lithuania the day after the vote, having been given just 10% in the official tally. Tikhanovskaya has declared herself the legitimately elected leader from Vilnius, and has said she wants to oversee a transition period before arranging a new, free election. “Today at 23:59 the term of the people’s ultimatum will expire, and if the demands are not met, Belarusians will start a national strike,” she said in statement on Sunday. Few in Minsk expect the strike to be successful, however. Strikes in August and September drew some support from workers at big factories but were soon crushed. “I support the strike, but of course I’ll still go to work,” said Sergei, a 29-year-old sales assistant who was draped in a red-and-white flag at the protest on Sunday. “We need to get rid of Lukashenko, but I also need to keep my income.” Whether or not the strike is a success, it is clear that Lukashenko has lost legitimacy among huge swaths of the population, and he appears to have little chance of regaining it. A counter-rally in central Minsk in his support was planned for Sunday but called off late in the week, ostensibly to avoid the risk of clashes with the opposition protesters. Most people felt the real reason was a fear that embarrassingly few people would show up. Lukashenko does retain the loyalty of his security forces, however, and if the strike does not work, the question will be whether the protest movement, which has so far remained almost entirely peaceful, will radicalise or whether it will die down as a result of fatigue and the onset of winter. The renewed violence from authorities on Sunday evening may serve to galvanise the weary protest movement again. The incumbent president has promised, alongside the threats, to launch a constitutional reform process. He even paid a visit to the KGB prison in Minsk this month for so-called negotiations with political prisoners in an attempt to win over part of the opposition. Many have dismissed the initiative as too little too late, but how events will play out remains uncertain. “It’s impossible to predict what will happen in a few months. We don’t know what will happen with the economy, we don’t know where Russia will stand, and we don’t know how far Lukashenko will go with concessions,” said the Minsk-based political analyst Artyom Shraibman. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, called Lukashenko on Saturday, one of the only conversations the Belarusian leader has had with a western politician since his controversial re-election. According to a description of the call published by Lukashenko’s team, the two men discussed “the internal political situations in both Belarus and the US”. The EU has placed sanctions on many in the Belarusian regime since the protests began, and Lukashenko has turned to Vladimir Putin for support. The Russian president is known to dislike Lukashenko but appears to have decided that propping him up is better than allowing a change of power to come from the street. The head of Russia’s spy agency, Sergei Naryshkin, flew to Minsk last week in one of many high-profile Russian visits.
10||Norman Thrower obituaryMy father-in-law, Norman Thrower, who has died aged 100, was professor emeritus in the department of geography at the University of California, Los Angeles. From relatively humble beginnings, Norman became one of the world’s most famous cartographers. In 1957, Norman joined the geography department at UCLA, where he authored, co-authored and edited 11 books, and more than 150 other contributions on cartography and associated geographical discoveries. He served his profession, UCLA and the state of California in many capacities, including as president of the Sir Francis Drake Commission (1975-81), which organised celebrations for the quadricentennial of Drake’s landing in California in 1579. Born in Crowthorne, Berkshire, to Daisy (nee Bayley) and Gordon Thrower, a chef at Broadmoor psychiatric hospital, Norman failed his 11-plus and did not go to secondary school. After winning drawing competitions and attending art school at the University of Reading, he joined the British army aged 21. His artillery division was redeployed to India, where he trained as a cartographer at the Survey of India to draw topographic maps in support of the war effort in Europe. The maps were based on aerial photographs taken over Europe then flown to India, with the return flights bringing back the completed maps. This covered the period of Operation Crossbow, one of the goals of which was to identify V-1 launch ramps using binocular imaging, including in northern France before D-day. The experience played a crucial part in Norman’s post-military career and the development of new mapping techniques introduced in his PhD for illustrating the three-dimensionality of the surface. Norman first met Betty Martin, an officer in the US Army Nurse Corps, in 1945 when her boat docked in London, though they had been pen pals for a number of years. Norman and Betty married in 1947 and, later that year, arrived in Charlottesville, Virginia, living in veterans’ housing while Norman did a BSc and an MSc in geography at the University of Virginia, where he was influenced by Erwin Raisz, an internationally renowned cartographer. With their first two daughters, they then moved to the University of Wisconsin, Madison, where Norman gained his PhD. A final move, to California in 1957, saw the birth of their third daughter. His best known book is Maps and Man (1972), now Maps and Civilization: Cartography in Culture and Society (1999). Later works focused on advances in 17th- and 18th-century cartography by Edmund Halley and Samuel Pepys. And, finally, an editing of A Buccaneer’s Atlas: Basil Ringrose’s South Seas Waggoner, with Derek Howse (1992), a compilation of captured maps of Spain’s Pacific ports whose value to the British crown saved many buccaneers from hanging. Betty died in 1997. Norman is survived by his daughters, Page, Anne and Mary, and five grandchildren.
2||Hopes rise for approval of coronavirus vaccine by end of this yearHopes are rising that a coronavirus vaccine will be approved by the end of the year, with healthcare workers receiving their first dose in early 2021. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US’s leading expert in infectious diseases, said on Sunday it should be known by the end of November or early December if a vaccine was safe and effective. The Irish government added to the growing optimism that a vaccine would soon be available. “I’m increasingly optimistic, as is government, that we will see a vaccine approved in the next couple of months and that in the first half or first quarter of next year it’ll be possible to start vaccinating those most at risk,” Leo Varadkar, Ireland’s deputy prime minister, who is also a doctor, told RTE radio on Sunday. Fauci’s remarks came after a report that the NHS in the UK is preparing to start immunising frontline staff with a vaccine within weeks. The Mail on Sunday published a memo by Glen Burley, the chief executive of a group of hospitals in the Midlands, in which he said NHS care providers had been told to be prepared to start a Covid-19 staff vaccine programme in early December. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff prioritised prior to Christmas,” according to Burley’s message, which was sent earlier this month, the paper reported. However, well-placed NHS sources said that, while hospitals were preparing plans to help roll out any vaccine that is approved, the timescale Burley set out is premature and overly ambitious. “There is no progress at all [on when a vaccine will arrive], no date, no national steer [from NHS England bosses] and only frustration,” said a senior official at one of the major NHS trusts that has been handed a key role in the drive to distribute whichever vaccine is the first to be approved. Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, told MPs and peers that a vaccine would not be available in the UK until the spring. Fauci was asked on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show if Donald Trump’s claims that a Covid-19 vaccine, while not a guarantee, would be coming by the end of the year were true. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” he replied. “The question is, once you have a safe and effective vaccine, or more than one, how can you get it to the people who need it as quickly as possible? “The amount of doses that will be available in December will not certainly be enough to vaccinate everybody. You’ll have to wait several months into 2021.” Healthcare workers are likely to be given priority access to any vaccine, as well as people whose underlying health means they are considered at increased risk of complications if they get Covid-19. “That could start by the end of this year, the beginning of January, February, March of next year. When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be in to the second or third quarter”, Fauci added. A vaccine being developed between scientists and doctors at Oxford University and the drug company AztraZeneca, which is in phase 3 trials, is considered the likeliest candidate to be used first. On Friday, Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, set out a similar timetable to that of Fauci and Varadkar. A vaccine could be available in early 2021, with enough supplies being produced to let many Germans be immunised within six or seven months, he said. Germany’s health ministry plans to create 60 special vaccination centres to ensure the vaccines can be stored at the proper temperature and has asked the country’s 16 federal states to provide addresses for the storage premises by 10 November, the newspaper Bild reported.
11||Ewart Hood obituaryMy father, Ewart Hood, who has died aged 71, was an NHS psychologist and a kind and quietly brilliant man. The son of the Rev John Hood, a Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Peggy (nee Ewart), he was born in Edinburgh and brought up in Perthshire with his brother, Allan. He attended Morrison’s academy in Crieff before studying psychology at Edinburgh University, graduating in 1971. He qualified as a clinical psychologist at the University of Birmingham in 1973. He went on to practise first at Stanley Royd hospital, in Wakefield, where he met his future wife, Denise Robinson, another psychologist. They married in 1979. Ewart was an early advocate of supporting people with mental health problems to live in the community, rather than in institutions. He was never afraid to speak up against injustice - including blowing the whistle about poor practice he witnessed early in his career. In 1978 he moved to Llanederyn health centre, Cardiff, to be senior clinical psychologist in a new practice and one of the first of its kind, based within the general practice department of Cardiff University Medical School. In the 1980s Ewart and Denise, now with two children, moved to Newcastle where Ewart worked part time while caring for us, and my mother went back to work full-time. He worked at St Nicholas (psychiatric) hospital, then as a senior clinical psychologist at the Newcastle district psychology department, working with outpatients from and within GP practices in the west end of Newcastle. Later he became a consultant clinical psychologist at Freeman hospital, Newcastle. He disliked formal teaching but was a popular supervisor on the Newcastle doctorate course for clinical psychology from 1990 to 2004. He was never too busy to take on a trainee. His clients in Newcastle included refugees from conflict in Rwanda and the Congo. When they were too afraid to use an interpreter, he would switch into French. Ewart loved music. As a young child, he learned to play the church organ, sometimes standing in for the organist at Sunday services. As an adult, he played the piano and guitar and sang in the university choir, the Newcastle Anti-Apartheid choir and later the North East Socialist Singers. Ewart retired in 2004. He learned to upholster and to bake bread, as well as taking long-distance cycling trips, tending an allotment and supporting his family. He is survived by Denise and by his children, Peter and me, and by three grandchildren, Elsa, Naomi and Bill, and Allan.
12||Letter: Deirdre Le Faye obituaryIt might encourage some readers to know that Deirdre Le Faye’s great achievement in the field of Jane Austen studies was achieved despite the fact that she had to leave school at 16, her family not being able to afford any higher education, and that she had to earn a living with a full-time job as a British Museum administrator. More daunting is the fact that she had a photographic memory and powers of total recall. She once told me she had reviewed a book by an American scholar and noted more than 200 factual errors. Before she turned to Jane Austen, Deirdre Le Faye did major research work on early child-rearing practices for Hugh Jolly, the paediatrician. Sadly he died before he was able to write it up, as did his doctor wife. So there is a valuable cache of clearly annotated and referenced material ready for a medical historian to write a valuable book on the subject. I can direct them to the material.
12||Forward poetry prize goes to ‘audacious, erotically charged’ The Air YearBritish poets have won all of this year’s Forward prizes for poetry, with Caroline Bird’s “audacious and erotically charged” The Air Year taking best collection, Will Harris’s RENDANG winning best debut, and Malika Booker winning for best single poem. Bird’s sixth collection The Air Year, named for the first 12 months of a relationship before the “paper” anniversary, was announced as the winner of the £10,000 prize in an online ceremony Sunday afternoon. A playwright, and published poet since the age of 15, Bird saw off competition from the acclaimed Native American-Latinx Natalie Diaz and the award-winning Pascale Petit. “It hasn’t sunk in yet, it is very weird,” Bird said of her win. “Obviously, it feels amazing. But it is also unsettling, as I write poetry imagining no one will ever read it. I read it now and I find it quite upsetting, even though some of the poems are funny and lively. You wouldn’t want to watch a video of yourself in distress, and it feels like that. But I guess that is a good sign in some ways, that I don’t want to ever read it again.” Chair of judges, the critic and cultural historian Alexandra Harris described Bird’s poems as “trapeze ropes made with words, swinging us up and out into the unknown”. “A lot of contemporary writing demands sympathy in a rather worthy fashion. She won’t do that,” she added. “The Air Year is the opposite of sentimental, it is brimming with humour.” Written in “a time of complete uncertainty” in her life, Bird set herself the challenge of writing poems starting from a single opening line that she would not change, leading to humorous and often melancholic poems that begin “Nancy found an entire torpedo in the forest”, in Nancy and the Torpedo, or “The 18th-century bawd who sells her daughter’s / virginity / to an Earl. The tired CIA operative who says ‘just do / it’ / and half a village dies”, in her poem about endings, The Final Episode. “At that time in my life, I felt like a cartoon character running in mid-air, only not falling because I hadn’t looked down. Romantically, emotionally, mentally, I did not know what I was doing or where I was going, in all areas of my life. And the poems, as they came out, seemed to want me to land safely,” Bird said. One of the most acclaimed debuts in recent years, Will Harris won the £5,000 Felix Dennis prize for best first collection with RENDANG, which explores his Chinese-Indonesian and British heritage, family ties, language and borders. RENDANG was praised by judges as containing “acute intelligence and mobile grace”. Previous nominee Booker, co-founder of the influencial collective Malika’s Poetry Kitchen, won the £1,000 prize for best single poem with The Little Miracles, documenting her experience of caring for her mother in the aftermath of a stroke: “Since I found mother collapsed on the kitchen / floor, we siblings have become blindfolded mules / harnessed to carts filled with strain, lumbering / through a relentless storm.” Booker had previously refused to write about her mother’s illness but was moved by medical research to “be more present during [visits] with my mother, scrutinising our time together by tuning in as a daughter, which has led to more meaningful and precious interactions, culminating in this poem of witness capturing the reality of my family’s emotional upheaval.” Judges praised The Little Miracles for its “warmth, frustration and humour”. The three poets were selected from 205 collections and 208 single poems submitted. “What we were looking for in the end were collections that could keep growing as the world changed,” said Alexandra Harris. “The best poetry we were reading found ways to connect the unknowable with the ordinary.” Past winners of the Forward prizes include three of the UK’s poet laureates – Carol Ann Duffy, Simon Armitage and Ted Hughes – as well as Seamus Heaney and Claudia Rankine.
4||Tao Geoghegan Hart's shock Giro d'Italia win 'the stuff of comic books'Tao Geoghegan Hart has spoken of the “bizarre” feeling of becoming the fifth Briton to win a Grand Tour after his victory in the Giro d’Italia for Team Ineos Grenadiers, whose general manager hailed the win “the stuff of comic books”. The 25-year-old pulled on the pink jersey for the first time on the final podium in Milan after a dramatic closing weekend of the race, in which he and Team Sunweb’s Jai Hindley – two riders not considered contenders at the outset – started the last stage level on time, an unprecedented situation in a Grand Tour. Speaking to Eurosport after his victory, Geoghegan Hart said: “It’s bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. “I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is something completely different to that and I think it’s going to take a long time to sink in. “My DS [directeur sportif] told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point.” Hindley, who finished 39 seconds back in second, said: “Of course, it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super-proud of the team and how I rode. “It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three weeks I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race, to be honest. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies.” The Ineos general manager, Sir Dave Brailsford, spoke of the way Geoghegan Hart’s situation in the team changed when Geraint Thomas was forced to withdraw after stage three following a heavy crash: “He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being: ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said: ‘I can do this.’ “The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really.” Geoghegan Hart was ahead of Hindley at every time check throughout the final 15.7km time trial, clocking a time of 18 min 19.40secs to confirm his remarkable win. Asked about his future following such a high-profile victory, he said: “I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. “I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated, wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races.” Geoghegan Hart follows Sir Bradley Wiggins, Chris Froome, Thomas and Simon Yates in winning one of the big three stage races on the calendar, delivering Britain’s 11th Grand Tour victory since Wiggins won the Tour de France in 2012, and second in the Giro after Froome won in 2018. Hindley’s Sunweb teammate Wilco Kelderman rounded off the podium, finishing 1min 29sec behind the victor.
4||GB's Tao Geoghegan Hart sensationally claims Giro d'Italia glory after time trialIn the end, Tao Geoghegan Hart’s 39-second victory in the Giro d’Italia ahead of the overnight leader, the Australian Jai Hindley, was not the tightest the race has ever seen. That honour remains with the Canadian Ryder Hesjedal’s win by 16sec in 2012. But none of the three Grand Tours has ever gone into its final day so tightly poised, with less than a second dividing Hindley and Geoghegan Hart as they prepared to start Sunday’s brief closing time trial into Milan, after more than 85 hours and over 2,000 miles of racing. Geoghegan Hart was expected to have the upper hand, and so it proved over the pancake flat course through the Milanese suburbs to the majestic Piazza del Duomo. The 25-year-old gained time gradually but inexorably on the diminutive Australian, visibly churning a far larger gear as Hindley opted to pedal a smaller ratio with a higher cadence but less power. At the only time check with five kilometres remaining the Londoner had a 22sec lead, meaning the race would be won if he avoided a crash or a puncture. After he negotiated the final corner on slippery wet cobblestones with the utmost care, he became the first rider to win the Giro without having worn the pink jersey until the end of the final stage. “My directeur sportif said I was 10sec up and he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew that we were in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the final kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down in a 15km time trial.” Hindley had started three minutes after Geoghegan Hart and rode the final kilometre with the look of a man who knew he had lost. But on leaving Palermo 22 days earlier, neither he nor his nemesis had expected to end the race with overall victory in their sights. Geoghegan Hart made his own luck in the final few days, but a curious combination of circumstances set him up for his final assault on the pink jersey. Ineos’s original Giro leader, the defending champion, Richard Carapaz, was drafted into the Tour de France at the last minute due to Geraint Thomas being short of form. Thomas was sent to the Giro as leader instead, but when he crashed on the stage to Mount Etna and broke his pelvis, that left Ineos leaderless. Initially the team focused on stage wins, with Filippo Ganna adding a road race stage to his initial time trial win, and then Jhonatan Narváez of Ecuador, before Geoghegan Hart opened his account on the mountain stage to Piancavallo at the end of the second week. That set up a final few days in which the race boiled down to a duel between Ineos and Sunweb, with Hindley emerging as the German team’s strongest climber ahead of his nominal leader Wilco Kelderman of the Netherlands. Geoghegan Hart’s searing sprint win at Piancavallo, after Sunweb looked to have taken control, pointed to the young Briton as the rider in form as the race’s biggest climbs hove into view. With the support of his Australian teammate Rohan Dennis he took the fight to Kelderman and Hindley on the majestic climb of the Stelvio Pass last Thursday, before dislodging the Dutchman and moving level with Hindley after winning Saturday’s stage to the Alpine ski resort of Sestriere. That set up Sunday’s pulsating finale. Like the Tour de France, won by the 21-year-old Slovenian Tadej Pogacar, this race marked a passing of the generations. The main Italian hopeful, Vincenzo Nibali, never truly made an impression and finished seventh, while another near veteran, the Dane Jakob Fuglsang, also showed little. In contrast, the 22-year-old Portuguese João Almeida led for 15 of the 21 stages before fading in the final few days to finish fourth, while at 24 and 25 respectively Hindley and Geoghegan Hart have big futures ahead of them. The Giro will also be remembered for the resurgence of the Frenchman Arnaud Démare, winner of four sprint stages, and for the effect that coronavirus had on the race. Positive tests for Covid deprived the Giro of two big favourites, Simon Yates of Great Britain and Steven Kruijswijk of the Netherlands, resulting in a more open race that gave space to the young hopefuls. On Sunday, the early pace was set by Ganna; the world time trial champion was viewed as the inevitable winner beforehand, and his blisteringly fast time of 17min 16sec gave him four stage wins in the race, and landed Ineos their seventh stage win, making this the British team’s most successful Grand Tour ever, as well as their 11th Grand Tour title. For a team which had been deprived of its leader since day four, it was quite a turnaround.
13||Ervine Glenny obituaryMy former colleague Ervine Glenny, who has died aged 97, was a materials engineer who, through his research and subsequent management of engineers at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), helped to pioneer the advent of jet engines and the use of carbon fibre composites to lighten aircraft and other structures. He was born in Belfast, the son of Elizabeth (nee Ervine), a housewife, and Robert Glenny, a police constable. He was named Robert, but was always known by his middle name, Ervine. He was educated at Methodist college, Belfast, and won a bursary to study chemical engineering at Queen’s University in the city, where he met his wife to be, Joan Reid, who was taking the same course. He began his research in 1947 with the National Gas Turbine Establishment (NGTE), which had just been formed from Power Jets, the company created by Frank Whittle, who invented the concept of gas turbines which form the basis of jet engines. By exploring the high temperature properties of materials suitable for gas turbines, Robert was able to contribute to their commercialisation and moved with NGTE to Farnborough, Hampshire, in 1955 to be close to the RAE, which specialised in all aspects of aircraft design. In 1970, Ervine moved to the NPL in Teddington, south-west London, to become superintendent of the materials application division and in 1973 he moved back to Farnborough to become head of the materials department at RAE. Ervine’s advice was always sound and well balanced and his encouragement and support of all his engineers enabled innovations to be pursued and commercialised. These included high strength, lightweight carbon fibres and he encouraged Bill Watt and other colleagues to continue developing their invention and its application initially to aircraft but then to other forms of transport. Upon his retirement from RAE, Ervine acted as a project monitor and assessor for the Department of Trade and Industry. One Sunday in 2003, Ervine and I travelled to Stansted airport to attend a project meeting in Prague. When Ervine showed his passport at the airline counter, the official said: “I am very sorry, Dr Glenny, but you have insufficient validity left on your passport so we cannot fly you to Prague.” In reply, Ervine uttered, without hesitation: “I am going to home to rejoin my 80th birthday party.” This quiet, unassuming person helped, in his own way, to make transport lighter and more energy efficient, a legacy from which we are all benefiting. Joan died in 2017. Ervine is survived by his children, Helen and Michael, and grandson, Jon.
4||Giro d'Italia: Geoghegan Hart seals shock win after time-trial – as it happenedAll the latest reaction to Geoghegan Hart’s victory: And with that, I’ll be off. Bye! Ladies and gentlemen, I give you Tao Geoghegan Hart. If you haven’t already read William Fotheringham’s piece on the man who became our champion, now’s your chance: Jai Hindley, who started the day in pink and ended it in second place, has a chat: Of course it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super proud of the team and how I rode. It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three week’s I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race to be honest. We can be super proud of what we accomplished. I’d just like to thank the guys on the team, the whole team, everyone involved. It’s a massive operation to get here and to be on the podium in Milan. A lot of effort and time has gone into it and I really appreciate what the team has done to get me here. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies. All of today’s key numbers: Stage 21 1. Filippo Ganna (IT) Ineos Grenadiers 17:16 2. Victor Campenaerts (BEL) NTT Pro Cycling Team +32 3. Rohan Dennis (AUS) Ineos Grenadiers “ 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +41 5 Miles Scotson (AUS) Groupama - FDJ “ 6. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team +44 7. Chad Haga (USA) Team Sunweb “ 8. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +46 9. Kamil Gradek (POL) CCC Team +47 10. Jan Tratnik (SLO) Bahrain - McLaren “ 11. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +55 12. Martijn Tusveld (NED) Team Sunweb +58 13. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) Ineos Grenadiers “ 14. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal +1:03 15. Maciej Bodnar (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +1:04 Overall leaders 1. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers 85:40:21 2. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb +39 3. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +1:29 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck-Quick-Step +2:57 5. Pello Bilbao (ESP) Bahrain-McLaren +3:09 6. Jakob Fuglsang (DEN) Astana Pro Team +7:02 7. Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Trek - Segafredo +8:15 8. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe +8:42 9. Fausto Masnada (ITA) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +9:57 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (AUT) Bahrain - McLaren +11:05 11. Domenico Pozzovivo (ITA) NTT Pro Cycling Team +11:52 12. Rafal Majka (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +20:31 13. Sergio Samitier (ESP) Movistar Team +35:29 14. James Knox (GBR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +37:41 15. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +38:10 16. Aurélien Paret-Peintre AG2R La Mondiale +45:04 (FRA) 17. Larry Warbasse (USA) AG2R La Mondiale +53:25 18. Ben Swift (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers +57:36 19. Antonio Pedrero (ESP) Movistar Team +59:36 20. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team +1:02:57 King of the Mountains 1. Ruben Guerreiro (POR) EF Pro Cycling 234 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 157 3. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal 122 4. Rohan Dennis (AUS) INEOS Grenadiers 119 5. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team 71 6. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb “ 7. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb 55 8. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 48 9. Jonathan Castroviejo (ESP) INEOS Grenadiers 45 10. Einer Rubio (COL) Movistar Team 44 Points leaders 1. Arnaud Démare (FRA) Groupama - FDJ 233 2. Peter Sagan (SVK) BORA - hansgrohe 184 3. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step 108 4. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 87 5. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team 78 6. Andrea Vendrame (ITA) AG2R La Mondiale “ 7. Diego Ulissi (ITA) UAE Team Emirates 77 8. Simon Pellaud (SUI) Androni Giocattoli - 70 Sidermec 9. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 66 10. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe 61 11. Here are the final standings in the overall classification: One thing has gone flat today: the Prosecco that is being given to the winners. Two bottles have so far been presented, and neither really did any spraying at all despite some enthusiastic shaking. Dave Brailsford has a chat about his team’s latest success: When we started out Geraint was the leader. What happened here was Filippo [Ganna] set the scene. Coming here with a rainbow band, first day, got the TT sorted, got the pink jersey. Then a massive disappointment with Geraint going home. Then when Filippo won that road stage in the hills, everyone was like, ‘Wow, that is incredible.’ It inspired everybody. It opened the race up. Everybody race the stages, give everybody an opportunity, and I think Tao liked that. He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said, ‘I can do this.’ The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really. What I like about it is, we’ve done the training, we’ve done the defensive style of riding, and we’ve won a lot doing that, but it’s not much fun, really, compared to this, is it? What the guys have done here, all the team here has raced, and at the end of the day it’s all about racing. We’re the Grenadiers now. A lot of people have contributed to this victory. I can’t think about this without thinking about Nico [Portal]. Everybody in this team has supported him along the way and they deserve a lot of credit for that. Here’s a report on today’s action: Our champion gives his first interview, and is asked how he feels to have won this thing: Bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is someting completely different to that and I think ti’s going to take a long time to sink in. My DS told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point. Is this the start of a long and great career? I don’t know and I don’t really care. I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated. Wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races. Everyone’s always nice about people who have just won stuff, but there is such genuine warmth being expressed for Tao Geoghegan Hart both by people at the race and others at home. “Shades of Lemond and Fignon here,” writes Guy Hornsby. “I feel for Jai Hindley, who’s been incredible all race, but Tao has been relentless this last week. A Tour won by a wafer-thin margin, but they don’t call it the Race of Truth for nothing when the clock is on. What a story.” Let’s not forget about Filippo Ganna, who has completed a clean sweep of the time trials on this year’s Giro by an astonishing 32sec margin. He and Tao Geoghegan Hart pose for photographs in front of the duomo, quite the one-two for Ineos Grenadiers. Jai Hindley’s race is over, and he has finished second! His has been a phenomenal race, but not quite enough for glory. What a moment for Tao Geoghegan Hart, Grand Tour champion! Tao Geoghegan Hart crosses the finish line in 18min 14sec, the 13th best time of the day, but he will surely now win the 2020 Giro d’Italia! Up to 24sec now, with Geoghegan Hart just 1.5km from the finish line. Neither of the overall top two are threatening to win the stage, but the Londoner is doing exactly what was required of him today. Into the last 3km for Tao Geoghegan Hart, and his overall lead is still expanding. Up to about 20sec now. Geoghegan Hart has a 17sec lead now, with just 4km to go, very nearly a conclusive lead. Hindley crosses the line at the 10.3km mark, and he’s well down on our leader, Filippo Ganna, who is not going to be shifted off that bar stool any time soon. Tao Geoghegan Hart is 10sec ahead! With 6.3km to go, he seems to be on his way here! Joao Almeida crosses the line in 17min 57sec, enough for fourth place (for now) on the day, and I think in overall classification as well. We won’t really know who is in the box seat here until both riders have passed the 10.3km marker. Tao Geoghegan Hart is about 1km away from it as I type. And so, to the race leader (just). Jai Hindley, clad almost entirely in rosa, never mind the maglia, is the last on the road! Tao Geoghegan Hart is on his bike and on the road! We are 20 minutes away from the end of this year’s Giro. What’s it to be? Wilco Kelderman, Friday’s maglia rosa holder, is on his way. Just two to go now! Nobody for some time has made any dent in the top three either at the 10.3km marker (Ganna, Haga and Campenaerts the top three there) or at the finish (Ganna, Campenaerts and Dennis). When riders launch themselves down the ramp organisers are playing some genuinely godawful Europop, which I suppose is one way of encouraging them to go as fast as they can. “I‘m sure its more comfortable that the saddle on his bike!” says Andrew Benton of Ganna’s bar stool, and this I’m sure is true. “Best saddle for me was the one on my Raleigh roadster sit-up-and-beg bike, wide and comfy and with a big curly spring at the front to ensure it soaked up the bumps.” Vincenzo Nibali is on his way, along with Jakob Fuglsang and Joao Almeida. There are only four riders still waiting. The crunch is coming. “Though an urban contre la montre is hardly likely to win over new fans, this Giro has been spectacular,” says Gary Naylor. “The riders may not be the very best, but competition has been fierce and fair. And Italy? Just wow.” There’s been great drama and great scenery, to be sure. Perhaps a bit more to come (drama, at least). I’m not sure I’ve seen this bettered. Filippo Ganna certainly deserves better than a bar stool. They really could have given the leader a more comfortable place to sit. Into the top 10 we go! Fausto Masnada of Deceuninck-Quick Step is the first second (sorry, counting error) of them on this bike, a man whose name it is impossible to read, think or say without having to fight the urge to insert a Que in the middle. Domenico Pozzovivo, the 37-year-old Italian, has just got under way. He’s 11th in the overall standings, so we now move from one to three minutes between riders as we head into the top 10. Rohan Dennis crosses the line in 17min 48sec, 32sec slower than the leader but good enough, for now, for third. If Ganna wins this stage, it would be the seventh stage win for Ineos Grenadiers on this year’s Giro. They have never previously won more than six on any Grand Tour. They also have a very good chance to win the whole thing in the shape of Tao Geoghegan Hart, which would make this a very good day indeed for them. We should know precisely how the chips have fallen within the hour. Rohan Dennis, the Australian who came second in the time trial on stage 14, is on his way, and has just been timed 20 seconds behind Ganna at the split. Ganna also won the individual time trial on the first stage of the Giro, and the individual time trial that formed Stage 14, and the individual time trial title at the world championships last month. To say he has been dominant in this particular discipline of late would be to understate what’s been going on. He also won stage five on this year’s Giro, a hilly 225km, just to prove he’s not a one-trick pony. Filippo Ganna crosses the line in a time faster than anyone else to have tried the course by a margin of over half a minute! He was clocked at 17min 16sec, 32sec faster than Campenaerts. It is very cloudy in Lombardy this afternoon, and the downside of having a finish line outside the cathedral is that most of the stage is spent on a variety of unexciting A-roads on the approach to central Milan. There is, in short, a lot of grey about. Filippo Gana mashes the rest at the split! His time after 10.3km is 20sec faster than Haga’s, and Campenaerts’ spell in the leader’s seat is surely about to end. We get an official time at 10.3km, to judge how well a rider’s doing while they’re still a while from the finish line. Chad Haga was the fastest so far over 10km, crossing that line a second before Campanaerts, but by the end he was 12 seconds behind and sits fourth. Victor Campanaerts is the clubhouse leader, but Filippo Ganna is on his way and will have him in his sights. Ganna is not only Italian but local, raised on the shores of Lake Maggiore, and you can tell people are excited about him because he is being followed by two motorbikes, three cars and a helicopter. Well then. The last day of the Giro d’Italia, and it’s more poised than Grace Kelly at a tea party. Or something. Tao Geoghegan Hart, the Londoner with a name that’s not as exotic as it looks, is level at the top of the standings with Jai Hindley but is reckoned to be a better time triallist. Both have completed the first 20 stages in an official time of 85 hours, 22 minutes and seven seconds. So who will end up as champion? Time will tell, what little of it is taken by the 15.7km route into Milan, ending at the Piazza del Duomo. Firstly, then, welcome! Secondly, here’s some information that may come in useful, starting with the route profile: Here’s the top 10 in the general classification as it stood this morning: 1. Jai Hindley (Aus) Sunweb 85” 22’ 07s 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers = 3. Wilco Kelderman (Ned) Sunweb +1m32s 4. Bilbao Pello (Es) Bahrain-McLaren +2m51s 5. Joao Almeida (Por) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +3m14s 6. Jakob Fuglsang (Den) Astana +6m 32s 7. Vincenzo Nibali (It) Trek-Segafredo +7m46s 8. Patrick Konrad (Aut) Bora-Hansgrohe +8m05s 9. Fausto Masnada (It) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +9m24s 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (Aut) Bahrain McLaren +10m08s The first rider got going at 1.40pm (12.40pm GMT), but it’ll take a while to get to the leaders. Here then are the start times for those last 10 riders (in local time, so subtract one for BMT): 3.45pm Hermann Pernsteiner 3.48pm Fausto Masnada 3.51pm Patrick Konrad 3.54pm Vincenzo Nibali 3.57pm Jakob Fuglsang 4.00pm Joao Almeida 4.03pm Pello Bilbao 4.06pm Wilco Kelderman 4.09pm Tao Geoghegan Hart 4.12pm Jai Hindley And here’s William Fotheringham’s report on yesterday’s action, which also tees up today’s: Tao Geoghegan Hart is on the threshold of Giro d’Italia victory going into Sunday’s time trial stage into Milan. After winning Saturday’s mountain stage at the Sestriere ski resort, the 25-year-old, London-born Scot is level on time with the new race leader, Jai Hindley of Australia, an unprecedentedly tight and tense situation after more than 85 hours of racing. No Grand Tour has been this close going into the final day, but Geoghegan Hart is a stronger time triallist; a single second’s advantage would suffice, meaning that he will be expected to give Great Britain its second Giro d’Italia win in three years after Chris Froome’s last-ditch victory in 2018. For a rider who had expected to support either Richard Carapaz or Geraint Thomas in an attempt for overall victory, it is an astonishing twist of fortune. Much more here:
13||Bill Fearns obituaryMy father, Bill Fearns, who has died aged 99, was a marine engineer whose long career encompassed designing vessels that were used in the second world war, including the D-day landings. Born in Dundee into a family of eight, to James Fearns, a foundry labourer, and his wife, Jessie (nee Farquharson), a jute spinner, Bill was raised in a tenement. He attended Stobswell school, but left aged 14 to train as a draughtsman in the Robb-Caledon shipyard, gaining qualifications at Dundee Technical Institute at night. At the age of 15 with his brother, Alex, he played bagpipes in the massed bands at the 1936 Hampden Cup final, something he was always proud of. During the war, now a qualified naval architect and therefore in a reserved occupation, in 1941 Bill was seconded to Clydeside, designing U-Boat-hunting corvettes and working on the D-day Mulberry harbours. After the war, he worked on Martin-Baker ejection seats at RAE Farnborough, but in 1948, after marrying Margaret Shand, Bill returned to a booming John Brown’s on Clydeside, working on the Cunard ships Saxonia, Carmania and Franconia. In 1956, he became a surveyor with Lloyd’s Register in Greenock and was transferred in 1960 to Hamburg, West Germany. Bill worked on reparation ships for Israel and was surveyor on the rebuilding of the SS Uganda and SS Nevasa to become educational cruise ships, as well as on the first custom-designed container ships. In 1973 Bill went to Singapore to head its operation replacing expat specialists with native Singaporeans. He enjoyed the occasional round of golf with Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s prime minister. When he returned to Lloyd’s Register in London at the end of the 1970s, shipbuilding was changing dramatically. London’s docklands were closing down and computers were now being used to assist with surveying. After retiring in 1984, he played golf at his home in South Woodham Ferrers, Essex, sang in the local choir and played in several pipe bands, including the Rayleigh British Legion Band. Margaret died in 2015. Bill is survived by his children, Jane and me, and by two grandchildren and a great grandchild.
3||Nearly 60 million Americans cast early vote as record-shattering turnout expectedTheir enthusiasm reflected in post boxes stuffed with mail-in ballots and by hours-long queues at voting sites across the country, by early Sunday almost 60 million Americans had cast a vote in the presidential election, even as the candidates scrambled to deliver their closing message more than a week before election day, 3 November. The vast numbers of early voters in the most consequential election in generations is fuelling what promises to be record-shattering turnout. Not since 1908 have more than 65% of eligible US voters actually exercised that right. Behind the eye-popping headline figures lie clues to why voters are so engaged, so early. Democrats hold a sizeable advantage in the early returns. The reason, analysts believe, is simply Donald Trump, and by extension his handling of the coronavirus pandemic that has infected 8.5 million people and killed 224,000. “The pandemic is part of it, particularly for older voters,” said Dr Larry Sabato, founder and director of the University of Virginia’s Center for Politics. “I’m pushing 70 myself, and it has to be a part of your calculations, we’re kind of vulnerable. “But to me, that doesn’t explain the lines. People really have bought into the understanding that if this isn’t the most important election we’ve ever had, it’s one of several. People are determined to express themselves and we all know why: Donald Trump. That includes his base: the cult is going to support the cult leader. But there are more, maybe quite a bit more, who want to end this nightmare. And that’s the way people put it. If you don’t like the word I’m sorry – that’s just the way it is.” More than one third of the votes already returned come from the three most populous states, California, Texas and Florida, according to the US Elections project, an independent data analysis by the University of Florida. California is staunchly Democrat, and its 55 electoral college votes are all but a lock for former vice-president Joe Biden. The race for the 38 votes in Texas is closer, but leaning strongly Republican. That leaves the swing state of Florida and its 29 electoral college votes as a glittering prize. So far, from 5.3m mail-in and in-person votes recorded, representing almost 40% of 14 million registered voters, Democrats hold an advantage of more than 7%, or around 400,000 votes. “It is our most mega, mega state,” Sabato said. “I like to put it that way, and there’s no way practically for Trump to get elected without Florida.” The president voted in Florida on Saturday. “If he loses there it will be obvious he’s going to lose,” Sabato said. “If Biden loses Florida, though, it is not the end for him. He has quite a number of other paths. [But] the problem with losing Florida is it is an indication that you’re likely not to do well in other states – we’re talking about Georgia, North Carolina, even parts of the midwest.” The Democrats’ lead in Florida appears to be amplified nationally, at least in the 19 states that release party affiliations with their statistics. In those states, registered Democrats have sent in more than 13m votes to Republicans’ 7.4m, with 6m votes from minor or no party affiliates making up the remainder. Across all states, the University of Florida reports, votes cast early amount to more than 42% of those from the entire 2016 election. In some places the figure is even higher, such as Hays county, Texas, where 73,277 early votes are several hundred more than the total four years ago. Sabato cautioned Republicans not to rely on the tradition of Democrats’ early voting advantages being wiped out when their own supporters turn out on election day. Trump “sure can win in the swing states”, he said, “Trump people who weren’t registered or didn’t vote the last time, they have spent four years identifying them. That’s been the hidden campaign that people haven’t talked about. “But you’re taking a tremendous chance when you put all your chips on the election day vote. Suppose there’s a hurricane barreling toward Florida. Almost certainly there will be really bad weather in at least a couple of swing states, you know, lots of things happen in life, and maybe the spike up in coronavirus will keep a lot of those older Republicans away on the day.” Michael McDonald, a professor of political science who maintains the University of Florida database, told the Guardian’s Fight to Vote project extraordinarily brisk early voting had handed Democrats a clear advantage, noting that the party’s supporters had not only submitted significantly larger numbers of ballot requests, but were also returning them at a higher rate than Republicans. Like Sabato, however, McDonald also urged caution. “The irony here is Democrats are actually doing Republicans a favour,” he said. “It should benefit Republicans who are trying to vote on election day that the Democrats have done them this favour of not standing in line in front of them.”
1||John Kerr's letters to the Queen's private secretary: 'A raw display of devastation'In the cryptic taxonomy of archives, the relationship between Sir John Kerr and the Queen stretches beyond the palace letters and into obscure files scattered throughout the National Archives of Australia and elsewhere. The most surprising of these is a new set of letters between Kerr and Sir Martin Charteris in the National Archives of Australia. From all these archives – in personal letters, Kerr’s rambling handwritten notes, and his unguarded personal reflections – a common theme emerges: the involvement of the palace in every step Kerr took, and every decision he made, regarding the dismissal of Gough Whitlam and its gathering aftermath, including even his own resignation. It is impossible to separate Kerr’s decisions from his intractable view of his “duty” to the monarch and the monarchy, presented to him so clearly in the months before the dismissal by Queen’s private secretary, the unctuous Charteris. Charteris had worked that sense of duty perfectly, most notably in his reassurance to Kerr that whatever decision he was to make, it could only do the monarchy good. Kerr’s decisions were in this sense entirely bounded by considerations of his view of the interests of the Queen and what was best for the monarchy. There was, quite simply, no decision that Kerr would make without what he saw as the imprimatur of the palace. How could it have been otherwise? For Kerr, his duty defined his decisions. Soon after the release of the palace letters, several previously unpublished letters from one of those obscure files were unexpectedly and quietly released by the archives, nine years after I first requested it. This file, carrying the incongruous title “Correspondence between the prime minister and the governor-general on the governor-general’s resignation”, contained several letters between Kerr and Charteris that were not included with the palace letters released by the archives with such fanfare following the high court decision. Apart from anything else, this raises the significant question of how many more of these historic letters lie elsewhere in the archives, imperfectly labelled and unseen, which ought to form part of the broader palace letters collection. The newly released documents consist of several anguished letters, drafted and redrafted by Kerr to Charteris in 1977 in the months before his reluctant resignation, and a single letter from Charteris in reply. They tell a poignant story of personal decline. These letters provide a snapshot of the distressed end of Kerr’s term as governor general, of his deteriorating relationship with the palace, and of his dramatic turn against Malcolm Fraser, as those who had encouraged and cajoled him in the months before the dismissal began to move against him. In the early months after the dismissal, in the afterglow of the successful revival of the reserve powers of the Crown, Kerr describes the view from the government, and “encouraged” by the palace, that he “should, indeed, must stay”. It is essential that he “avoid appearing to concede error” in any way about his dismissal of Whitlam. As Kerr navigates the shifting fortunes in his position, a detailed handwritten note prepared by him in April 1976 reveals the role of “the palace”, Charteris, and Prince Charles, as part of a select group of informal advisers with whom he discussed his future as governor general. Kerr sought advice from Prince Charles, the palace, Sir Robert Menzies, Sir Anthony Mason, prime minister Fraser, and Sir Garfield Barwick. They had all urged him to remain as governor general because, “(1) what I did was the right thing to do and (2) resignation … would leave the impression that I regretted what I did”. Despite the private professions of support and encouragement, as the months pass and the protests against him continue, Kerr perceives a change. Privately, he writes of his growing fear that “the Government, or some of its members, may get tired of defending me … and encourage me to go”. And if they did, Kerr would not go easily. He would not even consider resigning without a new position to go to. In a sign of his faltering judgment as his concern for his position grows, Kerr imagines that Fraser might consider appointing him as Australia’s high commissioner to the United Kingdom. “London might be the best place to spend a few years,” he muses. It is hard to understand how Kerr could have entertained the idea that after such intense political controversy, he could be appointed to a plum diplomatic role by the government he had installed in office just months earlier. In an extraordinary letter to Charteris in late 1976, when his relationship with Fraser is already splintering, Kerr raises the possible use of the reserve powers against the government. Kerr writes that Fraser faces several options for the next election, including a half-Senate election, or an early election for the House of Representatives. He sets out the possibility, raised by some commentators, that “because of my view that the Governor-General has a real discretion”, he ought to consider whether there is a case for invoking the reserve powers to deny Fraser such an early election. Kerr reminds Charteris, with the air of one with a shared understanding, that these powers exist and are available to him. Charteris’s response is emphatic, and quite unlike his benign insistence on the existence of the reserve powers, and even of their possible beneficial use, just the previous year. “I hope that this possibility will not arise, both for your own sake and also I think for the sake of the Crown,” he writes, firmly closing off that discussion. By 1977, Kerr’s behaviour at public events was also becoming a liability. That was the year he landed face-down in the mud at the Tamworth Show as he attempted to place the winning medallion around the prized cow “Lovedale Posh”, all of it captured by a waiting photographer. The front-page images of the governor general pinioned under the cow’s hoof won a Walkley award. There was a memorable repeat performance at the Melbourne Cup later that year when Kerr, in an ill-fitting top hat and tails, struggled to remain upright as he awarded the cup to the owners of the winning horse. It was a sad sight of a public decline (now a much-watched YouTube clip called, “the Governor-General drunk at the Melbourne Cup”). Kerr’s inadvertent burning of the carpet at Victoria’s Government House during a short visit, when he tripped over the heater in the middle of the night and woke to find the carpet smouldering, no doubt also caused ripples of anxiety in vice-regal circles. And so, it is hardly surprising that by 1977 the Queen had joined the list of those who wished the governor general to make an early retirement. In little more than a year he had gone from saving the Queen from embarrassment to being the embodiment of that embarrassment. Kerr’s greatest fear under Whitlam, his removal from office, would now ensue under Malcolm Fraser. Kerr’s forced resignation was, to him, the ultimate betrayal by Fraser, whose political fortunes during the 1975 crisis his unprecedented actions had assured. The newly released cache of letters and drafts to Charteris is a raw display of devastation. In an extraordinarily indiscreet draft letter, Kerr writes that Fraser had never given him the support that “I have been entitled to have”, and that now, “victory achieved”, Fraser is “happy for me to go”. The well-honed vituperation that Kerr once deployed against Whitlam he turns towards Fraser, “a stern, distant, arrogant man determined to rule completely and not able to relax in conversation with me as Mr Whitlam was able to do”. Whitlam is now, apparently, not so bad after all. This is an edited extract from The Palace Letters: The Queen, the governor-general, and the plot to dismiss Gough Whitlam by Jenny Hocking, out 27 October (Scribe, $32.99)
14||Bush and koalas found to be threatened by 'gratuitous' NSW land-clearing planTens of thousands of hectares of bush could be at risk under a New South Wales government proposal to allow rural landholders to clear up to 25 metres of land from their property’s fence line, analysis by WWF-Australia shows. The NSW government announced this month it planned to amend its Rural Fires Act to allow clearing without an approval on rural property boundaries to reduce bushfire risk. The proposal, which was not one of the 76 recommendations from the NSW bushfire inquiry, prompted alarm it could lead to broad-scale clearing of endangered forest and habitat and was called “anti-science” by the independent MLC Justin Field. WWF-Australia used spatial data to examine how much forest could be exposed under the proposed changes in four local government areas: Clarence Valley, Port Stephens, Shoalhaven and Wollondilly. It found if all rural property holders cleared to the maximum extent, 44,293ha of forest could be at risk in those four council areas, 32,609ha of that in Clarence Valley. The analysis found 12,000ha of at-risk forest in those regions was high quality koala habitat unless the state government imposed conditions to protect it. Martin Taylor, a conservation scientist at WWF-Australia, said there would be landholders who would not clear their land if the proposal passed the state parliament. “But this is what is at risk of being cleared if they go ahead and do it,” he said. “It’s gratuitous. You’re fragmenting forests even more than they are already. Particularly for koalas, it makes it harder for them to get around.” NSW laws already allow property owners to clear trees within 10 metres of a house or other building, and shrubs within 50 metres, to mitigate bushfire risk. The proposed rules would allow an additional 25 metres of clearing at the boundary. Property owners are also permitted to clear distances of 15 metres in coastal NSW, 30 metres in central NSW and 40 metres in western NSW to construct or maintain rural infrastructure, such as a fence. The greatest impact of the proposed changes is expected to be in coastal zones that have been most exposed to bushfires. Field expressed concern the government still had not presented any advice it had received from the NSW RFS before announcing the proposed amendments earlier this month. He said the emergency services minister, David Elliott, “has not been willing to explain” how the proposal would reduce bushfire risk, nor why it had been prioritised over the 76 recommendations from the bushfire inquiry report. “My concern is it will be developers that use this,” Field said. “I also worry that it sends the message that this is a constructive way to manage bushfire risk. It sets us up for failure.” The government is likely to introduce the legislation to parliament in November. It has said it would develop a code to take account of endangered species and habitat but it is unclear what this would entail and whether it would be introduced at the same time. Elliott did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia. Field said the government needed to ensure protections were in place for riparian zones, such as creek lines, critically endangered habitats, and threatened species, including the koala. He feared the laws could end up being used for purposes unrelated to bushfire risk. “I’m particularly concerned by coastal rural land that’s held by developers who may have an intention for future rezoning,” he said. “They would be allowed to clear their boundaries whether or not they had a fence, effectively degrading the environmental values of their land – not for bushfire protection but to assist with future rezoning applications.” There are also questions about how the proposed changes would interact with existing land-clearing laws that have caused turmoil inside the government in recent months. The lower house has passed amendments to local land services laws to exempt private rural landholders from having to recognise the expanded definition of koala habitat under the koala state environmental planning policy (Sepp) that nearly split the Coalition. If the changes pass the upper house, they would grandfather the arrangements under the koala Sepp for the five councils that already have approved koala plans of management. But the Environmental Defenders Office said if additional councils completed their own plans in future, the changes would allow private landholders to continue to do code-based land-clearing without an approval. Rachel Walmsley, the EDO’s policy and law reform director, said the deal reached between the Liberal and National parties was “not about clarifying the laws. It’s about weakening. “It is actually preventing koala habitat from being mapped and applicable.” NSW has already recorded huge increases in land-clearing rates as a result of changes to native vegetation laws in 2017.
15||Australia's theatres are slowly reopening, but will subscribers return?Judith Hughes, a Melbourne Theatre Company subscriber, sees seven shows a year, organising tickets for a group of 11 women with an average age of 65. She is eager for the company to reopen its doors. “The general feeling among our group is that we’ll do what we can to support the arts and we want to get back in the theatre as long as we can do it safely,” she says. Anecdotally, the sentiment seems shared by theatre audiences across the country. Mitchell Butel, artistic director of the State Theatre Company of South Australia, says demand for its first post-Covid shows, Gaslight and Ripcord, have been “through the roof. We were the first main stage back in the country and we had no seat to sell.” Box office statistics supplied by the Sydney Theatre Company show that 54% of ticket buyers for Wonnangatta, its first post-lockdown show for 2020, were previous ticket-buyers, and 70% of the company’s subscribers surveyed say they expect to renew. But the enthusiasm isn’t necessarily reflected in other data. An Australia Council for the Arts sponsored survey tapped more than 12,000 arts lovers nationwide and 150 arts organisations. It included galleries and museums as well as performing arts groups and was taken three times, in May, July and September. Its September figures for attending cultural events as a whole were more confident than the previous two surveys, but show an understandable short-term caution. Despite a theoretical willingness to engage, only 29% of audience members surveyed were ready to attend an event as soon as permitted, with 29% of those who are residents in states where venues are open having attended a cultural event in the past fortnight. Only 14% were actually buying tickets for live shows and performances. But the production costs of putting on a show remain the same, whether you’re playing to 50 people or 500. This is a crucial factor influencing theatre companies’ programming and projection of box office revenue for 2021. How many tickets can they reasonably expect to sell in a limited audience return? Covid has also disrupted the subscription funding model that a majority of companies rely on. In a normal year, the theatre companies would be in the middle of launch season, with tickets for much of 2021 going on sale for subscribers to buy in packages of several shows at once. The funds brought in during the subscription period would then go into the budget for the following year. STCSA will launch its full 2021 season on 29 October but other companies are holding fire, with plans for limited season launches selling in stages, and with smaller subscription packages for those reluctant to commit long-term in an environment of uncertainty. This isn’t great for the bottom line, and it hasn’t helped that the only money spent from a $250m rescue package for the arts promised by the federal government back in June has gone to the screen industry. Of all the companies, those in Melbourne have dealt with the longest lockdowns and the harshest restrictions. Melbourne Theatre Company’s largest proportion of subscribers – 34% – are between the ages of 50 and 64, an age bracket more at risk from Covid complications. “It’s awfully challenging,” says MTC executive director Virginia Lovett. “At the beginning we went in hard and fast [with cancellations]. People re-booked for September, when we hoped to reopen, but we’ve had to cancel the rest of the year.” In pre-pandemic days, Australia’s not-for-profit performance companies were expected by funding bodies to be as commercially profitable as possible, to build up philanthropy and sponsorship income, and reduce their reliance on subsidies. Federal and state government subsidy more generally varies from theatre to theatre and this funding depends on the legal status of the company. Both STCSA and Queensland Theatre Company are statutory bodies, set up by acts of state legislation, and have greater state support; Melbourne Theatre Company is technically a department of the University of Melbourne, although both it and STC, a public company, receive similar levels of government funding: between 6% and 7%. Many companies emphasise their box office revenue as a sign of this model working. MTC’s 2019 annual report touts box office receipts of $18.1m out of total revenue of $28.3m. For some state theatres, subscriptions represent an average of 50% of box office revenue. For the MTC, it’s 70%. The figures are the result of a campaign over the past few years that saw subscriber numbers grow 40% in 2018 to a high of 22,300, before dropping off last year to 20,315. Lovett is pessimistic about the ability of theatre companies to sustain revenue in a downward-turning market. “The recession will also mean a drop in sponsorship, philanthropy and corporate entertainment,” she says. This, she argues, means that the current government subsidy isn’t sufficient for what the company is expected to deliver during and in the aftermath of a pandemic. “It has to be between 15% and 18%,” she says. “If the governments are serious about us continuing to be a thriving part of the culture and want us to develop new work, be involved in education and touring, the subsidy has to increase.” Lovett says that MTC’s own research shows strong support and loyalty from existing subscribers, many of whom donated the cost of their cancelled tickets to the company. “They want to see good social distancing and we’re looking closely at what other theatres are doing,” says Lovett. “There will be a certain percentage who are very hesitant, but optimistically there is a very high number willing to return.”
1||Queensland election: seats to watch as parties play a game of electoral chessLabor holds a two-seat majority in Queensland and recent polls suggest a close contest on 31 October, with little swing in either direction since the 2017 election. But experts say the statewide polls are of little value in understanding how the larger election night story will play out on Saturday. Queensland is a deeply complex state – where messages in regional areas often run contrary to those used to woo city voters. Rather than a statewide pitch, Labor and the Liberal National party have been engaged in a game of electoral chess, attempting to plot a path to 47 seats. There are 93 electorates in Queensland. The LNP needs to win nine to gain a majority. The state has a large crossbench: three Katter’s Australia party MPs, one Green, one One Nation MP and an independent. The influence of minor parties will shape marginal contests, as well as the makeup of the next parliament. There are more than 20 seats that could flip on Saturday. Here are the ones to watch, and what they mean in the context of a tight election. All roads lead to Townsville Thuringowa (Labor 4.1% v One Nation) Townsville has three marginal seats and both campaigns have spent considerable time in the northern city, where crime and employment have dominated discussion. On face value, the seats of Townsville (Labor’s most marginal seat) and Mundingburra (where MP Coralee O’Rourke is retiring) are closer contests than the western suburbs electorate of Thuringowa. But both parties believe that if Townsville does swing to the LNP, Thuringowa would be the first of the three to fall. One Nation has previously polled well in Thuringowa and the contest has also been targeted by Katter’s Australia Party as a potential gain. Others to watch: Townsville (Labor 0.4%), Mundingburra (Labor 1.1%) LNP attempts to thread the needle Aspley (Labor 1.2%) The seat of Aspley, a suburban electorate in northern Brisbane, fell to Labor in 2017. LNP sources say if they cannot win it back, the party does not have a realistic path to a majority. Aspley has changed hands regularly in the past 20 years and is strategically important to both parties. The area is an LNP stronghold at local government level and the party has chosen a long-term councillor, Amanda Cooper, to run. Similar to Aspley, Gaven on the Gold Coast, won narrowly by Labor last election, is considered a key test of whether the LNP can win back its increasingly dwindling urban support in state politics. Maiwar, the Brisbane western suburbs seat held by the Greens, was identified by the LNP as part of its path to victory, however it is understood the party now considers a gain there unlikely. Others to watch: Gaven (Labor 0.7%), Mansfield (Labor 1.6%), Maiwar (Greens 1.6% v LNP) Will One Nation continue to be a factor? Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation) To win the LNP needs to shift the electoral dynamic in three ways: it needs to win Townsville; it needs to regain a footing in the south-east; it needs to win back low primary support in the regions, particularly those voters who abandoned it for more conservative options. Similarly, Labor cannot maintain a majority if it holds firm in the city but loses too much support in regional areas. In 2017 the expected “One Nation effect” didn’t quite eventuate. The party won only one seat (Mirani) though it did have some impact on the outcome of the election, particularly in central Queensland where the LNP’s primary vote tanked. In Maryborough (a seat the LNP won in the Campbell Newman 2012 landslide), the LNP primary vote was 18% at the last election. Word from the major party camps is the One Nation vote has tempered statewide, but it has always maintained a fervent following in pockets like Maryborough. Similarly in Keppel, in 2017 there was a 15% swing away from the LNP, which was beaten into third by One Nation. Others to watch: Keppel (Labor 3.1% v One Nation), Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation), Mirani (One Nation 4.8% v Labor) Labor could offset regional losses on the city fringe Pumicestone (LNP 0.8%) The former Labor MP John Mikel – now an adjunct professor at the University of Queensland – says that in lieu of reliable public polling on specific seats, one way of taking the temperature of the electorate was to “follow the leaders”. Having spent time in the regions, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk pivoted her campaign to areas of LNP heartland on the Gold and Sunshine coasts where Labor hopes to win seats. Pumicestone – which covers Caboolture and Bribie Island – is the LNP’s most marginal seat and its one-term MP, Simone Wilson, is not recontesting this election. It is the most likely Labor gain, but there are a handful of others on small margins. If the LNP threads the needle elsewhere, it still needs to hold these vulnerable seats. If Labor loses ground in the regions, the city fringe could offset losses and keep the Palaszczuk government in power. Or a mixed bag might deliver a hung parliament. Others to watch: Caloundra (LNP 3.4%), Glass House (LNP 3.4%), Currumbin (LNP 3.3%), Bonney (LNP 1.7%), Theodore (LNP 3.7%) The nightmare scenario for LNP Oodgeroo (LNP 7.2%) The seat of Oodgeroo, based in the city of Redlands south-east of Brisbane, would be a surprise loss for the LNP’s Mark Robinson, a Pentecostal pastor who employs the former Australian Christian Lobby head, Lyle Shelton, in his electorate office. But this week LNP leader Deb Frecklington made the surprise decision to include a whistle-stop in the electorate, rather than visit seats like Mansfield and Aspley the LNP needs to win from Labor. Robinson is being challenged by a high-profile local independent, Claire Richardson, who opposes the controversial Toondah harbour development plan. There are a handful of other seats the LNP need to be foregone conclusions to prevent Labor forming government. If Burdekin and Whitsunday (both on very tight margins) in the north fall to Labor, the LNP could be wiped out above the Tropic of Capricorn. Similarly, Clayfield and Chatsworth in Brisbane, and Burleigh on the Gold Coast, are on relatively small margins. Losing those seats would trigger a Labor landslide. Others to watch: Burdekin (LNP 0.8%), Whitsunday (Ind 0.7%), Burleigh (LNP 4.9%), Chatsworth (LNP 2.9%), Clayfield (LNP 2.4%) Minor parties will shape the next parliament South Brisbane (Labor 3.6% v Greens) And finally, the most keenly anticipated contest of all is in South Brisbane, the most progressive electorate in Queensland and possibly the country. Labor’s former deputy premier Jackie Trad has been written off in this seat, where the Greens vote has surged consistently in recent years. Last time around, Trad benefited from LNP preferences. The LNP’s “Labor last strategy” will make her task of holding the seat more difficult. Increasingly in Brisbane electorates will be three-cornered contests between the LNP, Labor and the Greens. Preference arrangements have made the Greens serious contenders in at least four seats – possibly more – if they can run second on primary votes. These include the CBD seat of McConnell and the inner-north seat of Cooper, vacated by popular minister Kate Jones. The same situation will occur in the north, where Katter’s Australia Party holds three seats. Some of the regional contests involving One Nation, KAP and the majors could be even more complex. In 2017, Nick Dametto won Hinchinbrook with 20.9% of the primary vote. Others to watch: McConnell (Labor 7.9%), Cooper (Labor 10.6%), Hinchinbrook (KAP 7.6% v LNP)
16||'Getting burgers delivered generally sucks': Adam Liaw rates the best and worst food to order inThe unique conditions of 2020 have seen eating habits change across the globe. Alongside the sourdough preppers and physically distanced diners, perhaps the biggest difference of all can be seen in the world of home delivery. For some cities in lockdown the only life on the streets has been thousands of scooters, cyclists and drivers zipping from restaurant to house, feeding families and keeping businesses running. But most food wasn’t made to be sealed in plastic and bounced on the back of a scooter for 20 minutes before it gets to you. Let me take you through a few delivery favourites and their pros and cons in search of the answer to which food reigns supreme in the world of home delivery. Pizza: 6/10 Pizza is the O.G. delivery food, which is why it’s so surprising that it’s not a particularly good one. Steaming a baked product in an insulated bag after it’s cooked is not exactly keeping it in prime condition. The heavily processed chain-store varieties get away with it because you’re not expecting perfection, but the problem is I’m a snob and like my fancy Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana-approved pizza to arrive as it would fresh from its wood-fired oven. The saving grace is that pizza reheats exceptionally well. After I’ve placed my order I turn my oven on as hot as it goes. When the pizza arrives, it goes straight on to a tray and into the oven for a couple of minutes to bring it back to its original glory. This method works for chain-store pizzas, too (though their original glory isn’t quite as glorious). Lasagne: 8/10 Why there hasn’t been a family-sized lasagne delivery service that has taken the world by storm and become some kind of billion-dollar tech unicorn through this Covid period is quite beyond me. Pasta is *OK* for delivery but it really is better freshly prepared. The exceptions, however, are the “al forno” baked varieties of which lasagne is the undisputed king. It might be a little time-consuming to make at home, but it can be prepared relatively easily and in bulk in restaurants. Combine this with its excellent deliverability and it’s a wonder why Italian restaurants haven’t pivoted to this sooner. Fine dining: 🤷🏻♂️/10 With restaurants severely restricted in what they can serve, many fine-dining establishments have pivoted to home delivery. Some do it well, others not so well, so it’s hard to give this one a score. While it’s good to see many restaurants giving it a go, I can’t help but feel that fine dining is more about the experience than the food alone. A bit like watching Hamilton on the telly, it might be OK as a novelty but it really isn’t the same as being there. Burgers: 3/10 The major burger chains have all jumped on the home-delivery wagon as a source of revenue, but getting burgers delivered generally sucks. The fries are irredeemable, any semblance of freshness has wilted to mush, and the sauces and meat juices have soaked into the bun, destroying any integrity it may once have had. If you must send for burgers, try to keep them as simple as possible. A simple cheeseburger – the smaller the better – will roughly approximate a White Castle-style steam-grilled slider after the trauma of delivery. Load up on these and leave the fancy burgers and fried sides for dining in. Sushi: 8/10 Sushi began life as delivery food. It was originally a product of packing fish in rice for weeks long road transport by horse and cart. The fermentation of the rice preserved the fish, and that souring is mimicked by the vinegared rice used in modern sushi. Even the nigiri sushi that we see whizzing around on conveyor belts these days was originally sold door-to-door by a man named Hanaya Yohei who in the 1800s wandered the streets of what is today Tokyo’s Ginza district selling rice balls he moulded by hand and topped with pieces of raw fish. Sushi’s delivery credentials are well established, but its main benefit is that it’s served at room temperature, meaning that the insulation and transportation process doesn’t generate excess heat or steam. Rolls are likely to fare better than nigiri, as balancing fish on top of rice is not a process designed to survive transport across these mean streets. Chinese/Thai: 3/10 – 7/10 You might think it’s strange that I’m lumping these together, but there’s such a variety of Chinese cuisines that even keeping those into one category is weird enough, so you may as well throw the stir-fried Thai takeaways in there as well. My issue with these is twofold. I’m no fan of the “pick your meat and sauce” Thai-ish takeaways at the best of times, so how they’re delivered doesn’t matter much to me. But one thing the various Chinese and Thai cuisines have in common is that they thrive on variety and the juxtaposition between the different characteristics and textures of dishes, and that’s something that delivery doesn’t do justice. A braised dish might arrive in good condition, but a crisp-fried fish or chicken won’t. Soup will need to be reheated, and stir-fried dishes will lose much of their wok hei. It won’t stop me ordering good Chinese or Thai food for delivery, but having it in a restaurant will be so much better. Curry: 9/10 Getting slow-braised dishes from the subcontinent delivered is perhaps even better than cooking them yourself. There’s little difference between the delivery version and fresh in the restaurant for most of the wet dishes, but anything from the tandoor will suffer from the journey. I reheat breads like naan and paratha on a hot, dry grill pan after they arrive, and can confirm it’s a step worth doing. Dumplings: 10/10 If I had to pick a favourite food to order in it would be dumplings. Dumplings are the *chef’s kiss* of home delivery foods, and they’ve been hiding in plain sight the whole time. While many of us have missed the joys of circulating yum cha trolleys over the past few months, if you think about it getting delivery is kind of the same thing except the trolley is a scooter and it travels a greater distance. Re-steam them if you want them piping hot, or even just give them a zap in the microwave. Steamed foods thrive in the steamy environment of packaging and home delivery, so break out the lazy susan and teapot and gird your loins for yum cha at home.
1||Decades of neglect: Victoria has built less than 10% of its public housing pledge as waiting list swellsThe Victorian government has built only 57 of the 1,000 new public housing units it pledged by 2022, amid a push to bind the state to a housing target. As the pandemic puts the spotlight on the state’s ailing public housing system, the Greens will this week call for a legislated benchmark to guarantee a much-needed boost to housing stock. It comes as analysis obtained by Guardian Australia suggests there are nearly 30,000 children among the 100,000 people on the state’s ballooning housing waiting list. The waiting list has blown out every quarter since a new registry was created in 2016, yet the state government’s signature 1,000 homes commitment is yet to gather steam. Though the government insists the pledge is on track, figures provided to a parliamentary committee show only 57 of the homes Labor promised to build by late 2022 have been finished. Halfway into Daniel Andrews’s second term, a further 87 homes are under construction and 122 are said to be “about to start construction”. Housing advocates warned in 2018 that the $209m promise – which focuses on the most needy applicants – was already insufficient given Victoria spends less per capita on social housing than any other jurisdiction. Since then, the public housing waiting list has only gotten longer. In the three months to June 2020, an extra 2,161 Victorians were added to rolls, according to estimates by researcher Dr Duncan Rouch. That takes the total number of people waiting for a home to 99,264, includes 29,618 children. The Greens’ housing spokesman, Sam Hibbins, blamed the situation on decades of “neglect by successive state governments”. “The state government hasn’t even built 10% of the public homes it said it would during this term, which means the waiting list will continues to blow out,” he said. “The only way we can solve homelessness is to build more homes, it’s really that simple.” Under a bill the Greens will introduce to parliament this week, the government would be bound to a public housing target, which the party says would work similar to a renewable energy target. It would require the government to construct or purchase an additional 100,000 new public homes by 2030, or 10,000 a year. The benchmark is more ambitious than a proposal from the state’s peak homelessness body, which in May called for the construction of 6,000 units a year. According to government figures, the average waiting time for a “priority access” housing applicant is currently 11.6 months. This fast-tracked list includes people who are homeless, escaping family violence or living with a disability. The Department of Health and Human Services has previously partly blamed the wait figure on the “lack of growth in social housing”. Until very recently, Michael Miletic, 63, was among those on the priority list. The Geelong man had been staying in cheap accommodation during the pandemic. When that came to an end, he was homeless for a month. It was not a new experience. “I’ve been house surfing for years,” Miletic said. “I’ve never had a place to call my own.” While waiting on the public housing list, Miletic slept in his car and would shower at the Geelong Olympic pool. Luckily, he said, his vehicle had a canopy on the back that fits a bed. “I thought, ‘At least I’m not doing it hard on the streets,’” he said. After eight months on the waiting list, Miletic was given a home this month. He knows his wait was shorter than most, and credits the outcome to the assistance he received from the Housing for the Aged Action Group. Across Victoria, there has been a 125% increase in priority applications like Miletic’s since September 2016, according to Rouch’s research. Geelong is the worst-hit regional area, while demand in metropolitan Melbourne was highest in a housing region described as “Western Melbourne”. That area includes the suburbs in and around the nine high-rise towers in Flemington and North Melbourne that were controversially locked down in July at the start of Melbourne’s second wave. Since September 2016, demand has increased by 82% in that region, while applications also surged in north-eastern Melbourne, including Preston (200% increase), the Dandenong area (166%) and the Hume and Moreland area, including Broadmeadows (149%). Since the tower lockdown, the government has allocated $30m to voluntarily relocate families living in Melbourne’s public housing high-rises. And in July, it also committed to build 168 new social housing units as part of a Covid stimulus package. However, controversially, it is also selling off eight public housing estates to developers as part of a “renewal” project that will lead a 10% increase in social housing, which also includes affordable homes leased by non-profits. With the state budget due before the end of the year, Hibbins said forthcoming stimulus should include a massive housing boost. “There hasn’t been the will from governments in the past, but the Covid crisis has now presented us with a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to build back a better future, and access to secure housing for everyone should be the first step,” he said. A state government spokeswoman said Labor was responsible for record investment to support those sleeping rough, or at risk of homelessness, and family violence survivors who need a home. She said the 1,000 homes program “remains on track to be completed by 2022”. Contracts have been signed with builders for nearly all of the 1,000 homes. “We’ve also been invested almost $500m to build, repair and upgrade over 23,000 community and public housing homes across the state,” the spokeswoman said.
1||Australia's biggest companies are being run by a 'directors' club', study findsA major new study of who runs Australia’s biggest companies has confirmed the existence of a “directors’ club” and proves boards are not punished for poor performance, investors say. More than a third of vacancies on the boards of the top 300 listed companies in Australia are filled by directors of other companies in the same group, according to data compiled by proxy advice firm Ownership Matters. The study, which compiled information on every director of an ASX300 company since 2005, also found that the directors of poorly performing groups last almost as long as the directors of top companies. It comes as corporate Australia readies for an annual shareholder meeting season that got off to a torrid start last week when Crown Resorts directors survived a protest vote only due to the intervention of the company’s biggest shareholder, the billionaire James Packer. To combat the lack of consequences faced by directors, they should be forced to run for re-election every year, as happens in the UK, the Ownership Matters co-founder Dean Paatsch said. Currently, most Australian directors only face a shareholder vote once every three years. Non-executive directors are supposed to perform a key role in making capitalism work, by supervising the efforts of company management to grow businesses. Directors of companies in the ASX300 oversee $1.7tn in capital at a cost of around $400m in fees. Ownership Matters analysed the pool of 1,777 executives and 4,143 non-executive directors who have sat on ASX300 boards since 2005. Over that period, 38.5% of director positions among the group were filled by someone who already had a seat on a top 300 board. This ratio peaked at 43.4% in 2006 and currently sits at 36%, Ownership Matters said. The study found representation of women on boards has improved dramatically, rising from just 9.6% in 2005 to a third this year. It also found that once inside the “club”, the professional lifespan of directors soars. Three-quarters of non-executive directors served only once and served for an average of 71 months. However, the 14% who were lucky enough to pick up a second board seat saw their tenure extended to an average of 116 months. “Each additional seat extends a director’s service by at least two years,” and being made chair was worth an average of an extra four years, Ownership Matters said. But the data also shows that the directors of poorly performing companies were only a little more likely to be removed than those of good performers. “The effect is you would lose one more board member every three years,” Paatsch said. He said this was also often due to directors resigning before a company hit the wall, rather than remaining on the board of a struggling business. “Turnover often increases as a result of people managing their careers – jumping ship when they’re most needed,” he said. Nathan Parkin, the co-founder of fund manager Ethical Partners, said the study proved that a relatively small group of directors controlled many of Australia’s top companies. “It really is an invitation-only club,” he told Guardian Australia. It “mostly invites people who are a known quantity, or who are on other boards and known, and that’s a big part of the recruitment process,” he said. “There should be a wider pool of candidates – and there is a wider pool of candidates who are qualified and available.” He said the small pool of directors had positives, including making it easier for them to share information on good governance practices with each other. But it could also result in a culture where boards did not properly interrogate claims made to them by management, he said. Electing all directors annually was “probably a good practice”, he said. “It doesn’t need to lead to director turnover, necessarily, if everyone’s doing a good job.” However, Simon Mawhinney, the managing director of contrarian investor Allan Gray, said he feared there could be “some perverse outcomes” to annual director elections. “One of the big problems we have is this focus on short-termism,” he said. He said this could be a problem if directors endorsed a necessary investment program that took years to pay off. “You run the risk of coming up for re-election in a year and it looks awful,” he said. He said Ownership Matters’ use of share price to measure underperformance was “a little bit blunt” because it did not take account of factors outside the control of boards and management. “If you’re the CEO of an oil or gas company, then for the past five years you’ve presided over awfulness and there’s nothing you can do about that,” he said. “But if you were to sharpen the pen I don’t think the results would change a lot, and that’s concerning. “If people like me held these directors more accountable for capital allocation errors and sought blood when errors were made, that would increase rigour. But instead none of that happens, there’s no accountability.” Louise Davidson, the CEO of the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, which advises super funds on governance issues, said the research showed progress on gender diversity – but “also suggests that there is a real risk of it plateauing unless the director pool continues to grow and becomes more diverse”. “Introducing new voices to the director pool will only strengthen good governance in Australian companies and in turn deliver stronger shareholder returns,” she said. She said ACSI supported annual director elections because they improved accountability. Nicola Wakefield Evans, a non-executive director of Lendlease and Macquarie Group who is the Australian lead for the 30% Club, a group that campaigns for more women on boards, said the increase in representation revealed by the report was “really pleasing”. “Obviously one thing people are interested in is, are we starting to see the clubbiness for women? And I don’t think we are.” She said women were still missing out on board positions because they lacked executive experience companies often look for. “So we do need to focus on that area.” Wakefield Evans said she was “agnostic” on whether boards should face re-election every year. “My own view is that they will come.” She said it meant angry shareholders would be better able to target the directors they blamed for a company’s predicament. Currently “shareholders want to send a message but they ping the wrong directors”, she said. “The only downside is that you then run the risk of losing the whole board, which is a huge amount of corporate memory.”
1||Independent MP to bring bill for federal anti-corruption body as pressure mounts on CoalitionThe Morrison government is expected to come under pressure over its delay in progressing a national anti-corruption commission this week, with an independent MP introducing her own bill and Labor likely to intensify its question time attack. Declaring the government’s pandemic-related excuse “does not cut the mustard at all”, the prominent independent MP Helen Haines told Guardian Australia: “There’s nothing so delicious as a scandal and boy, we’ve had a feast haven’t we?” Haines, the member for the Victorian seat of Indi, will introduce her bill to parliament on Monday morning and is urging the government to allocate time for debate in the near future. Her proposed body, called the Australian federal integrity commission, would allow public hearings when in the public interest and allow any member of the public to make referrals. She said the public understood there were “obvious and serious issues” for an integrity commission to confront, and Covid-19 had not stood in the way of other issues being pushed through parliament. “We have debated and passed numerous bills throughout the pandemic, some rather light bills which are changing the names of departments, right through to more complicated and tricky issues like mobile phones in detention centres, for example – I’m not sure why that had to get rushed into the parliament,” Haines said. “We’ve had the EPBC bill which is highly contentious and was not properly debated at all. That excuse – and I think it is an excuse – it doesn’t hold water at all.” Work on the Coalition’s proposal began in 2018, and officials from the attorney general’s department confirmed last week that the attorney general, Christian Porter, received a draft bill to establish the body in December 2019 – before the pandemic began. The fact the 300-page draft legislation was ready last summer was first revealed by Guardian Australia in January, when Porter said he was waiting “rather than starting the consultation process during the holiday period, which is not an ideal time to start a process of public scrutiny”. Confronted about the further delays during question time last week, Scott Morrison said the government’s watchdog proposal required complex consultation, and the prime minister did not want “one public servant diverted” from managing the public health crisis. But in a clear warning to the government about the public appetite for strong action, Haines said she had even heard feedback from community members sheltered in bushfire evacuation centres last summer – “so incredible is the public’s desire to fix this canker, essentially”. “We’d be talking primarily about the bushfires and about their circumstances, once we’d talked about that and I just sat quietly with people, they would raise it even then. They would say, ‘Helen, you know, it’s important work that needs to be done, we need a federal integrity commission’.” Haines’ bill is expected to be seconded by the independent member for Warringah, Zali Steggall. Haines will also introduce a bill to bring in a code of conduct for parliamentarians. Private members’ bills are rarely debated or voted on in the lower house, given the government has a majority. But Haines has used social media to try to drum up support for a full parliamentary debate on her bill on 3 December. Using the hashtag, #BringOnDebate, Haines has urged members of the public to contact their local MPs “to ensure the government doesn’t shut down debate on this bill”. She has not ruled out seeking to suspend standing orders to bring it on for debate if the government does not accommodate her request – although the numbers may not be there for such a move. Labor’s position is to support a powerful and independent integrity commission. While it does not yet have a formal position on the model advanced by Haines, it is likely to strongly support bringing on debate. Labor is also expected to target the government over the matter during parliamentary question time throughout the course of this week. Signalling his interest in pursuing the issue, the manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, said the government’s failure to produce its own bill reflected “a deliberate decision from Mr Morrison to try to go on a go-slow when it comes to dealing with corruption”. Burke said he did not think anyone could accept government’s claim about the pandemic being a reason for the delay, given that it was already drafted before the Covid-19 crisis began. “All they have to do is print it off on their own computer, walk into the parliament, and table it and the public conversation can start,” he told Sky News on Sunday. Last week in parliament Labor pursued the government over the $30m acquisition of land at Leppington Triangle that was worth $3m – something that is being investigated by the Australian federal police and the infrastructure department. It also chased the government over any lobbying from the former NSW MP Daryl Maguire. On Thursday revelations of Australia Post’s spending on four luxury Cartier watches as reward for senior managers in late 2018 led Morrison to demand the chief executive, Christine Holgate, stand aside pending an investigation. The following day, the chair of the corporate regulator, James Shipton, stood aside pending an investigation into high spending on tax advice. Morrison has left the door open to a broader review of spending by commonwealth entities but has argued his swift action in relation to Australia Post would have sent a clear message to all executives and board members of government agencies. “I think they got it with a rocket,” Morrison said on Friday.
5||As South Australia now knows, local jobs must be a priority in the clean energy transitionFuture historians will no doubt remember 2020 as the year of Covid-19. But according to veteran climate campaigner Bill McKibben, they may also view it as a turning point, the year the world moved decisively towards “the transition everyone knew we needed to make”. McKibben told the recent Global Smart Energy Summit 2020 has been a year of “extraordinary convergence”, from the images of Australia’s bushfires, seen around the world on New Year’s Day – “like something out of Hieronymus Bosch” – to unprecedented developments such as China’s commitment to achieve net zero emissions by 2060, the EU’s pledge to make its Green Deal and Є100bn Just Transition Fund the centrepiece of post-Covid recovery, and the US $15tn divested from fossil fuels. Closer to home, there’s extraordinary convergence between business and state governments on the need to speed up Australia’s energy transition. Tim Reed, president of the Business Council of Australia, wants a “national, bipartisan commitment to net zero emissions by 2050”. Most states have already made this commitment, and South Australia is leading the pack. The state’s energy and mining minister, Dan van Holst Pellekaan, says SA will aim for 100% net renewable generation by 2030. Rapidly expanding wind, solar and battery storage capacity in SA’s Upper Spencer Gulf region will play a key role in achieving that aim. But energy transitions are not just about panels, turbines and targets. They’re processes of social as well as technological change. The people of Port Augusta, Whyalla and Port Pirie know all about this. The Upper Spencer Gulf has become a social laboratory for Australia’s energy transition. The gulf once known as the Iron Triangle was a manufacturing powerhouse. Whyalla had the steelworks, Port Pirie the lead smelter and Port Augusta the coal-fired power plants which drove them. But in 2015, Alinta Energy announced it was closing the power plants and the Leigh Creek coalmine. Less than 12 months later, all three had shut. The closure wasn’t completely unexpected. Local Liz Zyler says she knew the end was coming when her husband, Kym, an electrician who worked at the mine, told her they weren’t buying any more dynamite. “I just realised: coal was finished. They were going to close”. Like many local people, Liz was angry that Alinta promised the plants wouldn’t close before 2030, and then pulled the plug without warning. “They pulled that Band-Aid off real quick” says Liz. For a while, she became severely depressed, and recalls fighting with Kym nearly every day. “Our kids were still at school, and I’d just turned 50”, says Kym. “That’s not a very employable age”. Many of Kym’s older colleagues took a payout. But he and Liz decided the money wasn’t enough. In the end, he got a government job in Adelaide. He still works as an electrician, but only returns to Port Augusta on weekends. Liz had seen the writing on the wall years before. “I started to realise gas, oil and coal were on the way out, and we were going to be stuck with a stranded asset”. In 2012, she joined Repower Port Augusta, a grassroots initiative set up by local people to plan for a future after coal. The push for renewables came from the community. “We had a vote on whether we wanted a gas-fired power station or solar thermal. 4,000 people voted for solar, a quarter of the population of Port Augusta, and that was huge.” Repower Port Augusta won the backing of then Labor premier, Jay Weatherill, and electricians union the CEPU. According to Ben Jewell, CEPU SA branch organiser, renewables were seen as “the next big thing that was going to return the jobs that Leigh Creek and the power station had lost”. But Repower Port Augusta’s bold vision was dealt a body blow in 2019. The planned 150 MW solar thermal plant was scrapped. Despite a $110m federal government loan, Solar Reserve, the company behind the project, announced it could not raise enough bank finance. Other projects have gone ahead – such as the Bungala Solar Farm, on land owned by the Bungala Aboriginal Corporation. The project promised to create 350 jobs during construction but, according to Ben Jewell, few of those went to locals. “We went out there and there were 150 guys employed and 140 of them were backpackers” says Jewell. “This should have been an opportunity for Port Augusta to build their skill base, give the locals transferable skills because it was going to be a renewable energy hub. But that just didn’t happen”. Bungala is just one example of a broad trend our research has identified across renewable energy projects in regional Victoria and NSW: most jobs come in the construction phase, and don’t always go to local workers. Liz says regions and state governments “need to think smarter about the next generation”. With more pre-planning, she and Kim believe Port Augusta’s transition could have been better handled, with more good quality jobs for locals. But despite the problems, there’s no doubt a major transformation is happening in the Upper Spencer Gulf. The 35 turbines of stage 1 of the 126 MW Lincoln Gap windfarm are already operating just outside Port Augusta. Stage 2 (94MW, 24 turbines + 10MW battery storage) is under construction, while the even larger stage 3 is awaiting approval. Other projects, such as the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park, and Energy Connect, an interconnector that will link the gulf to NSW, should begin construction in 2021. These developments foster a sense of pride and purpose, a feeling the gulf is leading a much larger transformation which the whole country will undergo over the coming decades. But the gulf also has valuable lessons for other regions facing transition, such as the Hunter Valley: unless local people see jobs and other benefits for their communities, there’s a danger support will falter, and the legitimacy of Australia’s energy transition will be undermined. • Tom Morton, Climate Justice Research Centre, UTS; research Lisa Lumsden
4||Born for the big stage: how Dustin Martin turned the tide in the AFL grand finalWe always suspected it, but now we know there has never been anyone like him. One Norm Smith medal guarantees a player’s place in the history of the game. Win two of them, and you’re set for life as one of the greats. Win three, and your name is Dustin Martin. If it is true that grand finals do not build character but instead reveal it, then Dusty is the quintessential man for the moment. The Richmond star was born for the big stage. The Tigers have now won three premierships in four seasons, and in each decider Martin was the best player on the park. It is a mind-boggling individual achievement, harder in its essence than winning three Brownlow medals or three Colemans. There is a reason it had never happened before: the perfect storm of aptitude, opportunity and sense of occasion seldom descends on the game. Only three others had previously won two Norm Smith medals – Gary Ayres, Luke Hodge and Andrew McLeod – but now one man stands alone. Parents rarely admit to having a favourite child, but if Martin were to nominate the pick of his three Norm Smiths the smart money would be on the 2020 edition. Against Adelaide in 2017 and Greater Western Sydney last year he was the chief punisher in two spankings; against Geelong on Saturday night he was the difference. Twenty-one possessions (10 contested), four clearances, three tackles and four goals were the sum of his numerical return, but it was his ability to influence the course of the game in key moments that set him apart. Per se, it has been setting him apart for some time now. The highlights reel of the grand final will forever favour Martin’s fourth goal, an astonishing snap late in the fourth term when the game had already been iced. Mere mortals wouldn’t even attempt it; for Martin it is all in a day’s work. “One of the most individually brilliant goals that I’ve ever seen,” teammate Shane Edwards told AFL Media afterwards. “You become a spectator. For about 10 seconds there you’re just thinking, ‘He couldn’t, could he?’, and he does. The occasion, he’s just got a feel for it.” The goal was a wondrous illustration of Martin’s supernatural talents but it was his industry precisely two quarters prior that marked the game’s most pivotal moment. Twenty-one points down deep in the first half, and with Geelong dominating play, Richmond needed something from somewhere. Step forward Martin, who shrugged off Jake Kolodjashnij as if he were an Auskicker before snapping truly for a desperately needed goal. Not only did it cut the margin to 15 points at the long break, but it planted a seed of doubt from which the Cats would never recover. “It was an important goal,” coach Damien Hardwick said. “That’s what great players do. They take their opportunities and they get the job done. That’s why he sits here with his third Norm Smith. The significance of his goals were really important. We looked at the quality of work he’d put in throughout the course of the game, we probably knew his third Norm Smith wasn’t too far away.” And with that third Norm Smith comes the unofficial accolade as the greatest finals footballer in AFL/VFL history. Of course, not all great players get the chance to do what Martin has done. Being exceedingly good is one thing, being in an exceedingly good team is sometimes another. Many a fine footballer has never played in a grand final, let alone three and been the star turn each of them. And that is the lot of the professional. There are no guarantees. If Martin has anything resembling a peer in the modern game, it is Patrick Dangerfield. A Brownlow medalist like Martin, Dangerfield endured 13 seasons and 269 senior games before he got to play in a grand final. The Gabba decider could well be his last. But the reality is nobody really comes close to Martin. Not now. Not as a three-time premiership winner and triple Norm Smith medalist to go with his countless other baubles. Turning 30 in 2021, it is hard to know what else he will achieve. It is debateable he will win another Brownlow but one could argue he is a better player now than in his younger days when his output was measured by disposals. Importantly, his body and mind look to be operating in peak condition. Age, however, does weary them eventually. It was fitting that Martin should be in opposition when the curtains were drawn on Gary Ablett’s career. The comparisons – and the parallels – between the two are stark. Ablett departs the game as one of its finest products, alongside Martin the best of a generation. But one can only wonder – and wonder if Ablett wonders – what might have been had he stayed at Geelong instead of followed the money trail to Gold Coast in his prime. As a one-club man at the fulcrum of his team’s ascent from middling to magnificent, Martin will never have cause to wonder what might have been, whether his God-given talents could have better contributed to individual and team success. To the man himself, the latter is the one that counts. “There’s no way I would have been able to do it without my teammates,” Martin said of his third Norm Smith. “We’re an unbelievable team. It’s not a one-man team, we all do our part. We’re humble and we’re hungry. Success is awesome.” No, Dusty, you are awesome. The pleasure is all ours.
0||Southampton 2-0 Everton: Premier League – as it happenedSo there we go. Thanks all for your company and comments – sorry I couldn’t use them all – and enjoy the rest of the weekend. Ta-ra. And here’s our match report. Sad news: Kevin McCarra has died. Here’s our tribute to a football-writing pioneer. Back to the red, here’s Gary Naylor: “I’m an Everton fan and it’s textbook. “Any player who lunges at an opponent in challenging for the ball from the front, from the side or from behind using one or both legs, with excessive force or endangers the safety of an opponent is guilty of serious foul play.” I’m not sure we can call it a lunge; it looked to me like he trod on him in the course of running in the usual manner. Elsewhere, Newcastle seem to have picked six wingers for their trip to Wolves. I’m buzzing to see how they make that boring. “How many times does Digne try to bring someone down without trying to play the ball before it becomes deliberate?” asks Stephen Henderson. Yes, a fair question. But the first attempt is a booking, so maybe two yellows and a one-match ban is the correct outcome here. Fun and games from elsewhere... OK, we’ve just see it again, and I’m actually leaning towards the two Robbies in terms of intent – he probably didn’t do it on purpose – but the law doesn’t require it to be. If it’s strict liability, then it’s a red I guess, but it shouldn’t be. “Robbie is on NBC giving the ‘his hands were in the air’ defence, it’s a yellow card. Rubbish. I am a Everton fan but you are responsible for your studs.” Hands in the air is as close as football gets to a smoking gun. I guess we’ll see it again in a minute. Ward-Prowse says his team didn’t like the idea of a team coming to play them unbeaten, and said that if they can get to the ball first, they’re well organised and have the firepower to score goals. He’s also pleased with his goal – and knows he needs to score more, as the manager is demanding of him – but thinks they should’ve won by more. “Sashes - hope I’m not too late,” says James Bolle. “I’m biased but it’s not been bettered.” Imagine telling Malcolm Shotton he had to go to work in that! “Digne red,” says Arran Ridley. “Digne means worthy in French.” Affaire classée, Lieutenant Columbo. Big picture: Southampton vault up to fifth, three points off the lead; Everton stay top. “Fitting, perhaps, that Everton are decked out in seafoam as they wave goodbye to their unbeaten run,” emails Grant Tennille. Also, since when was foam green? Southampton were excellent, Everton abject. 90+5 min “Six points separate the top fifteen teams,” says Bill Hargreaves, “some of which have a game in hand. The bottom five have had it, in terms of title aspirations. Probably.” It’s great, isn’t it? Before the season, I’d have backed Man City, but having watched them a few times I’m beginning to wonder if this side is finished, and whether Guardiola has the ability or desire to rebuild. So I’d back Liverpool. 90+4 min Alan Smith gives Redmond the man of the match award, which is fair enough, but I’d probably have gone for Ings. 90+2 min Calvert-Lewin leaves a boot in on Vestergaard and is booked. He’s had better days. 90+1 min “Not quite a sash,” says Justin Kavanagh, “but let’s mention the finest Manchester United second strip of all, this three-striped wonder from the 1977 Charity Shield. That game was shown last night on Irish TV and, fool that I am, I watched it through, not remembering that it was a 0-0 draw. Better than their 0-0 draw earlier in the day, mind. There’s a full lockdown in Ireland, in my defence.” Oh my days, that is inspired scheduling! 90 min There’ll be five additional minutes. 90 min “I watched the replay five times,” returns Mike MacKenzie. “It was a deserved red as Digne’s studs raked Water-Peters achilles area (and it was of course from behind). NBC commentators are useless.” That was certainly my reading of it. 89 min Another change for Southamton, Dan N’Lundulu making his Premier League debut by replacing Che Adams. 87 min “I’d certainly agree that the Saints have been good overall last season and this one so far,” says Mike MacKenzie. “But I think it shows the main problem with the PL which is unequal distribution of revenue among teams. A team like Southampton (or Wolves in recent years) can become quite decent but it reaches a plateau. Getting better means buying more expensive players which they can’t afford and then the rich teams come calling for their top players. Better revenue sharing is essential to make the league competitive in the long run.” Yes, I agree with all of that, bar the use of Wolves as an example. It’s tricky, as I don’t believe in making players play anywhere they dom’t want to because their labour belongs to them. The single aspect that’d make the most difference, though, probably isn’t even a financial one, but just reducing the number of subs allowed. 86 min Southampton replace Armstrong, who’s put in a monstrous shift considering, with Diallo. Why we need a stadium announcer to tell us this, I’m not entirely certain. 85 min In fairness to Everton, assuming they lose this, they’ll still be top of the league at full-time. 84 min Lovely from Romeu, lifting insouciantly over the Everton defence, Schuster-style, for the scurrying Ward-Prowse, but he can’t quite catch up with it. 83 min This has been an absolutely comprehensive doing. 81 min “NBC commentator insists Digne red not called for,” tweets Ron Stack, “says a ‘more football-trained eye’ would see it differently.” I don’t know – I’d need to see it again, because doing MBMs, you spend as much time watching fingers and console as the actual game, but it looked bang to rights on first half-glance. I’m not sure who gave that opinion, but I’ve been watching football for 38 years; how many are necessary to be deemed “football-trained”? I daresay the officials have a few years in them too. 80 min Everton finally get Calvert-Lewin on the ball in the box, but he’s double-teamed ad easily unloaded. 78 min Southampton fancy more here and win a corner down the right which Betrand swings in towards the far post, where Vestergaard, 9”4 tall, has somehow got himself in a battle with Gordon, 3”5 tall. But he can only head over the bar. 77 min “Sashed kits,” emails Ed Thorpe. “Can we have a shout-out for this lovely effort from Dulwich Hamlet Women, which is so nice the men sometimes borrow it as a third kit?” A bit Party Rings, but very smart nevertheless. 76 min Calvert-Lewin has barely had a kick, and tearing down the left, he’s easily thwarted by Bednarek. 75 min Digne will miss the away games with Newcastle and Fulham, which sandwich the home game with Manchester United. With Richarlison also absent for the first two of those and Coleman out injured, they’ve got a problem. 73 min Digne insists he didn’t mean it and hoofs something on his way down the tunnel; if only there was some course of dealing to give us an insight into his intention. Dearie me, what a misplacing of noggin that is! Walker-Peters runs away from Digne, who has a hack, misses, raises arms which makes all the difference, then administers a stamp to the achilles. See you in three games mate; absolute later. 71 min “It would be helpful for the neutral if Southampton could decide if they’re going to be woeful or decent,” says Stephen Carr, “as I’m struggling to keep up.” They’ve been good for quite sometime, I’d say, and they’ve been very good tonight. 70 min Bern “bites yer legs” Ard accidentally clatters Walker-Peters, who comes through on his blind side. He’s down briefly, but we’re quickly on with the game. 69 min Everton are pressing now, but still struggling to create. A clincher looks more likely than a livener. 67 min This is it. 65 min I’ve just discovered the Clive Allen played for seven London clubs, if we count his not playing for Arsenal. Can anyone beat that? I also recall the absolutely lush kit he wore for Bordeaux, complete with long shorts. This isn’t quite it, but is also nice. 64 min In a game almost entirely devoid of reducers, it takes the smallest man on the pitch to administer one, Bernard clattering Romeu. He’s booked, and would be well advised to watch his step from here on in. 63 min Looking again, Ings might’ve been marginally ahead of play. He must’ve left it for the man coming in. 62 min What?! Redmond collects a loose ball after useful foraging by Adams, slipping outside him to Armstrong; his cross is a doozy, but somehow Ings manages to avoid tapping it home! Not a clue. 61 min I saw Gordon play for Everton in the League Cup game against Salford. He looked a serious talent, and my guess is he’ll play in behind Calvert-Lewin. 59 min “No discussion on sash kits would be complete without mentioning Crystal Palace. Here’s a mid-80s beauty.” The one I found was earlier than that, but it’s the same idea. I assume the photo was taken after Allen signed for Palace from Arsenal, who he’d joined for £1.25m only to leave without playing a game, in a swap deal for Kenny Sansom. 58 min Ancelotti goes again, bringing on the extremely exciting Anthony Gordon for Doucoure, and also sending on Delph for Sigurdsson. 57 min Digne crosses and Walker-Peters has both hands above his head, giving Everton a free-kick just outside the box, left-hand side. Sigurdsson decides to swing it out, but can’t avoid the first man. 56 min Whatever Ancelotti said at half-time, it hasn’t worked. Problem being, he’s not replete with options that might solve it. Two strikers would at least change things though. 54 min But look at this work of art from Southampton, as referenced earlier. 52 min Godfrey chases Bertrnad into the box and Bertrand falls, but there’s not enough contact for either ref or VAR to award a penalty. 51 min “I HATE it when team turn out in totally unnecessary alternative strips,” emails Simon Gill. “Example 1: Everton today. Seafoam green and charcoal indeed. What would the likes of Shanks or Cloughie have had to say about that? Example 2: Wolves at Leeds the other day. The old gold and black is iconic; turning out in something like the castoffs from a Portugal training strip is not. Even if that is meant to be somehow referential, it still sucks.” Tangentially, I used to like my team playing away to Southampton because we got to see the blue third kit RIP, of which I’m struggling to find a snap. 50 min On which point, Ralph Hasenhuttl very clearly knows some things. If I was a rich club contemplating a change of manager, he’d be near the top of my list, with Marco Rose and Julian Nagelsmann. 49 min So far, the second half looks a lot like the first. This match-is not suiting Everton. 47 min “I’m not against sashes on kits,” says Chris Fowler, “and I like Rayo Vallecano’s model. But, although I know that in the early days Saints kit had a sash, I always prefer their kit, at least, to be red and white stripes. Like the good old days (the 1970s, when I first went to the Dell, for example), when the same strip was used season after season, The stripes didn’t have to be necessarily all the same, mind you, and I really liked the kit when Keegan played for us at the beginning of the 1980s, with its wide 2 red and 1 white stripes with a black pinstripe between them. The two shades of blue away kit was a cracker, too.” Yes, agreed on all counts. I remember a blue away kit a little later too, George Lawrence era, maybe worn in the 1986 cup semi against Liverpool. Ah, here we go. 46 min Immediately, Southampton get the ball into Adams, who holds up then swivels and shoots straight at Pickford. 46 min We go again. Everton send Bernard on for Iwobi, but I’m not certain what that’s going to achieve – the problem seemed to be one of shape rather than personnel. “Being at the top of the table this far into the season has been a dream,” says Mary Waltz. “Well it is quite obvious from this first half that it is still 2020, Trump is still President, and I am no longer dreaming and I am wide awake. My boys look like they have been reading their clippings and have been played off the field.” Half-time entertainment: Southampton have been excellent, while Everton have been poor. I doubt things’ll proceed quite like that, so the second half should be decent. 45+1 min Godfrey, who’s had a stressful baptism, finds himself in space down the right and considers a cross, which ends up flying behind. Whoops. 45 min There’ll be one additional minute. 44 min There’s not much rhythm to Everton’s play. I’m sure being without Richarlison is bothering them, but they’re also missing the width they get from Coleman down the right, and I wonder if changing to a diamond or a 4-4-2 would help them get into the game. Or maybe they might just play better. 43 min James finds Doucoure, and the ball ends up with Iwobi, but Ings is back by his own box to tackle. What a very very good player he is – you could tell when he was at Burnley in that first season they came back up, a one-man forward line and doing brilliantly in the bigger games. It didn’t work out at Liverpool, but right now he’d be a really good alternative to Firmino. 40 min Here come Southampton again, and Adams looks offside, but the flag stays down because this is now the procedure. Armstrong then drills home what looks like number three, but the flag is then raised. Southampton look dangerous every time they go forward, and though Everton look good for at least one, they’re struggling to create and still look likelier to concede. 37 min “It’s one of the better kits of the 2020 PL lot,” says Mike Hollitscher. “You take the River Plate/Rayo Vallecano sash and reverse the colours. I don’t get why some don’t seem to like it. Is it too Johnny Foreigner?” I doubt it – the whole culture is influenced by fashion from elsewhere. I can only speak for myself, and say that on its own, it’s not bad even if it looks like they’re in a beauty pageant, but it’s not what I’d expect from a Southampton kit. And this Everton one, modelled by the HILARIOUS John Bailey, what a CHARACTER is also a jazzer. Danny Ings, the creator supreme! This time, he turns up on the left, bustling away from poor Godfrey and slapping over a low cross that falls nicely for Adams. He takes a touch, ponders the ultimate futility of existence, as the 35 defenders inside the box run about in circles, then cracks a low one past Pickford with the help of a slight deflection. I’m not sure that was in the corner. 33 min “Jumping in on the kit chat,” says Barry Brian, “there are some disastrous kits this year (Chelsea’s blue and pink, Man United’s black and white, Inter home), but this Everton number certainly isn’t one of them. As for Southampton, I love a sash but fear we are in danger of overuse in recent years.” I quite like the United one, though it reeks of people with attention-seeking facial hair and glasses – yes, I realise that these days, that narrows things down to about 42 percent of the world’s population – doing themselves mischiefs trying to design something “iconic”. As for this Everton one, it’s a nice colour, but very toothpaste. 31 min “It looks like whoever designed the kit has been watching the Canadian Premier League, says Kevin Smith, attaching a picture of Calgary’s Cavalry FC. 29 min Both sides are playing well, but Southampton have looked the incisive to this point, and ought really to have scored sooner. Everton need to get James on the ball and give Calvert-Lewin some decent service, or failing that, some service. Twenty-four seconds later, poor Pickford is picking a pot of pickled peppers the ball out of his net, and what lovely reason he was given. Ward-Prowse finds Ings, who feeds him back in with a megs pass, and a deft first touch puts him in prime position to absolutely shmice a fine finish into the far bottom corner! 26 min Nice from Southampton, Redmond again on the ball and sliding back and across for Romeu, tanking onto it ... and he absolutely lamps it, a little flick off Keane forcing Pickford into a plunging save! 25 min “Everton’s kit is officially ‘seafoam green and charcoal’, by the way,” emails Andrew Goudie. That reminds me of the salmon and pink classic. 23 min Ings sticks one out wide to Bertrand, and another low cross finds Armstrong, but he’s kind of side-on to it so that when the ball arrives at speed he can’t quite resolve the conundrum of his feet, tentatively poking at a backheel that gets nowhere. 21 min How do we feel about this Southampton rig? Do they look like contestants in a beauty pageant? 19 min How! Again, Everton switch the ball left, this time to Sigurdsson, and he has a look the larrups a shot which looks to be flying over and plenty ... until it dips mid-swerve and crack the crossbar! 17 min Redmond gets himself at Godfrey again, but this time opts to go inside. The attack continues, the ball comes back to him, and this time he sticks Betrand in behind yerman – he needs help from Doucoure, who I think is the midfielder on that side. This time, though, he escapes when Bertrand’s low cross goes into the side-netting. 16 min ...James gets a decent connection and goes around the wall, but McCarthy waits for him, collecting the ball without needing to move. This is a good game so far. 15 min A foul on Calvert-Lewin gives Everton a free-kick 25 yards out, marginally right of centre. Sigurdsson fancies it, but not a chance James is stepping aside, armband or not... 13 min Everton are finding Iwobi constantly, and this time he comes in off the left and drags a shot towards the near post which is deflected just wide. The corner comes to nowt. 12 min Lovely from Southampton, Ings finding Redmond, who runs away from Godfrey – there it is! – then cuts back for Adams, arriving onto it just as you’d like. But he doesn’t make the connection he’s after, bumbling a shot that skips just wide. 11 min Godfrey misplaces a pass and Adams snaffles the loose ball, running away from Allan, but though Ings is moving for him he’s forced backwards and Southampton must build again. 10 min Everton are pushing. 8 min “I was there!” says Richard Adams of the Plymouth-Watford game. “And yes I can confirm that Reilly is hated in Plymouth for scoring against us. Pic: Umbrella Vi. Stood on the halfway line of the Lyndhurst End every home game for decades.” Can an end have a halfway line? But yes, I love this stuff – my mate’s nan is Man City’s longest-serving season-ticket holder. Here she is. 6 min “The Lomana Lua Lua incident actually led to the introduction of the exclusion rule barring on-loanees from playing against the parent club, as this Guardian article so eloquently explains,” emails Clive Naylor. It’s one of those that seems counter-intuitive. Of course they should play, but not allowing it guards against skulduggery. 5 min Nice from Everton, Allan spinning and laying back to Keane, who unleashes a gorgeous, er, “diag” to Iwobi. It’s about a yard too long. 4 min “A year to the day since this,” says Andrew Goudie, although that’s nothing compared to Ajax’s tonking yesterday of VVV Venlo (surely the only team with four consecutive Vs in their name).” Just when I thought we’d managed not to raise it. That will haunt all involved forever. 3 min It comes to nowt. 2 min Southampton win a free-kick out on the left, ideal for Ward-Prowse to swing in, and Calvert-Lewin is up first, but a shout from Keane allows him to escape at cost of a corner. 1 min I feel like Allan is the new Belgium, a player everyone knows and accepts is good, but is discussed like some sort of secret whose contributions are noticeable only to the highly enlightened. 1 min Off we go! The players take a knee. Let’s support them by donating, educating others and educating ourselves. The players are out! “I was on the North Bank when Inchy Heath scored that goal,” says Gary Naylor. “It’s hard to put into words how much the FA Cup meant back then, and the feeling of going to Wembley after being at Elland Road in 1980 watching Frank Lampard run round the corner flag. Happiest of days.” Yup, I remember. My parents went to the 1983 reply without me (I was deemed too young, aged four) and I’ve never quite forgiven them. And my team winning it the following year remains an extremely special memory. “Manchester United, playing with great pluck and intelligence, this player Hughes coming into it more and more...” On which point, did we have way better commentators then, whose lines we recall like that, or are we just old with too much football on to allow us to remember any of it? Oh yes! This from the game in question. Goodness me! Here’s Mac Millings with further details: “In the other semi-final of the ‘84 FA Cup, the mighty Watford FC defeated Plymouth Argyle by the odd goal. Perhaps the most notable footnote to that game was the reaction of one Plymouth fan to Watford’s goalscorer, George Reilly. Key line: ‘The attacker chewed off one of Reilly’s ears and whispered ‘Plymouth’ into the other one.’” I remember the game, but I did not know that. Ralph tells Sky that it’s been a “very intense time with lots of ups and downs,” and recently, performances have stabilised. The team, aren’t as far in development as they think they can be and still have things to improve, but they like to learn and have a good chance to win every game. Today, he thinks, is a good test against a strong side, and though the table doesn’t tell you everything after five games, it’s not a coincidence that they’re top. “Not sure about the Pennant one,” says Adam Griffiths, “but Lomana Lua Lua scored a last kick of the game equaliser for Portsmouth against Newcastle in 2004, while on loan from Newcastle. For reasons that are unclear, Newcastle hadn’t insisted on a ‘you can’t play against us’ clause. And yes, he did the full celebration.” Lovely stuff. Email! “As a neutral Mancunian (who only got Sky recently after hearing Murdoch had left) I’m really looking forward to this. Everton turned a corner this season and Southampton did last season. Both seem to want to control the game rather than sitting back defending.” Yes, I really like both of these too, and think we’ll see a decent game. One of the reasons the league table is as it is is because of corona, one way and another, but another reason is that almost every club has serious players who can hurt you. Which I guess brings us back to Sky. What Southampton need to beware is Everton’s attackers darting between the lines of what can be quite a rigid formation, and losing the numbers game in midfield. My guess is that they’ll have made specific plans for dealing with James. So what’s going to happen in this game? If I was Ralph Hasenhuttl (for avoidance of doubt, I’m not), I’d be looking to get Redmond running at Godfrey wherever possible, but as early as possible too – as in-form him is not something to face at the best of times, never mind out of position, on debut. Everton, meanwhile, need to beware the press that might stop the playing out, and in Romeu, Allan will find someone who delights in all the same things as him. Yet somehow I don’t think they’ll be friends. Kieron Dyer then spoke really movingly about those men as his pioneers, leading into a discussion about the dearth of black managers. The lack of Rooney rule, and the lack of desire on the part of the Premier League to institute such a thing, tells us how much we still have to do. On Sky at the moment, we’re watching a mini-doc on black players in the Premier League years, with Andy Cole, Paul Ince, John Barnes and Troy Townsend. Check it out, it’s really good. All black lives matter, people. These teams met in the 1984 FA Cup semi-final, at Highbury. Which ended in the traditional style. Ancelotti tells Sky that James didn’t train much in the week, but has recovered from his knock. He also says that replacing Gomes with Sigurdsson - who captains the side – was a difficult decision, but he’s been training well and is rewarded for his attitude. Meanwhile, Ancelotti is confident in Jordan Pickford, and hopes his team play with ambition; though they’ve started well, they need to keep at it. Everton, meanwhile, make three changes: Ben Godfrey makes his first Premier League start for the club, in for the injured Seamus Coleman; Gylfi Sigurdsson is in for Andre Gomes; and Alex Iwobi deputises for the suspended Richarlison. All of which tells us that James Rodriguez is good to go; good. On which point, I might be misremembering – YouTube is silent on the matter – but didn’t Jermaine Pennant once score the winner for Leeds, when on loan to them from Arsenal? Stuart Armstrong comes straight back for Southampton, following time out with corona; goodness me, if my experience is anything to go by he’ll find that an extremely taxing endeavour. He replaces Theo Walcott, not allowed to play according to the terms of his loan. Southampton (a throwback futuristic 4-4-2): McCarthy; Walker-Peters, Vestergaard, Bednarek, Bertrand; Armstrong, Romeu, Ward-Prowse, Redmond; Adams, Ings. Subs: Forster, Stephens, Long, Tella, Diallo, Vokins, N’Lundulu. Everton (a simple complex 4-3-3): Pickford; Godfrey, Mina, Keane, Digne; Doucoure, Allan, Sigurdsson; Rodriguez, Calvert-Lewin, Iwobi. Subs: Olsen, Delph, Nkounkou, Bernard, Gomes, Gordon, Davies. VAR’s straight man: Kevin Friend The Premier League is absolute state – and for once, in the best possible way. Everton top, and with this game in hand, is one thing. But if Southampton win today, they move from 13 to fifth, which is to say that this is a whole new ball game. I’m sure there’s a cheap gag to be made here, about Goodison and the world’s most perpetually indignant crowd, but anyway: Everton have very quickly become very good, and the way they’ve gone about it is telling. Carlo Ancelotti is a very particular kind of manager, who tends to inherit very good but very unhappy players, fortifying them with very good vibes and very minimalist tactics. And that lookslike what he’s done at Everton, finding the right few words for Dominic Calvert-Lewin – “one-touch finishes like Inzaghi” – then giving him, and Richarlison, all the scope that they need to show all that they have. First, he provided them with a happy working environment, then he contracted Abdoulaye Doucouré and Allan to build them a platform, and finally he asked James Rodríguez to decorate it. It’s extremely simple, but it’s also extremely difficult, because if it wasn’t, everyone would do it. Southampton are slightly different. Like playing for Ancelotti, playing for Ralph Hasenhüttl looks a lot of fun, but with a lot more drilling - pressing triggers, half-spaces, and all that jazz. In the end, though, it works partly because his team run their arses off for him and partly because they have a pair of big, burly, classy centre-forwards, marking whom sounds like the absolute worst way to spend a Sunday lunch. This should be really good. Kick-off: 2pm GMT, 3pm BST
0||Southampton's bright start ensures first defeat for lacklustre 10-man EvertonA year on from the infamous 9-0 home shellacking by Leicester, this was stirring evidence of Southampton’s impressive transformation under Ralph Hasenhüttl, whose side ended Everton’s unbeaten start to the season as fine goals by James Ward‑Prowse and Che Adams brought Carlo Ancelotti’s side back down to earth with a bump. Everton were insipid from the moment they fell behind and Lucas Digne’s red card for appearing to rake his studs down Kyle Walker-Peters’ achilles with around 20 minutes to play compounded a frustrating trip south. For the Saints, this was the closest thing to a complete performance. With 39 minutes played, Stuart Armstrong, the beneficiary of Adams’s endeavour and awareness, thought he had added a third. At that point Ancelotti removed his hands from the pockets of his royal blue trench coat and made his feelings known, berating Jordan Pickford for failing to hoover up the initial pass downfield to Adams, always a willing runner. Pickford argued there was no such problem and, as it happened, the assistant referee flagged for offside and the goal was disallowed, but it was an episode symbolic of the kind of chaos that ensued as Southampton carved Everton open. Ancelotti revealed James Rodríguez had barely trained this week after sustaining a knock against Liverpool last weekend and, while he conceded the Colombian was undercooked, that was the least of the manager’s concerns. Everton were two goals down inside 35 minutes, with Ward-Prowse arrowing in across Pickford after a neat give-and-go with Danny Ings. Ward‑Prowse hooked the ball over Allan before Ings slipped in the midfielder, who finished emphatically. Adams, who has often slogged without reward, doubled the advantage just eight minutes later. Ings again turned provider, scooting away from Ben Godfrey and Yerry Mina before hanging a cross towards the back post, where Ward‑Prowse was waiting unmarked. But Adams, too, was lurking and, with the Everton defence having gone walkabout, he smashed in via a Gylfi Sigurdsson deflection. Given Everton have never won a Premier League game when trailing by two or more goals at half-time, it is fair to say Ancelotti had work to do. He tweaked personnel at the interval, introducing Bernard in place of Alex Iwobi, one of three substitutes from the Merseyside derby promoted to the starting lineup, but little changed. They sorely missed the suspended Richarlison – they are yet to win a Premier League game without the Brazilian since he signed two years ago – and the isolated Dominic Calvert-Lewin cut an aloof figure aside from an initial spurt, but it was the absence of Séamus Coleman, who was forced off against Liverpool, that told most dearly. Godfrey again deputised at right-back but the £25m signing from Norwich never looked comfortable. Twenty-eight seconds into the second half Everton were fortunate not to trail by a bigger margin after Adams comfortably eluded Godfrey inside the channel but the striker dawdled before getting a tame shot away. At least Godfrey tried to atone for his errors, racing back to regain possession after losing the ball upfield early in the second half. The body language of Digne and Sigurdsson, who had the captain’s armband until being withdrawn on the hour, was not so reassuring. Everton were lethargic and lukewarm at best. Sigurdsson came close to opening the scoring after a swerving shot from distance skidded off the top of the Southampton crossbar, cutting inside after collecting a Rodríguez pass, bringing a chorus of gasps from the Everton dignitaries and substitutes scattered across the stand. Everton’s appetite appeared to wane but Southampton were relentless and strode forward with the tempo the animated Hasenhüttl conducts on the touchline. He bounced around the technical area to roar his players on, yelping in disbelief as Armstrong’s cross somehow eluded Ings in the six-yard box. Southampton were supercharged, but not by any ghosts of that Leicester game. “It’s not interesting for us,” Hasenhüttl said. “We are so concentrated on what we have to improve all this time; we don’t have time to speak about anniversaries. The way the guys managed this was game outstanding.” It was a similar story in the first half, when Nathan Redmond dragged wide after meeting a cross by Ryan Bertrand, again overlooked by the England manager, Gareth Southgate, this month. Moments later, a Bertrand cross pinballed around the Everton penalty area before Michael Keane eventually averted the danger after Walker-Peters recycled possession. But that was just the start of things to come, not that Southampton will be resting on their laurels any time soon. “If you lean back a little bit, you immediately get the bill for it,” said Hasenhüttl. “We have to keep on working and keep on being focused. It seems we have definitely done some big steps forward. ”
6||Ann Ambache obituaryMy friend Ann Ambache, who has died aged 72 of a heart attack, left Northern Ireland in the 1960s for a 40-year teaching career in England. She herself carried on learning new skills all her life, which enabled her to make a move from home economics to teaching information technology to children with special needs. Ann was born in Dungannon, County Tyrone, where her parents, Bridget (nee Hart) and Patrick Campbell, ran a small farm. Ann, eldest of four children, attended Killyman junior school and Dungannon academy. She had to be self-sufficient from an early age and helped her aunt in her shop. After taking her A-levels, Ann trained as a home economics teacher at Mary Ward College in Nottingham (1967-70) and then taught in Warley in the West Midlands. She also worked for several evenings a week in a hostel for older children. There she met Jeremy Ambache, a young social worker. He asked her out and for their first date she took him to a parents’ evening at her school. They married in 1973 and moved to London, where Ann became a supply teacher at Sacred Heart high school in Hammersmith. After a career break to have their daughters, Zoe and Lucy, she returned to Sacred Heart. Ann had a real curiosity and thirst for learning and completed a BEd at the University of Surrey in 1985 while teaching. Policy changes moved home economics into food technology, which inspired Ann to retrain. She gained a certificate in counselling at Westminster Pastoral Foundation in 1991; a BA (Hons) in psychology at the Open University in 1992; a diploma in information technology and education at King’s College London in 1993 and a diploma in education for those with special needs or dyslexia at Kingston University in 1995. With her new skills she developed a rewarding career in special needs education with responsibility for IT, joining Cambridge school in Hammersmith, where she remained until her retirement in 2008. She resisted school politics and management, preferring to stay in the classroom, and was famous among her students for her portrayal of a good and bad interview job candidate – everyone remembers her impression of a scruffy, gum chewing and uninterested teenager. Ann swam and attended the gym daily at Putney leisure centre, near her home in south-west London. She enjoyed London’s cultural opportunities, especially seeing Ibsen or Chekhov plays, and was the secretary of a women’s culture and theatre group in Putney, where she and I first met, for more than 20 years. She had a wicked sense of humour and was highly irreverent; she was a “giver”, especially to her family, looking after her six grandchildren during her 13 years of retirement. She was a wonderful cook and loved to grow and pick fruit and vegetables. Ann is survived by Jeremy, Zoe and Lucy, and her grandchildren, Eva, Ella, Una, Rory, Zander and Stella, and by her brothers, John and Francis, and sister, Kathleen.
5||In the restaurant where I work, Covid has brought out the worst in customersWaitressing can be a difficult job at the best of times. The hours are long, the work is exhaustingly physical and the customers have a tendency to take out on you whatever frustrations have been building in them all week. I fondly remember one weekend brunch shift when a woman berated me because we only had white sugar for her coffee, not brown; she insisted that this was a breach of “etiquette”. She was definitely not sweet enough. I took the job last summer as a way to make ends meet while I started a new life in Manchester after moving from London. It wasn’t exactly what I’d trained for in drama school, but it paid the bills and I love being around people. I took the good customers with the bad, and found solace venting with my partner at the end of the day. Then Covid hit. We endured the closure of the restaurant due to lockdown along with the rest of the country, but from July onwards we were lucky enough to be able to set up an ad hoc outdoor space for customers. It was a relief to be able to keep the place open and all we asked of customers was to register with the Covid app, wear a mask when they entered the indoor area and stay seated as we provided table service. Maybe waitressing would even become easier, I thought, as groups were restricted to no more than six. Surely this would be a simple enough bargain to make in order for us all to stay safe while enjoying a return to some semblance of our normal lives? Yet since customers have started to stream back through our doors, I have been faced with a different reality. When I greet them and ask them to scan the test-and-trace app barcode, many will ignore me or say they don’t have their mobile phones with them, only to sit down and put their phones on the table. It’s not just my restaurant that faces this sort of attitude; one of my favourite places to eat in the city was given a two-star review by a customer complaining about being asked to register on the app. Apparently the place was “brim with ridiculous rules and concepts”. Tell that to Boris Johnson, love, not the service staff. As we’ve moved into tier 2 and now tier 3, we have had to be alert to groups of more than one household turning up. Despite the rules, it’s patently obvious that we’re receiving parties of mixed households, unless communal living has really taken off in Manchester. There is only so much we can do: I can’t ask to see their house keys, or quiz them on each other’s preferred breakfast cereal. The rules are unsustainable and shouldn’t be our responsibility. Then there’s making sure people are wearing their masks to keep each other and staff like me safe. You’d think we were taking away people’s right to vote by asking them to pop a piece of cloth over their face while they nip to the toilet. All of this would be bad enough, but to compound issues, management have decided that the maxim “the customer is always right” endures, despite staff going no further than enforcing government regulations. When you eventually get everyone seated, you hope that the hard work is behind you. But then comes the shouting across the room to get your attention, and the eyes boring into your head as you finish up serving another customer. I’ve cried in work more than once because of the way a customer has treated me. In hospitality there’s always that one difficult customer, but nothing could prepare me for life post-lockdown. We all want to get back to normal and it can feel frustrating at times, but this situation has truly brought out the worst in people. If you plan to go out this week, please remember to be polite to your waiting staff: they’re living through exactly the same pandemic as you. The writer is a waitress in Manchester
17||Joan Hocquard, Britain’s oldest person, dies aged 112Britain’s oldest person, Joan Hocquard, who drove ambulances during the second world war, has died aged 112. Hocquard died at her home in Poole, Dorset, on Saturday. Her nephew, Paul Reynolds, 74, said she had always sought to live life to the full and that she “loved eating butter and cream and didn’t believe in dieting”. She was born on 29 March 1908, under the reign of Edward VII, the same day as the world’s former oldest man, Bob Weighton, who died in Hampshire in May. Their final birthday celebrations were held behind closed doors because of the national coronavirus lockdown. The pair also shared a birthday with Alf Smith from St Madoes in Perthshire, who shared the title of Britain’s oldest man with Weighton until his death in 2019 at the age of 111. Reynolds described Hocquard as an independent spirit who had refused a card from the Queen on her 100th birthday because “she did not want people to know how old she was”. Born in Holland Park, west London, Hocquard spent much of her childhood in Kenya, where her father was a colonial officer in charge of shipping on the Great Lakes in east Africa. She later worked as a cook in a French hotel near Geneva in Switzerland, and met her husband, Gilbert, through their shared love of sailing. During the second world war, she drove ambulances in London before she and Gilbert moved to the south coast of England. The couple travelled across Europe in a camper van and went on yachting holidays until his death in 1981. In the late 1980s she met widower Kenneth Bedford, who was 20 years her junior, at the Bournemouth Gramophone Society and they had lived together since in Poole. She lived “an extraordinary innings and died peacefully in her own home, which is all you could wish for”, said Reynolds. “She was a strong-willed character and loved telling stories about how naughty she was as a schoolgirl.” The oldest living Briton is now Lilian Priest from Swanage in Dorset, who is 111.
3||Party chair insists Republicans will hold Senate after Trump voices doubtAfter Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said he could not and did not want to help some senators, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted the Senate would stay in GOP hands, saying: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” In fact, as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls, senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have sought to put daylight between themselves and Trump. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour. McSally dodged opportunities to express support in a debate. Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on policy. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election but McSally and Cornyn are in tight races. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday, before admitting: “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeating that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” According to FiveThirtyEight.com, while Trump trails Joe Biden by 2.6 points in Arizona, McSally is struggling in her battle with Mark Kelly, a former astronaut now a campaigner for gun control reform. Other Republicans facing tough fights include Cory Gardner in Colorado, David Perdue and Kelly Loeffler in Georgia, Thom Tillis in North Carolina, Lindsey Graham in South Carolina, Susan Collins in Maine and Joni Ernst in Iowa. Most forecasters give Democrats a good chance of retaking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47. Trump insisted again on Sunday that his party could take back the House but that seems unlikely, Democratic control firm enough that Speaker Nancy Pelosi barely created a ripple with her confirmation to CNN’s State of the Union that at the age of 80 she will seek to stay in the role. Corey Lewandowski, a Trump adviser, played down the president’s comments about the House but told NBC’s Meet the Press he had been “out aggressively campaigning for members of the US Senate” and had “asked his surrogates, including me, to go out and help.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” he said. “The Senate is very tough.” He also said: “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in. I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” McDaniel said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Lewandowski said the president had “helped raise money. He’s got a great partnership with Senate leader Mitch McConnell. They’ve raised money together, and we feel very, very strongly that we’re going to retain our majority in the US Senate.” Frustrated by McConnell’s rush to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court, Democrats are considering structural reform to both the court and the Senate. McDaniel said: “Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are not not hiding the fact they want to get rid of the filibuster” – the 60-vote threshold for new legislation – “and they want to fundamentally change the third branch of government [the court]. “This is a tight race, we know this, but the trend lines are good in these states. You’re seeing McSally gain momentum. You also didn’t mention candidates like John James [Michigan] and Jason Lewis [Minnesota], who are in competitive races against Democrat incumbents. “So we’re gonna keep the Senate, we’re working hard to do that.”
0||Kevin McCarra: a pioneer who changed football journalismIt was around about 1990, long before journalists had mobile phones. Kevin McCarra, the former football correspondent of the Guardian who died from Alzheimer’s disease on Saturday aged 62, was travelling from Glasgow to cover a game at Easter Road for Scotland on Sunday when his train got stuck somewhere near Falkirk. Time passed. It became clear Kevin wasn’t going to make kick-off. Still the train didn’t move. He wasn’t going to make half-time, either. Unable to contact his desk but knowing they had a space to fill and needed copy, he composed a piece about being on the train with frustrated fans, filed when he was finally able to disembark and somehow produced something true and insightful, and far more memorable than anything that had been written at the game itself. It was a moment of improvised unorthodoxy typical of Scotland on Sunday at the time. It was a bright, fresh paper, fizzing with imagination in every section. Kevin’s role was vital. In the era of Fever Pitch, fanzines and Italian football on Channel 4, Kevin was one of those who transformed football journalism. Out went the jaded hackery of old, and in came a far more literary sensibility. Kevin had been doing a PhD placing the 15th-century Scottish poet Robert Henryson in his European context when an arts centre where he worked part-time asked him to put on an exhibition about Scottish football. That led to him being commissioned to co-produce A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, published in 1984. He wrote it on an Amstrad PCW using the deeply unintuitive Locoscript. As anybody who sat near him during a game knew, it was the last thing to do with computers he ever really mastered. “Technology is a word we only use when it goes wrong,” he would say; he used it a lot. The contacts made during his research led to further writing opportunities. As disillusionment with academia set in, Kevin became a regular in Scottish Field before being invited to join Scotland on Sunday when it launched in 1988. He also co-founded the Mariscat Press, publishing poetry editions including Edwin Morgan’s 1984 work Sonnets from Scotland. Kevin later worked for the Sunday Times and the Times before succeeding David Lacey as the Guardian’s football correspondent after the 2002 World Cup. It was his dream job. He even took a pay cut to move, although only because he misremembered his salary during negotiations (characteristically – practicalities were never a forte). It was Lacey he most admired and Lacey whose prose his most resembled, crisp and free of cliche, capable of summing up a game with deceptive economy. Looking back at old pieces now what is striking is both his prescience and the unusual cadences of his writing. He was rarely controversial, although there was the incident after a friendly against Spain in 2007 when the England manager Steve McClaren referred to the upcoming Euro 2008 qualifier in Israel as “the real bull”, apparently a laboured bullfighting analogy. Kevin, taking his turn with transcription, was understandably mystified and decided McClaren had said “rainbow”, leading to McClaren being mocked up on the back of the tabloids with George, Zippy and Bungle. With somebody else, it might have created major issues, but McClaren and everybody at the Football Association knew that with Kevin it would have been an honest mishearing, no mischief intended; there was never any malice to either him or his writing. The affection in which he was held became clear during Euro 2016, when he went missing in Avignon. The football community rallied to appeal for help and the following day he was found, confused and dehydrated, by an England fan who had seen his photo on Twitter. Kevin never savaged anybody, remembered always the person behind the mistake he might be describing. Only once did a manager ever really lose his rag with him, and that was, of all people, Tommy Burns, who had been taught by his father. “I can’t believe Joe McCarra’s boy could write those things,” he hissed, pinning Kevin against the wall, before the preposterousness of the situation overcame the pair of them. It was Burns’s No 10 Kevin later had on the back of his Celtic shirt. He co-wrote a book on Celtic’s 1967 European Cup win and there was a sense he never enjoyed anything quite so much: Kevin was a famously terrible footballer – so bad that after he’d reluctantly agreed to make up the numbers for a team at Glasgow university, he was quickly subbed off as his teammates decided they would be better playing with 10 – but he enthusiastically acted out the key moments of that campaign as recreated for him by Jimmy Johnstone in his living room. Some journalists end up covering football because it’s where they are shunted, some do it because it’s a job; Kevin did it because he loved football. That perhaps came through most obviously in his broadcast work. Kevin was one of the original regular guests on Football Weekly and a huge part of its early success. After leaving the Guardian in 2012, Kevin returned to Glasgow and wrote another book, telling the history of Celtic through the biographies of nine key figures. Long after illness struck, he kept going to Parkhead and Partick Thistle. He was, as his friend Philippe Auclair put it, “a gentle fanatic”, obsessed by Celtic but never partisan. He was unashamedly erudite, but also had great warmth. He was a pioneer who changed Scottish football journalism but, most fundamentally, he was a thoroughly nice man.
2||Global report: Spain declares Covid state of emergency as Italians urged to stay homeThe Spanish government has declared a six-month state of emergency and ordered a nationwide curfew, while Italians have been strongly advised to stay at home as both countries impose tough limits on people’s movements in a effort to contain the second wave of the coronavirus. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said his cabinet had approved a state of emergency on Sunday morning that is set to remain in force until 9 May 2021. The decree will allow Spain’s regional governments to order an overnight curfew to run from 11pm to 6am, or to begin and finish and hour earlier or later. The only area of Spain exempt from the curfew is the Canary islands because of what Sánchez termed “the very positive epidemiological situation there”. Spain became the first western European country to record more than 1m Covid infections last week, and Sánchez said on Friday that studies suggested the real number was three times higher. The state of emergency also permits Spain’s regional governments to bring in full or partial lockdowns, and limits public and private gatherings to six people. “We have to protect our economic and work activity and preserve, as far as we can, the rhythms of our lives,” Sánchez said in a televised address on Sunday afternoon. “Sacrifices will be indispensable. No one, not the government of Spain nor its regional governments, want to impose a single restriction that isn’t necessary to flatten the curve and protect public health.” He said his government would seek congressional approval for the six-month state of emergency next week, and called on opposition parties to support the measures. The initial declaration comes into effect on Sunday night and will last a fortnight. Sánchez said the drastic decision had been taken following scientific and expert advice, but that it would not remain in force a day longer than necessary. He said the government believed the situation could be brought under control without the imposition of the strict national lockdown that tamed the first wave of the virus in the spring and early summer. “The more we stay at home and the fewer the contacts we have, the more protected we’ll be, and the more we’ll be able to protect our loved ones and the health of everyone,” he said. Italy’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, said the country’s escalating infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals as he announced new restrictiions on Sunday. His government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums can stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been urged not to leave their homes except on work, medical or educational grounds. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. A €1.5-2m funding package is being considered to support businesses penalised by the latest measures. There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme rightwing group Forza Nuova also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew introduced on Friday. The number of coronavirus infections in the Netherlands rose by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, hitting a new record, according to data released by the National Institute for Public Health. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boyko Borissov, became the latest political figure to test positive for the coronavirus. “After two PCR tests, I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page on Sunday, adding that he had mild symptoms and would self-isolate at home. The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, tested positive for coronavirus on Friday, joining a list of leaders who have contracted the virus that includes the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, the US president, Donald Trump, and his Brazilian counterpart, Jair Bolsonaro.
4||F1: Hamilton surpasses Schumacher with victory at Portuguese Grand Prix – as it happenedSo Lewis Hamilton takes Michael Schumacher’s astonishing record of F1 race wins, and will leave Portugal offering little prospect of anyone getting near it for the forseeable future, or derailing his hopes of joining the German on seven world championship titles. Here’s the updated list … Most F1 race wins 1 Lewis Hamilton – 92 2 Michael Schumacher – 91 3 Sebastian Vettel – 53 4 Alain Prost – 51 5 Ayrton Senna – 41 6 Fernando Alonso – 32 7 Nigel Mansell – 31 8 Jackie Stewart – 27 =9 Jim Clark – 25 =9 Niki Lauda – 25 And finally, here’s Giles Richards’s report from the circuit. Thanks for joining us and enjoy the rest of your weekend. Bye! 1 Mercedes 435pts 2 Red Bull 226 3 Racing Point 126 4 McLaren 124 5 Renault 120 6 Ferrari 93 7 AlphaTauri 77 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 1 Lewis Hamilton 256pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 179 3 Max Verstappen 162 4 Daniel Ricciardo 80 5 Charles Leclerc 63 6 Sergio Pérez 75 7 Lando Norris 65 8 Alexander Albon 64 9 Pierre Gasly 63 10 Carlos Sainz 59 11 Lance Stroll 57 12 Esteban Ocon 40 13 Sebastian Vettel 18 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 The Mercedes team principal in conversation with Sky Sports F1 … 92 race wins? Who would have thought that when we embarked on the project in 2013. It’s an almost surreal number of wins. The talent, the ability … he’s just standing out. Victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve means Hamilton has now, incredibly, finished in the points at 45 races in a row. Testimony not just to his own skill but the dominance in reliability terms that Mercedes offer compared to their rivals. His last failure to finish was at the Austrian Grand Prix in July 2018. The race-winner says: Today was tough. It was all about temperatures, and with the setup I pre-empted it. We got some slipping at the start. Into turn seven I got a huge oversteer moment, so I backed off massively … I knew I could come back later on. On taking Schumacher’s wins record … It’s going to take some time for it to fully sink in. I’m still very much in race mode mentally … I can’t find the words at the moment. Speaking to Sky Sports F1, the second-placed driver says: The opening lap was pretty good. Some cars behind with the soft tyre had the upper hand. After that though, I just had no pace today. I don’t understand. I couldn’t go past [Hamilton] … I was hoping to go for the soft tyre in the end but I don’t think it made a difference. 1 Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Bottas (Mercedes) +25.592sec 3 Verstappen (Red Bull) +34.508 4 Leclerc (Ferrari) +65.312 5 Gasly (AlphaTauri) +1 lap 6 Sainz (McLaren) +1 lap 7 Pérez (Racing Point) +1 lap 8 Ocon (Renault) +1 lap 9 Ricciardo (Renault) +1 lap 10 Vettel (Ferrari) +1 lap 11 Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 12 Albon (Red Bull) +1 lap 13 Norris (McLaren) +1 lap 14 Russell (Williams) +1 lap 15 Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 16 Magnussen (Haas) +1 lap 17 Grosjean (Haas) +1 lap 18 Latifi (Williams) +2 laps 19 Kvyat (AlphaTauri) +2 laps DNF Stroll (Racing Point) After a poor start, the Mercedes driver recovered brilliantly to take Michael Schumacher’s record! Lap 66/66: Hamilton goes into the lap 25 seconds in the lead. Bottas second, with 7.5secs in hand. Verstappen remains safe in third. It will take tremendous late drama to stop that being the podium. Lap 65/66: Gasly goes fifth! He refuses to settle for sixth, swings wide and away, and suddenly Sainz has a whiff of blood too. Lap 62/66: Perez, on soft tyres, climbs all over Gasly as they fight for fifth. Very dicey stuff given the relative lack of grip so late in the race. Lap 61/66: Drizzle alert! It may take something more substantial than that to upset the applecart, but it’s a late additional reminder to the drivers to keep their focus. Hamilton is 22 seconds clear, with history beckoning. Lap 60/66: Hamilton’s sluggish start feels a long, long time ago, and the race on the whole has settled down into fairly standard my-car’s-faster-than-your-car fare. The only drivers from the top 10 in the standings not currently in a points place are Norris, Albon and Stroll – Sainz, Ocon and Vettel are the trio punching above their recent championship weights. Lap 58/66: Bodywork issues for Bottas, who has debris hanging off to the right of his cockpit. Hamilton, muscles perhaps lulled into a bit of complacency, reports a touch of cramp. Surely no late drama to derail a one-two for the Mercedes pair? Lap 56/66: TEN LAPS TO GO! Ocon, Ricciardo and Vettel are in a Renault-Renault-Ferrari ding-dong-ding for eighth place. Four-times drivers’ champion Vettel has had a fairly unenjoyable weekend but has made up a handful of places for a points position. Lap 55/66: Still pretty serene up front for Hamilton – he’s almost 16 seconds clear of Bottas. He’s lapped everyone down to fifth place now. Kvyat, down in 16th, has attracted a time penalty. Lap 54/66: Spoke too soon – Stroll is the first retirement. Since his third place at Monza, that’s four successive failures to start or finish for the Racing Point driver. Lap 52/66: Still no retirements, despite Stroll’s earlier efforts. Still serene progress for Hamilton up front. Russell has now taken Giovinazzi, and meanwhile Albon has had two warnings for track limits and is on notice. Lap 50/66: Russell, down in 14th, is having an enjoyably competitive race, clambering all over the back of Giovinazzi despite the best efforts of his Williams, which hops off the track as the car loses downforce. Lap 47/66: Bottas has stopped the rot of ebbing pace and pulls away a little more from Verstappen – the gap is now 8.2secs. Sainz relegates Ricciardo to ninth, while Raikkonen rounds out the points places. Oooh – impressive work in the pits from Red Bull … a superb 1.8secs stop for Albon. Lap 46/66: Twenty laps to go. Verstappen is shortly to be within seven seconds behind. As things stand, there’ll be no constructors’ title for Mercedes today, but Michael Schumacher is looking a lot like ending the day with the second-most all-time F1 race wins. Lap 45/66: The gap from Hamilton to Bottas is holding steady, but the one from Bottas to Verstappen … not so much. The Red Bull racer is now within eight seconds of second. Gasly takes Ricciardo for seventh place. Lap 43/66 Full standings 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Pérez 6 Ocon 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Sainz 10 Raikkonen 11 Albon 12 Vettel 13 Norris 14 Giovinazzi 15 Russell 16 Kvyat 17 Grosjean 18 Magnussen 19 Latifi 20 Stroll Lap 42/66: Fake news … Bottas comes in, and he takes the hard compound as well. He rejoins behind Hamilton and is losing even more pace. Gap is now over 11 seconds. Verstappen, on the medium compound, is still third, 10 seconds behind the Finn. Lap 41/66: Hamilton pits, takes the hard compound, and rejoins in second behind Bottas … who is considering switching to softs. Lap 39/66: Everyone below Ocon in sixth position has now been lapped, but still no retirements to report. Bottas is falling even further behind Hamilton – the gap is about to be 10 seconds. Lap 38/66: George Russell pits from seventh. An encouraging opening stint from the Williams driver. He comes back out in 14th. Hamilton has pulled out another second from Bottas – suddenly the lead is around nine seconds. Lap 35/66: After all that, Sainz retakes 10th moments later. Vettel is up to third after Leclerc pits – the Ferrari re-emerges in fourth. Bottas briefly cut the gap to Hamilton by half a second, but it’s holding steadyish around the eight-second mark. Lap 33/66: Sainz and Raikkonen are slugging it out for that 10th place. They trade the final points position multiple times before Raikkonen emerges, chest puffed out. “Cool the car,” reports Bottas’s dashboard. Uh oh. Could another retirement be on the way? Standings at halfway: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Leclerc 4 Verstappen 5 Ocon 6 Pérez 7 Russell 8 Ricciardo 9 Gasly 10 Raikkonen Lap 30/66: As half-race distance approaches, the gap from first to second expands to over eight seconds. Lap 29/66: Hamilton is moving beautifully, seven seconds clear of Bottas. Leclerc is 23 back, with Verstappen 21 further behind in fourth. Raikkonen is back in the points in 10th. However Stroll, in last, has attracted another penalty, this time for exceeding track limits. Lap 26/66: Leclerc, in third after Verstappen’s stop, is 16 seconds behind Bottas. Sainz pits to switch for mediums, to leave Gasly the final racer on soft tyres. With Vettel in the pits, that leaves Hamilton, Bottas, Leclerc, Gasly, Ocon, Russell, Giovinazzi and Magnussen are the only drivers without stops to their name. Lap 23/66: Five-second penalty for Stroll! That’s small comfort for Norris, who is now down in 19th after their collision. The wins record is very much on for Hamilton – 3.3secs now the lead. You may have noted incidentally that Williams’ George Russell, without a point this season, is currently running ninth. He’s never finished higher than 11th in a grand prix. Lap 22/66: Bottas is suddenly slipping to almost three seconds behind the new leader. Always fun to see a top 10 shaken up as stops start playing a part btw … Current standings: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Gasly 6 Sainz 7 Ocon 8 Vettel 9 Russell 10 Giovinazzi Lap 20/66: Hamilton’s quick progress has taken him right into Bottas’s slipstream, he makes use of DRS … to take the lead into turn one! A pretty regulation overtake and almost immediately he pulls a second out from his teammate. Lap 18/66: Lance Stroll spins while trying to go wide on the kerb to take Norris – suddenly he’s down in 11th, and there’s bits of front wing hanging off for the Racing Point driver. Some sweary testimony from Norris’s side of things on the radio. Lap 17/66: Sainz and Gasly are having a great little ding-dong for fifth. The McLaren driver shuts the door belligerently a couple of times to maintain his place. Eeeeeee Verstappen’s front right looks more than a little problematic. Lap 16/66: Hamilton sets the fastest lap of the race, despite his apparently dicky tyre. He’s been holding steady around 1.9secs behind his teammate. Lap 15/66: Ocon is in the points in 10th. Ricciardo is in and rejoins with medium tyres, while, intriguingly, Hamilton radios in to report discomfort with his left front tyre. Lap 13/66: Ricciardo more or less waves Stroll through into eighth. Raikkonen’s had enough of the soft compound and has rejoined in 20th on mediums. Verstappen is over nine seconds off the lead, 6.8secs behind Hamilton in second. Lap 12/66: Leclerc’s Ferrari is back up to where it started, taking fourth from Sainz. Vettel, incidentally, is down in 13th. Verstappen still third but he wants to pit. Lap 10/66: Those on soft tyres – Sainz, Verstappen, Norris, Raikkonen, Ricciardo, Gasly and Albon – will soon have a decision to make. They’re being outpaced by rivals on the medium compound. Gasly is up to sixth, while Stroll takes ninth from Raikkonen, whose incredible start suddenly feels like it’s from a different race weekend. Lap 9/66: Fastest lap of the race for Bottas. Leclarc takes Norris. Raikkonen’s brilliant start is fading, with Ricciardo now up to seventh, and Gasly also finds a way past. 1 Bottas 2 Hamilton 3 Verstappen 4 Sainz 5 Leclerc 6 Norris 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Raikkonen 10 Stroll Lap 8/66: Verstappen relegates Sainz to fourth, while Leclerc – also on the medium compound tyres – takes Raikkonen’s sixth spot. Hamilton is just shy of two seconds down from his teammate, with Verstappen a further 2.5secs back. Lap 6/66: Bottas retakes the lead and straight away pulls clear from Sainz. Verstappen’s taken Norris and is lapping quicker than anybody on the track. Into lap seven, and Hamilton eases past Sainz as well, as the leading drivers running medium tyres start to capitalise. Lap 3/66: Verstappen’s interesting start has eased into a battle for fourth with Norris. Raikkonen is just behind, having made up 10 places from the start. Lap 2/66: Sainz LEADS! Hard to blame Bottas there as all drivers take interesting approaches to find the desired line. Hamilton still third. Lap 1/66: Oh my days. Rain IS falling. Cars lunging wide at corners two and three. Raikkonen spitting fire while on the charge to sixth. Sainz took second from Hamilton … before … Hamilton swallowed up … and Verstappen hits Pérez! Wild start, with the Dutchman taking second from Bottas, while Hamilton is unable to lead the charge from pole and loses the lead. A few corners later Verstappen is off the track after catching the Racing Point … LEAVING BOTTAS IN FRONT! Mirror, signal, ’AV IT. Go, go, go! They’re off for the formation lap. And apparently that rain I mentioned, that was due to just about miss the race, might actually be about to play a part … Gasly says a few spots have just landed on his visor. Given the tyre fun teams endured yesterday, that could really shake things up. STAND BY YOUR BEDS … race incoming … In seven minutes’ time, brace yourselves for a dramatic start. Stroll and Verstappen collided at turn one in practice on Friday, and Sainz is wary that it could cause a hairy situation at the start of the race. Speaking to F1.com, the McLaren driver said: “That Turn 1, it’s asking for some accidents. The angle of the corner and how fast the guys on the outside will approach it – and how slow the guys on the inside [will be] and which angle we will approach it – it will be tricky! It’s going to be a bit of an experiment this track, and hopefully it can create some cool racing.” The drivers have just been out to make the now-familiar End Racism gesture, with Hamilton wearing a Black Lives Matter shirt. Some fans are present at the circuit this weekend, and the message was warmly received. Speaking to Sky Sports earlier, Hamilton displayed a different shirt bearing the hashtag: “#ENDSARS”, a protest against Nigeria’s infamous Special Anti-Robbery Squad. Some more context here … While the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve makes its F1 bow, it’s not completely alien to everyone on the grid and working at some of the teams. Within weeks of the circuit’s completion in 2008, Ferrari and McLaren spent two days testing that December. Renault, Toro Rosso (now AlphaTauri) and Williams also spent some tinker time there in early 2009. Ricciardo won the British F3 championship on the circuit in 2009, while Pérez competed in GP2 the same year. Albon, Leclerc, Russell and Stroll all competed in the Formula 3 European Championship. Asked about the venue earlier this weekend, Hamilton said: “Oh god – it’s hardcore. It’s a really, really hardcore circuit. There are places where you can’t see where you’re going. You’re looking at the sky for periods of time. Understanding your braking points, there are no references when you’re looking at the sky. It really is one of the most challenging circuits I’ve been too.” In the drivers’ standings, Verstappen closed the gap on Bottas in second at the Eifel GP. The Finn’s failure to finish from pole due to a power problem left the way open for 23-year-old to take second place. Hamilton has a mammoth 69pt cushion at the top. Drivers’ standings 1 Lewis Hamilton 230pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 161 3 Max Verstappen 147 4 Daniel Ricciardo 78 5 Sergio Pérez 68 6 Lando Norris 65 7 Alexander Albon 64 8 Charles Leclerc 63 9 Lance Stroll 57 10 Pierre Gasly 53 11 Carlos Sainz 51 12 Esteban Ocon 36 13 Sebastian Vettel 17 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 Another subplot today is that, mathematically, Mercedes could secure their seventh successive constructors’ title. It would require them to better Red Bull’s points haul from the weekend by 40 or more, which would require both Max Verstappen (who starts third) and Alexander Albon (starting sixth) to both have days to forget. Constructors’ standings 1 Mercedes 391pts 2 Red Bull 211 3 Racing Point 120 4 McLaren 116 5 Renault 114 6 Ferrari 80 7 AlphaTauri 67 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 The cars are on their way out on the pit lane, with the start 35 minutes away. On the first hot runs in Q3 Bottas led the Mercedes pair out and set the initial pace with a 1min 16.986sec, an advantage over Lewis Hamilton of four-hundredths of a second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was ultimately third, still in touch, a tenth back on the leaders. Their times, however, were down on earlier runs as the wind picked up in the hills of the Algarve and with the drivers still struggling for grip on the newly resurfaced track Mercedes offered both their men options for their final runs – what rubber to run and whether to make two or three laps. The latter was crucial – two laps carried less weight in fuel but three offered the possibility of the rubber working marginally better on the final run. Both Hamilton and Bottas switched from the soft to the medium tyre but Bottas chose a two-lap run and Hamilton the three. Hamilton had an extra lap to work his rubber, putting in two quick runs after his out lap. It proved inspired but it could not have been closer as the lead seesawed between them. Hamilton’s first flying circuit set the pace with a 1:16.934 only for Bottas to better it with a 1:16.754. But the Finn then had to peel off into the pits as Hamilton circled one more time, banking on having the very best of what grip there was at the death. It worked and he delivered as he checked out with a 1:16.652, a tenth clear of Bottas and two-tenths up on Verstappen. 1 Lewis Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Valtteri Bottas (Mercedes) 3 Max Verstappen (Red Bull) 4 Charles Leclerc (Ferrari) 5 Sergio Pérez (Racing Point) 6 Alexander Albon (Red Bull) 7 Carlos Sainz (McLaren) 8 Lando Norris (McLaren) 9 Pierre Gasly (AlphaTauri) 10 Daniel Ricciardo (Renault) 11 Esteban Ocon (Renault) 12 Lance Stroll (Racing Point) 13 Daniil Kvyat (AlphaTauri) 14 George Russell (Williams) 15 Sebastian Vettel (Ferrari) 16 Kimi Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) 17 Antonio Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) 18 Romain Grosjean (Haas) 19 Kevin Magnussen (Haas) 20 Nicholas Latifi (Williams) Before we get to a qualifying catch-up, an unsettling story from yesterday that has affected things behind the scenes in Portimão … Vitaly Petrov, the Russian former driver who was a steward at the Portuguese Grand Prix, has stepped down after his father, Alexandr, was shot dead at his home in Vyborg, 80 miles north-west of St Petersburg. He will be replaced by Bruno Correia, the Formula E safety car driver. On Thursday Petrov had been criticised for being used in the stewarding role by Lewis Hamilton in response to the negative comments Petrov had made on the British driver’s anti-racist stance this season. The FIA stated Petrov had stepped down from his position after “a personal bereavement” and Russian media is reporting the incident as an assassination. Petrov has returned home to Russia. Happy Sunday! Welcome to lap-by-lap coverage from the first Portuguese Grand Prix since 1996. It’s already been a dramatic weekend at the 12-year-old Autódromo Internacional do Algarve, making its F1 bow, with drivers frustrated by a broken drain cover that halted final practice and delayed qualifying, and then a brilliantly tight qualifying session (of which more in a sec). It’s all led up to a Mercedes one-two on the grid, fronted by defending champion and runaway 2020 drivers’ standings leader Lewis Hamilton, who has been racking up records in recent times, and today has his first opportunity at a big ’un, outright. Michael Schumacher overhauled Alain Prost for race wins at the 2001 Belgian Grand Prix, when he took his 52nd victory. Between 2001 and 2006 he added 39 more, leaving him light years ahead of everyone else. In recent times, Hamilton has reeled his haul in and two weeks ago at Nürburgring he joined Schumacher on 91. Given the British driver’s dominance in recent seasons, and his team’s superiority over the chasing pack, it’s a a question of when rather than if he will make the record all his own. His teammate Valtteri Bottas starts second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen third and Charles Leclerc an encouraging fourth for Ferrari. Rain is forecast to arrive at Portimão in a few hours, but as things stand we should just about get a full race in bright, cloudy conditions. With BST ending overnight in the UK, sending a nation into its six-monthly fart about to find instructions of how to change the clocks in their cars and on their ovens, the race starts at 1.10pm GMT.
17||Fijian-born British soldiers lose latest legal fight to stay in UKEight Fijian-born soldiers who served with the British army in Iraq and Afghanistan have been rebuffed in their initial attempt to seek a judicial review of the handling of their immigration claims. A high court judge said the Commonwealth veterans were “out of time” – but the veterans are able to demand a fuller oral hearing in December, where they will make a final attempt to win the right to remain in the UK. The British army actively recruits from Fiji and those who serve more than four years have the right to remain in the UK if they can afford the application fees. But the eight say that because of systemic administrative errors they were not properly informed of their rights when discharged. Esita Tuimanu, from Commonwealth Neglected Veterans, said the eight were victims of “institutional discrimination” from the Home Office and Ministry of Defence and they would “keep on fighting till the end”. The veterans and their lawyers say they intend to run a public campaign in the run-up to the final high court hearing, in the hope that ministers will allow them to remain in the UK without paying the usual application fees of £2,389 per person. One of those joining the campaign is Tuimanu’s 10-year-old daughter, Gracie-Ann Kelly, whose father, Etuate Bakaniceva, served in Iraq and Afghanistan. She has started making badges in support of the veterans and posting videos about her efforts on YouTube. “They must not be forgotten for their service to the Queen,” she said. She was born a British citizen because of her father’s service but has been unable to see him for the past six years, partly because of the immigration complications that followed after he had served in the army. Bakaniceva was prematurely discharged in 2010, a year after he had been injured in an RPG attack in Musa Qala, Afghanistan, that killed another British soldier, Cpl Danny Nield. Bakaniceva could not afford the cost of applying for citizenship for both him and his wife after he was discharged, and was suffering from tinnitus and PTSD. Struggling with his condition, he eventually returned to Fiji to get help. But Tuimanu said that because he had been away for more than two years he had to reapply to reenter the UK and see Gracie-Ann or obtain treatment. His medical and citizenship problems “tore his family apart”, she said, and his young daughter does not want others in a similar position to suffer in the same way. “Gracie-Ann is fighting for justice for these veterans because she wants to see the Commonwealth eight veterans get to have the peace and luxury to family and private life. This was a privilege she never had the opportunity to enjoy,” Tuimanu added. Most of the eight claimants have not been named, but one, Taitusi Ratucaucau, is facing a £50,000 NHS bill after a brain tumour, with the hospital waiting to see if his immigration status is being resolved before levying any bill. Costs of £12,000 were awarded against the veterans, who have been crowdfunding their campaign, by Mr Justice Lane following the initial ruling. As he ruled against the claimants, the judge accused them of “an inappropriate attempt to mount a legal challenge in respect of what is in reality a campaign to change the law”. A government spokesperson said: “The Home Office and Ministry of Defence work closely with our foreign and Commonwealth recruits to make sure they are aware of how they and their families can attain settlement in the UK, and the costs involved.” “Whilst legal proceedings are ongoing, we cannot comment on these cases.” The lawyers for the claimants, led by Anthony Metzer QC from Goldsmith Chambers and Vinita Templeton from Duncan Lewis Solicitors said they would “continue to pursue legal redress vigorously for what we consider to be a just and principled cause”. The final oral hearing is scheduled for 1 December.
4||Lewis Hamilton wins Portuguese GP to break Michael Schumacher's F1 recordOnly time will tell how long Lewis Hamilton’s extraordinary success story will run. At this moment, however, it is enough to acknowledge the world champion as he is now – in winning the Portuguese Grand Prix to become the most successful Formula One driver in history. A sportsman at the peak of his powers who has delivered now so consistently, for so long, that like the true greats he is almost making the extraordinary look commonplace. Which is to do him a disservice, everything about his victory summed up why he is one of the greatest of all time. His touch was exquisite, the win emphatic. As he crossed the line at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve to take his 92nd win, one more than Michael Schumacher, his race engineer Peter Bonnington summed it up succinctly. “What a race,” he said. “You are rewriting the history books.” Which he is. Schumacher’s records were thought untouchable. Hamilton has them all in his grasp and will likely shatter them to the winds. He already holds most pole positions and now race wins. This season he will match Schumacher’s seven titles and there is every chance next season surpass that milestone too. Yet much as this was a recognition of the accumulation of success, a numbers game, it was also a moment of sheer emotion for the world champion too. Two weeks ago, on equalling Schumacher at the Nürburgring, he had been moved, humbled, he said. Here in Portimao there was a sense of giving free rein to revel in the joy of having achieved something no other driver has ever managed. Having climbed from his car he went to enjoy a long embrace with his father Anthony, who had been so vital in supporting Hamilton’s career when he began racing. There were tears in his father’s eyes as his son stood atop the podium, doubtless made all the more poignant now the pair have reconciled after their once close relationship broke down in 2010. For Hamilton himself there was unalloyed joy and a distinct sense that this was a moment he would allow himself to savour. He deserves it and the recognition for it. It had been his remarkable judgment that led him to run an extra lap in qualifying that helped ensure he took pole. It is an almost other-worldly talent possessed by only a tiny number of sportspeople. He has combined this with an enormous natural talent and an intimidating ability to turn in performances that are so often flawless. In Portugal it was his touch in managing his tyres such that he had pace a class apart from his rivals. Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas, who was second, admitted he could do nothing to challenge the world champion. Indeed if there are chinks in Hamilton’s armour he guards them well. Physically and mentally the British driver presents a rock against which the waves of the opposition crash with futility. It has taken him 262 races to reach his remarkable 92 wins, having scored his first at Canada in his debut season in 2007. Now 35 years old, his record since then has been hugely impressive. He is the only driver to have taken a win in every season in which he has competed, now stretching across 14 years in F1. Since Mercedes proved so strong when the turbo-hybrid era began, he has been ruthless in taking every opportunity and returning an extraordinary success rate. He has 71 victories for the team and bar 2017 when he took the title with nine wins has scored 10 or more a season every year since 2014. It is relentless success that has perhaps made it sometimes feel almost as a foregone conclusion yet it is anything but. This trait, the repeated inch-perfect execution across circuits, conditions and machinery season-in, season-out is what other drivers recognise as making him so hard to beat. Max Verstappen, who was third for Red Bull, acknowledged it. “Everybody knows he is very quick but what has been his strong point is he is very consistent and very rarely makes a mistake,” Verstappen said. “That’s why he got to these numbers so quickly, it’s very impressive.” Hamilton did so in Portugal with a masterclass that epitomised Verstappen’s assessment. Recovering from a testing start when he lost places from pole on cold rubber, the world champion held his composure and put his head down to then manage his tyres to perfection. The track surface lacked grip and was a challenge but Hamilton had its measure, exploiting the additional pace he was able to eke out from not overworking his rubber to retake and then hold a significant lead over Bottas. Portugal has not hosted a grand prix for 24 years since 1996 when Jacques Villeneuve won at Estoril, in doing so making a memorable pass on Schumacher. This time Hamilton showed the same fine race management the great German so often exhibited. Indeed, he was on rails through the undulations of the hills of the Algarve’s rollercoaster. Once he had ensured he had put less wear into his tyres and regained his lead, he never looked back, taking the flag 25 seconds from Bottas. More is surely to come, this moment a special one but Hamilton’s entry in the history books is far from finalised yet. Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc an excellent fourth and there was a superb fifth for Pierre Gasly in the AlphaTauri. Carlos Sainz was sixth for McLaren, Sergio Pérez seventh for Racing Point. Renault’s Esteban Ocon and Daniel Ricciardo were in eighth and ninth and Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel in 10th.
18||Nightmare on asylum street: His House, the horror film about the migrant crisisThere has never been a whole lot of overlap between the social realism of Ken Loach and the twisted horror of A Nightmare on Elm Street. But that’s about to change with the release of His House, a strikingly original debut from the gifted British film-maker Remi Weekes, which was snapped up by Netflix at Sundance earlier this year for an eight-figure sum. His House follows a South Sudanese couple – Wunmi Mosaku as Rial, Sope Dirisu as her husband Bol – who are dumped on a bleak Essex housing estate while their appeal for asylum is considered. Their temporary home is blighted by peeling walls, dodgy wiring and hostile neighbours. Worse than that, it’s haunted. If they flee, Rial and Bol risk deportation for violating bail. Stay, however, and they will need to do battle with the wall-dwelling creatures, which appear to have followed them from Africa. This isn’t the first film to use the conventions of horror to address this modern crisis: Mati Diop’s Atlantics imagined the women of Dakar being possessed by the ghosts of migrants who had perished at sea. But it is undoubtedly the scariest. His House thrives on two types of threat, the social and the supernatural, each intensifying the other. Horror audiences will be accustomed to figures lurking in the back of the frame – it’s just that, in this case, there’s no knowing whether it will be a scuttling monster, a meddling immigration official, or a lout. When the idea of a horror story involving asylum-seekers was first proposed to Weekes by producers, he was unsure if he had any personal connection to the material. Although his grandparents are from St Lucia and Sierra Leone, he was raised in London. “But once I thought about it, I was reminded of how I felt growing up in this country,” says the 33-year-old, sitting in his home with a bicycle leaning against the wall behind him. “You’re torn. There’s one side that wants to assimilate and be accepted by a culture that is ambivalent toward you. Then another side wants to reject that, to be proud of where you’re from, to rebel against the norms. That’s always been in the background of conversations with my family and friends: which parts of us are English and which are from other places?” The theme of tribalism underpins His House. Back in South Sudan, Rial scarred herself with the markings of two warring factions to improve her chances of survival. Now in Britain, she finds it harder to move between tribes. In the film’s most provocative scene, she approaches a group of black British teenagers for help, only to receive a chastening reminder that skin colour is no guarantee of solidarity. Weekes consulted with Waging Peace, an organisation that opposes genocide and human rights violations in Sudan, and Right to Remain, which helps people navigate the UK asylum system. This was to ensure a realistic grounding for a story that takes flight into the nightmarish. “It was important to know how asylum seekers are treated,” he says. “The draconian rules, the uncaring bureaucracy, it all shows this lack of empathy.” Physical displacement and disorientation become, in the film, a breeding ground for internal horrors. “Being effectively under house arrest, you can really take a battering psychologically. All the spooky stuff that happens in the house I wanted to treat as tangible. Whether it’s real or not doesn’t matter – it feels real to the characters.” Weekes first made his name as one half of the partnership Tell No One, turning out playful, effects-driven video shorts with his childhood friend Luke White. The duo’s name suggests the sinister or the secretive, though nothing could be further from the truth. “We just wanted to put stuff online without telling anyone,” says Weekes. “It was more a reference to our psychology, to not letting ego get in the way. We’re very understated people. Get us in a meeting and we go quiet.” Posting their shorts on YouTube and Vimeo, the pair attracted commissions from fashion and advertising. Those films have an enchanting simplicity: in one, coloured umbrellas pop open like vibrant floral blooms, while another shows arms layered digitally on screen to create a tree of limbs. His House also features a multiple-arm scene, as does Weekes’s Channel 4 horror short Tickle Monster. Does he have a fear of limbs? “I don’t think so,” he says with a sheepish giggle. “Tickle Monster came from a conversation I had with a friend. He was dating someone who kept tickling him. Even though he hated it and it made him feel awful, his laughter seemed to the other person like some weird form of consent. I thought, ‘That could be a horror film.’” He has also encountered another kind of monster: Harvey Weinstein, who was desperate to get his paws on His House, back when it was a hot script doing the rounds. “When I turned the Weinstein Company down, they got upset and tried to sue me. They’re very aggressive about getting the rights to films. If it wasn’t for the #MeToo movement that blew up the company, they probably would have had their way.” Now that’s a scary story. • His House is in selected cinemas now, and on Netflix from 30 October.
19||Girlhood: Girlhood review – breezy, 90s-tinged electropopSinger-songwriter Tessa Cavanna and producer Christian Pinchbeck first crossed paths in 2017. He heard her singing, so the story goes, when she walked past his narrowboat in east London and was so impressed he invited her to hop on board and record in his studio. The resulting project, Girlhood, marry sweet, soaring vocals with iPad instrumentals, channelling the expansive spirit of the Avalanches and the gospel-tinged beats of Moby. In other words, at times they can sound anachronistic. It’s the older tracks, such as Bad Decisions and Milk &amp; Honey, that really shine on their self-titled debut – the former with its taut percussion and uplifting vocals; the latter all spiralling melodies and trip-hoppy scratches. Queendom, meanwhile, is smooth and soft, while Fever Sweat recalls the atmospheric warmth of producer Flume, and Keep On and The Love I Need possess a housey euphoria. So, while there’s nothing especially fresh-sounding here, Girlhood is a solid set of breezy electropop with a hint of future possibilities.
5||Sudan is being rewarded for its revolution with blackmailFew countries in the world have been subjected to as many punitive sanctions as Sudan. After the deposed president Omar al-Bashir came to power in a military coup in 1989, the country was gradually cut off from the rest of the world, with the upholding of human rights the rationale. Economic sanctions were followed by a spot on the state sponsors of terrorism list, and then by the indictment of Bashir by the international criminal court. At some point it became hard to keep up with all the legislation, punishment for the reckless harbouring of terrorists in the 1990s, and the brutal slaughter of marginalised ethnic groups in areas such as Darfur. There were sanctions on individuals, a US travel ban on all Sudanese-born people, acts of Congress and lawsuits by members 9/11 victims’ families. The country became a sort of human rights cause celebre, attracting Hollywood stars and a vast network of lobbyists in Washington who, whenever it seemed like there might be a relaxation of sanctions, campaigned fiercely to keep them going. Bashir was a president over whom it was easy to reach consensus. Here was an African brute in the classic mould, a military man who turned on his own people, and a sharia-wielding terror sponsor to boot. But it was not Bashir or his government that suffered. He remained in power, if anything getting stronger. He and his vast network of cronies had the means to circumvent sanctions, finding ways to do business and enrich themselves. The Sudanese people, those whom the global human rights community was ostensibly supporting, struggled in isolation, in poverty and with a lack of access to basic healthcare. Eventually, interest in Sudan faded. The war on terror ran out of steam after the killing of Osama bin Laden and the weakening of al-Qaida, and the moral outrage over Darfur found catharsis via war crimes indictments. The international community moved on, but all the sanctions stayed. The world remembered Sudan last year, when an epic revolution overthrew Bashir at long last. His removal came at a heavy cost. Many were killed in confrontations with security forces, and the economy, already on the brink, was pushed over the edge. But it was worth it. The feeling on the streets was that the blood, the economic instability, the political jeopardy were all worth it if the Sudanese were to have a shot at democracy and dignity. The United States, the Sudanese people’s alleged white knight, took one look at the success of the Sudanese revolution and decided to blackmail the country in return for taking it off the state sponsors of terror list, reintegrating it into the international financial and trade system, and providing aid. Last week Donald Trump made clear that the price tag would be $335m (£256m) of compensation for terrorist attacks that took place under the old regime. Alongside this, the US is forcing the fragile new interim government, already struggling to maintain its mandate amid worsening economic conditions and the plotting of Bashir loyalists, to recognise Israel and normalise relations – a move that is hugely unpopular with the Sudanese people, and about which they weren’t consulted. Even for those of us in Sudan who had given up expecting more, this naked exploitation of a country brought to its knees but still crawling to freedom is hard to stomach. The choice for the Sudanese government is to risk economic collapse and a resurgence of the old forces – essentially the overturning of the revolution – or to accept all of the US’s conditions. That is no choice at all. Trump crowed about the deal, tweeting that Sudan had “agreed” to pay the $335m, and that this was “justice” for the American people. The agreement to normalise relations with Israel was announced last week, and has already triggered anger domestically. The condition seems to have been thrown in just because the US could, and amounts to bullying a country with which Israel is not likely to have many trade or diplomatic ties anyway. It’s about building numbers and momentum in the Arab world so that more valuable regional assets, such as Saudi Arabia, can be convinced to normalise relations too. That is all Sudan is – a weak pawn. It’s a case study in how the moral framework within which human rights law is drafted and enforced is designed not to bring about regime change and the safety and security of people suffering under despots, but to leverage the victimhood of those people to advance other interests. The first of these interests is self-image. Western powers can maintain their charade of virtue by coming down hard on poor countries that have little strategic importance. The second is a need to divert scrutiny away from allies, such as Saudi Arabia, that have never been in the dock to answer questions about sponsorship of terrorism or the quashing of internal dissent. Who has attempted to hold Riyadh accountable for its palming off of Osama bin Laden to other countries to wreak havoc, its exportation of dangerous hardline Islamism? Indignation, sanctions, censure and condemnation are instead reserved for countries such as Sudan. Even with these burdens, the Sudanese people managed to liberate themselves from Bashir’s grip. But the injustice they have suffered was compounded by the very system that was supposed to help them: the west’s hypocritical, counterproductive human rights regime. • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist
15||The Knife of Dawn/New Dark Age review - isolation meditationsThe goodwill that inevitably greeted this double bill – a proper staged event with live music! – couldn’t quite hide the disappointment with the first half. Hannah Kendall’s opera The Knife of Dawn, originally staged at the Roundhouse in 2016, is a rather laboured and didactic piece that succeeds only in informing us about a largely forgotten moment in colonial history. It follows the aftermath of the 1953 elections in British Guiana, the first under universal suffrage, which were overturned by British authorities. The story is told from the point of view of the Guyanese poet Martin Carter, one of the many members of the victorious People’s Progressive Party who was jailed. He is on hunger strike and is starting to hallucinate, haunted by offscreen female voices – his wife and daughter, other political prisoners, long-dead Guyanese slaves – who drive him to the brink of madness. Despite a fine performance by baritone Peter Braithwaite, the monologue lacks any dramatic momentum, mistaking showing for telling. We are told that Carter is a great poet, which he was, but it’s not evident from Tessa McWatt’s excruciating libretto, which spends an hour outlining the historical background and ends just as it starts to explore any artistic and emotional ramifications. Much more effective is the second half of the bill, New Dark Age, in which existing compositions by three leading contemporary composers are reworked into a 10-part song suite that narrates post-pandemic life, accompanied by Grant Gee’s artful slow-motion film. The only original piece is Anna Meredith’s swooping Fly By Night, but even the compositions that are more than five years old, such as Missy Mazzoli’s quartet from Vespers for a New Dark Age, setting poems by Matthew Zapruder, seem to have an eerie post-Covid resonance. The shimmering Vivaldi-meets-Philip Glass textures of Meredith’s Stoop seem to sum up a locked-down population straining to enjoy the bright sunshine of April 2020, while Anna Thorvaldsdottir’s two choral pieces – a blend of austere medieval plainsong and holy minimalism – serve as a threnody for the victims of the pandemic. By the end of the suite, with Meredith’s bleak a cappella Heal You (text by Philip Ridley) and her icy, discordant, malfunctioning harpsichord-and-strings piece Low Light, the bemasked audience at the ROH seemed emotionally prepared for a second lockdown. • Available to stream on demand to ticket holders until 23 November.
20||Serco staff told to wear masks in courts and cells after complaintsEscort and security officers working for Serco and other firms have been told to wear face masks in courts and cells amid complaints about inadequate social distancing in the criminal justice system. The abrupt policy change, which comes into force on Monday, has been imposed by the Ministry of Justice on the outsourcing company, which also runs a widely criticised contact-tracing service for the government that is supposed to limit the spread of coronavirus infections. The MoJ instruction also requires all security staff, including those working for GeoAmey, another outsourcing company that carries out similar prisoner guarding and transporting duties, to wear masks when on duty. Until recently it was assumed by the court service that work inside courtrooms was sufficiently socially distanced or individuals adequately protected by perspex screens. But the rapid rise in infections during the pandemic’s second wave has forced a review of health safety measures. The Guardian has been told of one incident in a criminal trial where a judge requested security staff to put on face masks but they declined to do so. Concern has been expressed by lawyers and other court staff over the more relaxed regulations inside court buildings compared with compulsory mask wearing in shops. Last week, the barrister Sarah Forshaw QC tweeted that mask-wearing for security at court would be desirable. Another barrister tweeted: “Well, none of us could have predicted this. Also, why are GeoAmey etc not telling the cells staff to wear masks or providing PPE? In every cell area I’ve been in during the pandemic, gaolers have been maskless.” Concerns have also been expressed by Intermediaries for Justice, the experts who sit alongside vulnerable witnesses and defendants in court, helping them to understand and communicate during proceedings. Catherine O’Neill, the chair of the charity, said: “Our members are concerned that dock officers are not wearing masks. The conference rooms are extremely small and intermediaries throughout the country are reporting concerns that when they visit the custody suites there’s poor ventilation but no one seems to be wearing PPE [personal protective equipment]. “I have seen barristers wearing visors and masks. One judge used gloves. But the dock officers in Serco uniforms were not wearing any PPE. Serco is running the test-and-trace contract. I cannot understand why they do not have a duty to look after their employees and to the prisoners who will be the last to have a voice. “After being in court the other day where no masks were worn in the building, it felt like a different world when I stepped outside and all the cafes and shops were compliant and doing their best.” A Serco spokesman said: “As of 21 October [the date the MoJ letter arrived], all Serco officers have been mandated to wear PPE face masks by our customer, the MoJ. “Prior to that date, safe systems of work were in place which were endorsed by the MOJ, where a risk assessment process determined whether a mask was to be worn; for instance for confirmed or suspected Covid cases only or where the 2-metre rule could not be met. “All safe systems of work and risk assessments were aligned to PHE guidance; this has clearly now changed to reflect more stringent measures.” A spokesperson for GeoAmey said: “With limited exceptions, from Monday 26 October it will be mandatory for GeoAmey employees to wear GeoAmey-provided medical-grade PPE face masks when entering an HMPPS establishment, within the court custody suite and associated docks, and aboard vehicles and in offices where social distancing cannot be maintained.” An MoJ spokesperson said: “All custody and security staff are required to wear masks where social distancing is not possible. Following consultation with partners this will be extended to all circumstances.” Judges are understood to have been given discretion to decide whether security staff need to wear them while sitting in the dock alongside a defendant.
19||Royal Northern Sinfonia/Cottis – buoyant return with Mozart and an intriguing rarityThe autumn season has started late for the Royal Northern Sinfonia – as it has for almost every British orchestra. But this weekend it embarked on an initial seven-week series of concerts in its home auditorium at Sage Gateshead, with a socially distanced audience of around 300 in the concert hall, and an online audience watching via a livestream. The programmes are a nice mix of reassuringly well-known pieces with rarities and new works. In the opening concert, which was conducted by Jessica Cottis, the familiar feelgood music was by Mozart – the overture to The Marriage of Figaro and the 39th symphony, K549, both given suitably buoyant, if slightly routine performances, with just the occasional moment when the ensemble was not quite as precise as it might have been had the orchestra been playing regularly together for the last seven months. If a short piece, Strum, by the composer-performer Jessie Montgomerie seemed a disappointingly routine workout for strings here, never conveying the freshness and energy reported for her music, the real collector’s item was Jean Françaix’s Double Bass Concerto, with the RNS’s newly appointed principal double bass, Philip Nelson, as the soloist. Françaix wrote concertos and chamber music for a huge range of instruments, but unlike Hindemith, another neoclassicist who was equally prolific, he generally did so with a sense of humour. The gruff little march with which the double bass concerto opens is surely tongue-in-cheek, and the lyrical episodes in the later movements seem to have been inserted just to take the solo instrument as far out of its comfort zone as possible, though Nelson obviously relished every opportunity to put it in the spotlight. The home stream didn’t run as smoothly as those we’ve seen from other orchestras and halls – just teething problems, I’m sure. But it’s a shame the concerts are only being made available online live, and those who pay to watch them are unable to view them again, while others who couldn’t make the live cast, can’t catch up with them later. • Sage Live 2020 continues until December.
11||NHS denies elderly people were refused care during early CovidNHS bosses have denied claims that thousands of frail elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic in order to stop the health service being overrun. NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. “The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts. It was older patients who disproportionately received NHS care. Over two-thirds of our Covid-19 inpatients were aged over 65. “The NHS repeatedly instructed staff that no patient who could benefit from treatment should be denied it and, thanks to people following government guidance, even at the height of the pandemic there was no shortage of ventilators and intensive care.” The newspaper claimed the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. The Sunday Times said its claims were the result of a three-month investigation that involved speaking to more than 50 sources in the NHS and the government about the health service’s response to the pandemic. As a result, they decided to stop “large numbers of elderly and frail patients” going into hospital in the first place, so that intensive care wards would not be overwhelmed, which meant that many patients died of Covid-19 at home or in care homes, it added. Ambulance crews and hospitals were told to be more selective than usual about who should be admitted, “with specific instructions to exclude many elderly people”, the Sunday Times said. Dr Alison Pittard, the dean of the Faculty of Intensive Care Medicine, said patients had not been denied care. “Throughout the first wave of Covid-19 the NHS did not run out of critical care capacity, which remained available to everybody who would benefit from it,” she said. The Sunday Times pointed out that of the 59,000 excess deaths in England and Wales in the first six months of the pandemic, only 8,000 occurred in hospital, while 26,000 were in care homes and 25,000 in private homes. It also claimed that an “age-based frailty score” commissioned by Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, played a key role in the alleged policy of denying care. A spokesperson for the Intensive Care Society said, however, that while an expert group did undertake work on developing guidance for doctors on which patients should be prioritised for admission, it was “subsequently stood down on 28/29 March 2020, with Department of Health and Social Care or NHS implementation, after a review of capacity and pandemic trajectory”. NHS sources are adamant that “NHS hospitals did not run out of intensive care beds, so there was never a need to refuse anyone treatment on the basis of NHS capacity. There was categorically no blanket national decision to refuse care to any group of people, including on the basis of their age”.
8||Scottish Tory leader: I still can't see why Dominic Cummings did not resignThe Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross, has reignited the row over Dominic Cummings’ Durham lockdown trip by indicating that he could not see how the prime minister’s most senior aide did not resign over the incident. Ross, who quit his junior ministerial post in protest at Cummings’ 264-mile journey from London at the height of Covid-19 restrictions, said the actions of Boris Johnson’s adviser were “indefensible” and that they had undermined the government. In a fresh intervention unlikely to prove popular in Number 10, Ross stood by his decision to stand down and suggested Cummings should have followed his lead. Pressed on whether he believed Cummings should have resigned over the affair, Ross told the Guardian: “If someone who was not involved at all resigned then, yes, I don’t see how the individual themselves couldn’t take that position. I was so far removed from the actions yet even that far away from it I felt what he did was indefensible and that’s why I would assume, or I feel, he would take the same decision but he didn’t.” Ross was particularly unconvinced by Cummings’ excuse that he had gone on a separate drive with his family while he was in Durham to nearby Barnard Castle, apparently to test his eyesight. “I felt the only way I could be true to myself was to resign from government and to express my opposition to what he’d done, particularly the driving 60 miles to test your eyesight.” Noting his wife’s job as a police officer, he said: “I did think, how would she manage if she pulled someone over for driving issues and they used the defence that they were testing their eyesight?” He has no regrets: “Several months on, I still believe it was the right decision to take.” Rather than setting back the 37-year-old MP’s career, within months of his resignation in May from the role as parliamentary undersecretary of state for Scotland he was thrust back into the frontline of politics when he became the Conservatives’ leader north of the border uncontested. He has since set about reinvigorating the Scottish Conservatives’ approach as the SNP renews its calls for a second independence referendum. Nicola Sturgeon’s party is riding high in the polls ahead of next year’s Holyrood election. Ross, who has a seat in Westminster but not in the Scottish parliament, appointed Ruth Davidson, who held his job until 2019, to be his party’s leader in Holyrood. Davidson has been no fan of Johnson and any apparent attempt by Ross to differentiate himself from No 10 could play well with the home crowd, given the prime minister’s popularity in Scotland is questionable. In his conference speech this month, he called on his party to end the “defeatism and disinterest” over the country’s future in the UK, arguing that an SNP majority in next year’s Holyrood election was not inevitable. Reflecting on the speech, Ross said he had wanted to “make it very clear that it’s in our name that we are both Conservative and unionists”. “I said in my speech it’s in our DNA and if you don’t believe in strengthening the union and the bonds that we share across four nations of the United Kingdom then you’ve got to reflect on if you’re in the right party or not,” he said. “The feedback I’ve had back since is people at various levels in the party think it is right that that message was delivered just now because the defeatism and disinterest only benefits the SNP and their agenda to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK and I want to do everything I can to stop that.” It comes as a poll this month put backing for independence at a record high of 58%. The SNP constitution secretary, Mike Russell, indicated on Thursday that Scotland could face a second independence referendum as early as next year, following the victory for the Better Together camp in 2014. Ross called Russell’s comments “deeply disappointing but sadly predictable”. Reports also emerged this month about a leaked memo from a political consultancy firm given to senior Tories which said continuing to dismiss calls for another independence referendum could be counterproductive. It proposed potentially handing more power to Edinburgh. Ross said he did not receive the memo, but dismissed the suggestion of more powers going to Holyrood, suggesting the current ones should be used to better effect. On Sturgeon’s handling of the pandemic, Ross highlighted her communication skills in what some might characterise as a subtle dig at Downing Street. “No one would doubt that Nicola Sturgeon is a highly effective communicator but when you look at the response to the pandemic in Scotland, and across the UK, it has been largely similar,” he said. “So people who suggest there has somehow been a different approach to dealing with coronavirus in Scotland to the rest of the UK are simply unable to point to anything substantial that has been done differently. But there has been a difference in terms of the communication.” Asked about Downing Street following Scotland in U-turning over the summer on exam results, Ross said: “From students receiving their exam results in Scotland, the U-turn took longer by the Scottish government than it did by the UK government. Now I think the UK government should have seen what happened in Scotland and changed the decision before exam results south of the border were even delivered … but the fact is that it took the Scottish government longer.”
14||‘We had nudity on the greens!’ The battle over Britain’s golf coursesHollingbury golf course is a big splodge of green bleeding into Brighton’s grey urban sprawl. For more than a century, its 18 holes have risen above the seaside city towards the ruins of an iron age hillfort, which is now enclosed by holes nine, 12, 13, and 14. From Hollingbury’s highest point, it is possible to look west on a clear day and see the hills of the Isle of Wight. As housing has spread around the course, which is owned by the council, so has tension between golfers and walkers, who are permitted to cut across it on a network of footpaths and old drovers’ tracks. Relations seem calm on the autumn day I visit, but I gather “Fore!” is not the only four-letter exclamation to have bounced along the manicured fairways. In late March, the awkward relationship flipped on its head when a lockdown ban on golf coincided with a yearning for green space among Britain’s confined households. A national campaign, supported by the Brighton MP Caroline Lucas, called for golf courses to be opened to the public to relieve crowded parks. At Hollingbury, which has no fences and is part of the South Downs national park, residents responded like calves put out to pasture. They cartwheeled on the fairways and picnicked on the greens. “It was like being in the mountains up here, with that open-space feeling that makes you feel immediately better,” says Michaela Spryanova, an office administrator who lives just beyond the course’s western edge. Rachel Henson, an artist and translator, came here every day, basking in the spring sunshine and sweeping views over Brighton and the Channel. She taught her daughter to ride a bike on the sloping fairway of hole 10. “We learned all the common birdsong together,” she says. But then, in June, golf was permitted once more – and golfers reclaimed the course. “We knew it was coming, but it was a terrible shock,” Henson says as we walk with Spryanova from their children’s school after the morning drop-off. We stroll up towards the hillfort on one of the old paths to which non-golfers are again confined. “It depressed me so much I couldn’t come up here for a while,” Henson adds. The struggle for space at Hollingbury – and a second council-owned golf course two miles to the west at Waterhall – reflects a wider debate about conservation, ecology and democratic access to green space. As a pandemic triggers a revolt on many of Britain’s fairways, it poses a vexed question: is it time we opened up all golf courses to the public for good? One of the joys and challenges of golf is that it requires a lot of nice green space. How much space is disputed. A common claim that Britain’s golf courses occupy more land than housing is based on dodgy estimates, but it is a lot of land. The American writer Malcolm Gladwell once considered the scale of gated golf courses in Los Angeles, a city of few parks. He calculated that if you gave each player on a basketball court the space a golfer commands, the court would cover 12 hectares (30 acres); the hoops would be more than 400 metres apart. “They’d have to play on motorcycles,” Gladwell wrote. Yet this calculation depends on a course being busy. Not all courses are busy. Steve Garrioch, who has been the captain at Hollingbury since 2009, tells me he was one of significantly more than 500 members when he joined 20 years ago. There are now 122 members and about twice as many season-ticket holders. Garrioch, a leather merchant, blames an oversupply: Hollingbury is one of six courses within five miles of Brighton Palace pier in a city of about 300,000 people. But its decline is not unusual. According to a participation report by KPMG late last year, membership of golf courses in Great Britain dropped to a low of slightly more than 850,000, down almost 20,000 in a year. In Scotland, membership has dropped by 14% since 2014. Yet the number of courses – more than 2,000 – is relatively stable. Hollingbury, which opened in 1908, is not exclusive. “It’s for working-class people,” Garrioch says. “We’ve got taxi drivers, builders … there’s nothing elite about it.” Yet perceptions fuelled the debate about the role of courses in lockdown. “I think a certain US president has done golf no favours,” says Guy Shrubsole, a campaigner and the author of Who Owns England?. For Shrubsole, Donald Trump – and the eponymous courses on which he has played out a large part of his presidency – exemplifies the image of golf as a gated, gilded pursuit. In early April, when many councils threatened to shut the gates of crowded parks, Shrubsole launched a petition at change.org calling for golf courses to be opened. More than 7,500 people signed it. Lockdown was highlighting space inequality; studies show that people in poorer postcodes not only have smaller gardens, or none at all, but also less access to smaller parks. Pushing open the gates of golf courses began to feel like a moral imperative. “There’s a sense that golf is played by a small number of people and that they are potentially quite wealthy, retired, white men who don’t necessarily represent society,” Shrubsole says. It is not known how many courses opened to the public. It was a fraught process for many that did. “We had nudity on the greens and kids riding bikes straight over the bunkers,” Garrioch says. Elsewhere, there were reports of quad biking, horse riding and rampant picnicking. One couple were spotted playing a rather different sport in a bunker at Glenbervie golf club near Falkirk in central Scotland. “This isn’t Butlin’s,” an anonymous member of the club told the Daily Record. “It’s frustrating that members aren’t even allowed to get their daily exercise by playing a round on their own in the fresh air, yet you’ve got locals having sex in the bunkers. Where’s the social distancing in that?” But for the responsible majority, including Henson, Spryanova and their families, the overnight arrival of new parks was a revelation. “I wanted to shift debate and say there was something deeper going on here – this was about our exclusion from public space and our inability to provide enough of it,” Shrubsole says. That debate was big in Brighton before the pandemic. Ten-year management contracts at Hollingbury and Waterhall were due to expire on 31 March. “It came up at pretty much my first committee meeting last year,” says Marianna Ebel, a German-born IT engineer who was elected as a Green party councillor for Goldsmid ward in May 2019. Brexit inspired Ebel, 35, to enter local politics. She is now the joint chair of the council’s tourism, equalities, communities and culture committee, so council-owned golf courses are her responsibility. For a while, it was assumed a new operator would simply take over the leases. “But I remember looking at the membership numbers,” Ebel says. “I thought: ‘Instead of continuing, how about rewilding the courses?’” In October, the council appointed an estate agent to market the courses, offering 25-year management leases. But they also invited bids for other uses, including projects to restore the wildlife-rich chalk grassland on which the courses were laid. “We simply cannot miss this exciting opportunity to create a health &amp; wellbeing sanctuary and a wildlife haven for all,” read a petition launched in late December by the Brighton branch of Extinction Rebellion (XR), the environmental campaign group. Counter-petitions called for golf to be saved. Meanwhile, Liberal Democrat councillors pushed for the space to be used for affordable housing. More than 5,000 people signed the rewilding petition, including Chris Packham, the presenter and campaigner. In January, XR Brighton held a protest outside a committee meeting. They marched on Hollingbury. “We’re not anti-golf,” insists Ben Benatt, an ecology surveyor and XR member. “It’s about a sustainable solution that addresses the climate and biodiversity emergency.” In January, the council awarded a new contract for Hollingbury, securing its future as a golf course. It was a blow to campaigners and the families who had roamed the course. But the council also announced that Waterhall, where membership was in steeper decline, would shut down for a rare experiment: the rewilding of a golf course. “They call chalk grassland rainforests in miniature,” says Kim Greaves, as we crouch low on the first green at Waterhall. The 37-year-old played here briefly as a teenager. These days, he works with adults with learning disabilities and teaches Brazilian jujitsu, a martial art that relies on skilful leverage. He is also an amateur naturalist and part of the campaign to restore Waterhall. Golfers abandoned the course when lockdown stopped play just seven days before the old lease expired. It had stood here since 1923. Six months later, the greens are cracking up. Daisies and ragwort are growing and the old holes and bunkers are filling with soil and debris. The clubhouse, which sits just above the first green, has sweeping downland views. There is one proposal to move the building towards a rugby club, where dog walkers now park to enjoy the old course, and turn it into an education centre. For now, it is a symbol of a lost era. Abandoned trophies left in the window of the Spike Bar collect dust next to a golf glove, on which a large bumblebee has expired. The very thin layer of soil that covers chalk in valleys across the south-east of England – the result of centuries of grazing – lets rain drain straight through it. Nutrients are scant, so dominant grasses, and the shrubs and trees that would succeed them, tend not to do well. Instead, an array of resilient wildflowers cling to the earth, supporting rare species of butterfly and birds. Diversity on the old greens is still low; it will take years for the effects of mowing and pesticides to be flushed out. But Greaves wants to show me what is happening on the fringes of the fairways. Wildflowers with evocative names – betony, harebell, devil’s-bit scabious, lady’s bedstraw – are creeping in from the rough. “I even saw a round-headed rampion in the middle of the fairway,” Greaves says of a survey he did in the summer. “It might have been there without flowering for decades.” The delicate blue flower, also known as the Pride of Sussex, is a magnet for the chalkhill blue butterfly. Rewilding here will require management. Without any intervention, ecological succession will do its thing, even on thin soil. Last month, the council took responsibility for the project after a leaseholder pulled out. Greaves is anxious to start controlling the hawthorn that is already dominating areas between fairways. In other ecosystems, big fauna would do this kind of work. “Perhaps we’ll introduce elephants here eventually,” Greaves says with a smile. Golf still offers pleasure and exercise to hundreds of thousands of people. Many clubs enjoyed a growth in visitor numbers when they reopened in June; golf is nothing if not a socially distanced sport. Even XR Brighton says a sensitively managed links is far from the worst way to preserve green space, “especially if it brings a revenue stream that can help manage it in the right way”, Benatt says. Housing can be an obvious – and lucrative – alternative, especially when privately owned courses can rescue their finances with a sale to developers. Reading golf club, another old, struggling course, will next year merge with Caversham Heath, a club two miles to the west. A controversial housing development will take its place. But Waterhall’s fate adds weight to campaigns for old courses to remain green yet public, making permanent the freedom that excluded communities briefly enjoyed this year. Four years ago, Lewisham council closed a municipal 18-hole golf course that had occupied an old Georgian estate in Beckenham, south-east London. It is now a public park with a restored lake for swimming and boating. “It shows what local campaigns can do,” Shrubsole says. It will take time for balance to be restored at Hollingbury. Today, walkers and joggers outnumber golfers by far. “It’s just getting ridiculous,” says Brian Coomber, a club member who is looking for his ball in the rough next to the 10th fairway. He says people have been using the footpaths way more since golf resumed, interrupting play and messing up the fairways. “Don’t get me wrong, I’ve got a dog myself, but at the end of the day this isn’t common land,” he says. His friend, Dave Slocombe, nods in agreement. Days later, the men leave Hollingbury to join East Brighton golf club, which is only three miles away. Henson and Spryanova still walk on Hollingbury, where Spryanova says a few comments from golfers have made her children feel uncomfortable on their walk to school. Lockdown inspired Henson’s art. She made videos of the course, in which images of cartwheeling children fade into more recent footage of golf. Birds sing in the background. As we stand at the hillfort, taking in the sweep of Brighton, she can still picture those weeks. “At sunset, everyone would have been sitting here looking west, each little group taking a mound,” she says. “It looked a bit like a very spaced out village green.”
5||Tenants are facing eviction again, despite the UK government's promisesAfter a seven-month gap, the housing courts are open. Although many of them will not be operating at any capacity until early November, some cases are starting to be heard. In mid-October I represented a typical couple, Monty and Lola (not their real names). They were in court to prevent a bailiff’s appointment that had been scheduled for the Friday. The government has insisted that such hearings should continue. It has set in place two main protections for tenants. First, in the majority of cases, landlords have to wait several months after serving notices on tenants before issuing proceedings. Second, where cases were begun during the first lockdown, landlords must serve a “reactivation notice”, telling the courts whether a tenant has been affected by Covid. The idea of both provisions is to filter out the cases where the justification for eviction is clearest. Monty and Lola were excluded from either protection because a final possession order had already been made against them before Covid. In drafting the rules, the government refused to include any safeguards for people in that situation. Eighteen months earlier, their landlord had served a section 21 notice, a document that requires a tenant to leave without the landlord needing to show the tenant has done anything wrong. Monty and Lola went to their local Citizens Advice office and were told that the landlord could not win. He had taken a deposit from them but had not registered it within the statutory time and any section 21 notice would be invalid. The government has promised, many times, to repeal section 21 – however, it has indefinitely postponed acting on that promise. Although Monty and Lola had been in a strong position, they tried to be fair. They told the landlord’s solicitor they just needed to stay in their home until June 2020 when their son was due to leave school. The solicitor offered Monty and Lola a compromise: they could stay till the summer so long as they promised to leave then. They signed a consent order granting the landlord outright possession against them, never imagining that the pandemic would destroy all their plans. The issue before the court was simply whether that order had been properly made. The hearing was supposed to start on the Wednesday at 2.45pm using the court’s cloud video platform. Fifteen minutes beforehand, I logged into an online waiting room. I could see an icon representing me and one for my opponent. I could see a blue dot by the names of the people in the hearing, as the judge invited each of them to speak. But I could not hear them, and nor could they hear me. By now, my pulse was racing at around 200 beats a minute – think what it was like for my clients. The hearing was stopped and began again by telephone at 3.30pm. The judge had promised us a decision that day, but I needed to explain my client’s case, and the landlord’s barrister had to reply. Time wore on: past four, four thirty … We stopped at five, with no decision but the promise of a judgment on the Thursday. On Thursday morning, I spoke to my clients and asked how they were. “Terrible,” said Monty. “We couldn’t sleep,” added Lola. Monty was focusing on their son who is in year 12. He suffers from dyslexia and has a statement of special educational needs. They had been expecting to take him out of school after his GCSEs. But his mock grades had been so poor (and, because of Covid, they had become his final results) that he had been forced to stay at school another year to re-sit his exams. That was why they were trying so hard to stay in a home they had previously been planning to leave. Lola was focusing on the practicalities: they would not be able to find a moving company in the short time available to them. She and her husband had already driven more than 20 times to storage, they had moved everything they could. What they had left was heavy furniture, things they could not move without someone else’s assistance. They had asked the local authority to help, but it had refused. She could not imagine how they would move everything before the bailiffs arrived. “We can’t do it,” she told me, “we just can’t.” I had my telephone on speakerphone as the judge gave us her decision. She spoke gently and softly, but with urgency. The judge noted the decision of the higher courts that I had quoted. She referred to the cases my opponent had cited. The tension was so great, my hands clawed up. I could not type. She said that she agreed with me on the law – a consent order is binding in possession cases only if both parties had been absolutely clear in recording the factual admissions that would justify granting possession. That hadn’t happened in this case. Accordingly, she set aside the possession order and dismissed the warrant. Court officers would call the bailiffs and tell them the appointment was cancelled. When I rang Lola and Monty later, they sounded drunk with relief. Covid made everything rushed. It meant my clients had no proper warning of the bailiff’s appointment. It caused the hearing to be listed just days before the bailiff’s date. It meant that if we lost there would be no time to appeal to another judge. If the local authority had ended up moving my clients to emergency housing, it would have been shared accommodation – including possibly with people who might be ill. The government is aware that there is a problem, and has recently begun a process of negotiating with the bailiff’s bodies, inviting them to hold back from evictions in tier 2 and tier 3 areas. While this is to be welcomed, it doesn’t go far enough. There isn’t any proper legal basis on which bailiffs can refuse to carry out court orders, even at the government’s request. The new measures also are not being properly publicised, when (as we saw in Monty and Lola’s case) the problem in evictions is repeatedly that tenants don’t know their rights, and landlords rely on their ignorance. Much better would be a return to the summer’s ban on evictions. That system worked well and protected people who needed it. Until we do, many tens of thousands of people like Monty and Lola are going to suffer unnecessarily. • David Renton is a housing barrister at Garden Court Chambers
21||Bubble review – tetchy, tender tale of love under lockdownThe playwright James Graham has suggested it is too early to address the politics of the coronavirus crisis head-on in dramatic form. Instead, he gives us a “Covid romcom” that captures the domestic isolation and claustrophobia of pandemic life. On the brink of lockdown, Ashley (Pearl Mackie) and Morgan (Jessica Raine) have had an “amazing” first date just as the “whole frigging world is shutting down”. Should they take a leap of faith and quarantine together or face isolation alone? This one-hour drama enacts both outcomes in parallel narrative strands. In one reality, they end up in Morgan’s open-plan attic flat. In the other, they conduct an app-based courtship. As a part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival, it was staged in the theatre and simultaneously streamed online. Sleekly directed by Adam Penford, it takes place on a stripped-down stage that mirrors the stripped-down nature of the relationship evolving on it. Online, the camera shows the women more intimately on a split screen. As a drama, it is an eloquent survey of the past eight months with lively repartee, and it is impressive that Graham can take the over-familiar (jokes about face coverings, the horrors of shopping, and the insomnia induced by it all) to make it freshly witty, with sparky moments of insight. Reflecting on Zoom technology, Ashley says: “It’s like a historical re-enactment of talking.” Later, she observes how gardens have become the “new class divide”. Graham has proved himself to be a master of political playwriting, with shows such as Brexit: The Uncivil War, The Vote and This House. While this is primarily written in a comic vein, there is politics here. We are reminded of Boris Johnson’s Covid-19 experience and the killing of George Floyd. Both become heated points of contention between the women, and the play flares to bigger life as a result, if only briefly. “This fucking virus, man, it’s racist,” says Ashley, as a comment on the uneven burden of key work on BAME communities, including her mother. There is clever observational comedy in both narratives, and the two versions of coupledom push against each other, rather like the parallel worlds in The Last Five Years, but the “together” version is better investigated with all the awkward domestic intimacies, quibbles and moments of bonding. Ashley is a classic millennial – an upbeat vegan yogi who owns a micro-pub and watches reality TV. Morgan, a school teacher, lives off white wine and espressos and is more bristly. Both actors steer their characters from over-excitability to growing tetchiness and occasional tenderness. The nature of love and togetherness is explored, too, though perhaps with too light a touch. “What was it you liked about me?” asks Morgan as the couple sink into the fug of quotidian home life, and she dismisses love as nothing more than manipulation, though the play offers up its own happy ending. There has been a steady output of Covid-era romances over the course of the pandemic, both online and latterly on stage, such as in Sunnymead Court, which also has lesbian love at its centre, and the recently revived Lungs, so it is all the more of an achievement that Bubble finds freshness against this backdrop. Morgan and Ashley’s relationship does not particularly gather in emotional intensity or even in romance, but it always stays joyfully warm and entertaining. • Bubble is part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival.
2||'He was a father figure': loved ones remember victims of UK's Covid second waveWhen Roehl Ribaya left intensive care after 60 days in the summer, his family thought his battle with coronavirus was over. In July, he left the doors of Blackpool Victoria hospital to applause from staff as lead consultant Dr Jason Cupitt said it signalled the hospital had “survived the first wave of this silent killer”. But the 47-year-old experienced difficulties from then onwards, finding tasks such as walking up stairs challenging. He was breathless and fragile. On 13 October, he had a cardiac arrest, leaving him in a coma until he died two days later. Complications from Covid-19 led to Ribaya’s death and his story is among recent tales of loss as the UK experiences a second wave of the virus. “He was depressed when he came out of the hospital because he is 47 and should be fit and well but he felt like a 90-year-old man,” said his close friend Mark Delabajam. Delabajam and his wife, Angela, had formed a strong bond with Ribaya and his wife, Stella. When the couple first moved to Blackpool from the Philippines, Ribaya had offered them his house to stay in after only meeting them that day. They spent Christmas and holidays together. He said that when Ribaya came out of the hospital, even though he had challenges he would always try to be positive for those closest to him. “He was strong for his family and friends but we knew he was struggling with his breathing,” Delabajam says. “I had a conversation with his wife who said he would often cry in the middle of the night.” Ribaya was an aerospace engineer who came to the UK from the Philippines, following in the footsteps of his wife who got a job as a nurse here. “He was like a father figure to many, not just us – there are lots of overseas workers coming in from the Philippines at the moment as hospitals are short-staffed. All those Filipinos that come over, he is like the father figure to most of them,” Angela Delabajam said. The couple said they saw Ribaya the Sunday before he died and he seemed all right although he had been complaining of shortness of breath. If he could send a message now, Mark said it would “lecture people if they gathered in groups or in crowds … He would say my experience and what I went through hopefully will give you an insight into how bad or worse it could be.” Hambi Haralambous, 69, a music legend in Liverpool and the founder of the Motor Museum Studio in Lark Lane, which has hosted bands including Oasis and the Arctic Monkeys, died from coronavirus on 16 October. Haralambous posted photos of himself from his hospital bed, warning people about not taking Covid-19 seriously. His son, Narada, says his father had to wait three days before getting his coronavirus test and was told he would have to go to north Wales for it. Eventually, he got a diagnosis but his health got worse and he was admitted to intensive care. Haralambous was born in London to Cypriot parents who came to the UK for work. He was seven when he moved to Liverpool and as a young man, he went to art college before travelling in India. He met his first wife around this time and had two children. He later remarried and had another son and daughter. Haralambous fronted the popular synth band Hambi and The Dance in the early 1980s, which were signed to Virgin Records. He then moved into recording and managing for other artists, and later retrained in film. “When my dad was ill in hospital he told me about how unfair this was and how angry he was as he had so much more he wanted to do,” said Narada. “I asked, what it is you want to do, Dad? He said he wanted to finish off certain [creative] projects. That was his passion and what he was thinking about.” He said the family went through periods of thinking he was getting better.“After a while, he seemed to improve and the doctors were happy with his progress … then he called me one morning and he said the doctors said he was not going to make it. I was shocked as they had just moved him to a different ward.” “I spoke to the doctors. I wanted to do that before telling the family and they reassured me a bit. They said that they had not told my father he wasn’t going to make it but they had said he had deteriorated a lot and worried and concerned about him.” Narada said his father’s condition got worse and he died not long after this conversation. “People are not taking this illness seriously and I am sick of seeing it … People don’t understand what this is doing but seeing doctors and nurses, and what have to deal with [shows the toll]. They are doing such a good job of looking after people. No one has a clue until it hits you,” he said. Another local legend, Rotherham taxi driver Haji Tanveer Hussain, who worked up until his death to support his family, also died from the virus, on Wednesday 7 October, a few weeks after getting ill. Tributes flooded in for the Pakistan-born driver since his death, with colleagues and customers of Gold Star Taxis worker expressing their sadness at the loss of a “humble” and “joyful” man. Nasar Raoof, a friend, said Hussain always offered him golden nuggets of advice when he was feeling hopeless. Raoof recalls one particular time when he bumped into him at a local garage and he had had a tough day and felt people were being ungrateful for his hard work. He said Tanveer told him satisfaction comes from within and “by what you do and how you help people”. “It brightened up my day because it was not going well and it was hectic. It brought a smile to my face,” Raoof said. He had conversations with Hussain about his concerns working at a time when cases were so high, particularly in Rotherham. “He was worried but he said it was always about striking a balance between being able to provide for your family and being able to stay safe while you do your work,” Raoof said, adding that he always joked that he wished he had a job in an office instead. During the peak of coronavirus, Hussain was one of a few drivers who offered to do free pharmacy runs for vulnerable people unable to go outside and get their medication. “Every customer really loved him. He was really just a smiling joyful person. He was polite and courteous – putting himself out there in harm’s way to provide a service. These were the messages that came through social media. There were customers ringing in to offer their sympathies and condolences,” Raoof said.
12||In brief: Solo; The Forger's Daughter; Little Weirds – reviewsSolo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind) Rebecca Seal Souvenir, £14.99, pp304 Could there be a more apt moment for a book about working on your own? The former Observer journalist Rebecca Seal is a long-term “soloist” who knows all about the glories and gut-churning grind of self-employment. Deep-diving into productivity literature, economics and social sciences, as well as hard-won experience, she’s crafted a primer that covers topics from resilience and focus to procrastination and the curse of comparison. It contrives to be kind, realistic and genuinely helpful, all without lapsing into business speak and psychobabble. Install a copy on whatever surface is functioning as your desk, and you may even feel a little bit less alone. The Forger’s Daughter Bradford Morrow Grove Press, £12.99, pp288 According to Bradford Morrow, literary forgers are coy about their craft, preferring to think of it as creative endeavour rather than crime. His hero, Will, is just such a man – or he used to be, until he got caught. Now, decades later, a villainous character from his past has materialised, demanding that Will create a copy of the rarest book in American literature, Edgar Allan Poe’s Tamerlane and Other Poems. The novel flits evocatively from upstate New York farmhouses to Manhattan auction houses, and there’s an aptly gothic tinge to the tense drama that ensues. Little Weirds Jenny Slate Fleet, £9.99, pp240 The actor and comedian Jenny Slate works hard at being weird in her debut essay collection. Must we really think of her as a homemade croissant, oozing “antique decadence” and made up of “layers and layers of fragility and richness”? Peel away the artifice, and she turns out to be rather like the rest of us, albeit with the volume turned way up. She’s a gardener, a dog-lover, and “very divorced”. She gets stage fright still. And, when she stops trying quite so strenuously, she becomes a writer of tender, zestful prose. • To order Solo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind), The Forger’s Daughter or Little Weirds go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
5||Brexit was no aberration. The European Union needs to learn from itIn fewer than 100 days, Brexit will have been completed. Britain will be outside the European Union customs union and the internal market. But Brexit poses questions for the EU as well as for Britain. It challenges what might be called the ideology of Europe. It is, after all, a serious matter for a democratic organisation when a major member state decides to leave. “It would,” declared Donald Tusk, then president of the European council, shortly after the Brexit referendum in 2016, “be a fatal error to assume that the negative result in the UK referendum represents a specifically British issue … the Brexit vote is a desperate attempt to answer the questions that millions of Europeans ask themselves daily.” President Macron of France was honest enough to confess to the BBC’s Andrew Marr early in 2018 that it was possible a referendum in France could even have yielded the same result as in Britain. What, then, are the lessons? In her Bruges lecture of 2010 (as important as Margaret Thatcher’s lecture of 1988, though less noticed) German chancellor Angela Merkel pointed to a continual and creative tension between two Europes – supranational Europe and intergovernmental Europe. If that tension is disturbed, and supranational policies intrude upon national identities, there will be popular resistance. The problems sparked by migration and the euro show in graphic form how the EU can arouse such resistance, if it goes beyond what is acceptable by seeming to challenge the national identity of member states. The strong executive action needed to resolve the euro and migration crises could only be taken by national governments working together. These crises were confronted primarily by the governments of the member states in the European council: the commission and the European parliament played a distinctly secondary role. The Covid crisis, like past crises, is leading to talk of further integration. Some EU leaders seek new economic and budgetary instruments culminating in fiscal union so as to place the euro on stronger foundations. But with fiscal union, what issues would be left for national elections and national governments when so much economic policy has been removed from the agenda? Further integration, let alone treaty amendment, is the last thing Europe needs. For supranationalism is now a threat to the fulfilment of the European ideal, not a facilitator of it. As long ago as 1990, when Jacques Delors, former president of the commission, told the European parliament that he wanted Europe to become a “true federation” by the end of the millennium, the then French president François Mitterrand, watching on television, burst out: “But that’s ridiculous! What’s he up to? No one in Europe will ever want that. By playing the extremist, he’s going to wreck what’s achievable.” Few in Europe seek to submerge their country’s national identity in a federation. Instead, they seek to pursue their own national interests constructively within a co-operative European framework. Perhaps Britain should have done the same. There is, paradoxically, a sense in which Brexit Britain, together with Gaullist France, were in the vanguard of European development, rather than hindrances to it. For both appreciated – Britain, thanks to its long evolutionary history, and the Gaullists as a result of France’s experiences during the war – what the sacrifice of sovereignty would actually mean in practice. When, in the 1990s, prime minister John Major declared that Europe was not yet ready for a common currency, his warnings were ignored and he was regarded as an obfuscator. But perhaps the other member states should have heeded what he said. That would certainly be the view of those young people in the Mediterranean member states who find themselves unemployed as a result of the austerity policies caused by the euro. For those member states emerging from dictatorships, it was easy to say, rhetorically, that they were eager to sacrifice sovereignty. But all of them found their acceptance of shared sovereignty was subject to very strict limits: Germany, when it came to sharing debts; Greece, when it came to budgetary restrictions; and the Visegrad countries of central Europe (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia), when it came to accepting a due quota of Syrian migrants. What Europe needs, as Tusk frequently pointed out, is not more Europe but better Europe – practical improvements, such as completion of the European services market. Services, after all, make up 70% of economic activity in the EU, but there are still about 5,000 protected professions. Europe also needs a digital single market, which Mark Rutte, prime minister of the Netherlands, has calculated would add €400bn (£370bn) to Europe’s GDP. The EU, then, must remain primarily an intergovernmental institution in which the member states, through the European council, dictate the pace of change. But such a Europe of states would be an intergovernmental organisation with a difference, since member states would be considering not only their own national interests but the interests of the whole continent. Europe has suffered in the past from the absence of such a perspective. Had it been there in 1914, had national governments considered the interests of Europe as a whole rather than merely their own national interests, war would have been avoided. Brexit, then, was not an aberration. Instead of applauding or condemning it – for, after all, Brexit is yesterday’s argument – the EU must seek to learn its lessons. • Vernon Bogdanor is professor of government at King’s College London, and author of Britain and Europe in a Troubled World
19||Billie Eilish review – immersive adventure with fish and spidersOf all the online attempts to fill the gaping chasm where live music used to be before coronavirus, Billie Eilish’s livestream has attracted the most attention. Understandably so. The 20-year-old has a far keener visual sense than any of her peers, expressed through her album covers and self-directed videos. If a pop artist can come up with something eye-catching enough to make you temporarily forget there’s no chance of proper gigs for the foreseeable future, goes the thinking, it’s probably her. For your 30 bucks, you get a 55-minute performance, a “pre-show” that involves clips from a forthcoming Eilish documentary and a variety of celebrities – including Lizzo and Eilish’s “surrogate dad” Steve Carrell – imploring fans to vote in next month’s US election. A lot of fuss has been pre-emptively made about the “extended reality” technology used in the staging of Eilish’s performance, but what the show itself most closely resembles is a souped-up version of a late-60s or early-70s pop TV special devoted to a single artist, an impression underlined by the fact that between-song changes to the set are masked by the screen fading to black. Clearly, though, things have moved on. The technology means Eilish and her fellow musicians – brother Finneas and drummer Andrew Marshall – appear to be performing underwater, with fish swimming around them, or in the middle of a glistening cartoon forest, or, for All the Good Girls Go to Hell, in a corridor of images of environmental catastrophe and protest marches that stretches into infinity. It isn’t clear how live the music is, although Eilish’s vocals audibly are, and all the more impactful for being devoid of the showboating latter-day pop singers tend to go in for: during Xanny, a kind of 21st-century teenage equivalent of Neil Young’s The Needle and the Damage Done, her voice comes out as a kind of sighing mumble, as if she’s so bored with druggy excess she can barely be bothered to articulate her contempt. Occasionally, you’re struck by the feeling that the simplest staging ideas are the most effective: a single spotlight that strobes and casts a Nosferatu-like shadow behind the singer, a vast spider that crawls around the stage during You Should See Me in a Crown. And occasionally the technology is used to create a simulacrum of the communal experience of a gig. Fans watching at home find webcam images of themselves flashed up on the screens. Some of the fans appear prepared for this, holding up homemade signs and making heart shapes with their hands. Others do not: one girl is so startled by the sight of herself, there seems every chance she’ll be carried away from her computer on a stretcher. It’s both striking and entertaining – no one who stumped up the cash is likely to feel short-changed – but it doesn’t feel anything like being at a live show, as Eilish acknowledges. “The only benefit of not having a crowd,” she says, “is that none of you are in the pit, fainting, like usual.” The time may come when someone harnesses technology in order to produce an online live music experience that’s fully, game-changingly immersive. This isn’t it, but as stopgap exercises go, it’s impressive, if haunted by the sense that no one really knows how long the gap it’s stopping will last. “One day, if we vote the orange man out, we might see each other again,” says Eilish, before the screen fades to black again and the credits roll.
3||'Sue if you must': Lincoln Project rejects threat over Kushner and Ivanka billboardsThe Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards put up in Times Square. “Sue if you must,” Matthew Sanderson said. The New York City billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, displaying apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. According to Johns Hopkins University, more than 8.5m coronavirus cases have been recorded across the US and more than 224,000 have died. Case numbers are at record daily levels and one study has predicted 500,000 deaths by February. New York was hit hard at the pandemic’s outset. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday, Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president against allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing first amendment rights of free speech and the “reckless mismanagement of Covid-19” by the Trump White House. In a legal response on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson told Kasowitz: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, citing supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticise freely”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting in March, in which Kushner criticised New York governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter, Sanderson wrote, “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” A footnote to Sanderson’s letter cited “one of the seminal libel-proof plaintiff cases”, that of a well-known mobster whose reputation was “so tarnished … he could claim no damages for defamation”. “Mr Kushner and Ms Trump’s claims will fare no better than Boobie Cerasini’s given their tarnished reputations on Covid-19,” it said. Sanderson also said “this isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian on Saturday, that seems unlikely. Donald Trump “has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.”
2||Europe's Jewish population has dropped 60% in last 50 yearsEurope has lost almost 60% of its Jewish population over the past 50 years, mainly as a result of the collapse of the Soviet Union after which many Jews left eastern Europe as borders opened, a study shows. Only about 9% of the global Jewish population now lives in Europe, compared with nearly 90% in the late 19th century – but similar to the proportion 1,000 years ago. In total, an estimated 1.3 million Jews live in Europe in 2020, about 0.1% of the continent’s population. Two-thirds of them live in France, the UK and Germany. The figures are in a report produced by the London-based Institute for Jewish Policy Research, which attempts to give a comprehensive picture of Jewish populations in European countries. “Jews have not only been an integral part of European history and culture but are actually one of its oldest and original component groups,” says the report, titled Jews in Europe at the Turn of the Millennium. “However, throughout history, the inherent weakness of a landless and powerless minority vis-a-vis territorially based societies and their constituted powers often put theJewish people in a condition of dependency and instability, and translated into powerful ups and downs in the Jewish presence.” Between the end of the 18th and 19th centuries, the number of Jews in the world rose to more than 10 million, and climbed further to 16.5 million on the eve of the second world war. Most of the growth was in eastern Europe, then America and then Palestine and Israel. The murder of 6 million Jews in the Holocaust reduced the global population to around 11 million, “radically disrupt[ing] what had been up to that moment the continuous build-up and transformation of European Jewry”. In 1880, 88% of the world’s Jews lived in Europe. By 1945, this share had fallen to 35%, then to 26% in 1970 and to 9% in 2020. Most of this decline happened in eastern Europe, where the share of the global total fell from 26% in 1945 to 2% in 2020. In the latter decades of the 20th century, the “opening of the doors of the Soviet Union” meant that more than 1.8 million Jews left eastern Europe between 1969 and 2020, resulting in “a drastic shift in the Jewish population’s centre of gravity from the east to the west of the continent”. The study also reports that almost 70,000 Israeli-born Jews now live permanently in Europe, about 25% of these in the UK. The vast majority of European Jews – including 90% of British Jews – are not actively planning to emigrate to Israel or elsewhere. A minority of European Jewish families have more than five children, with the highest proportion (24%) in Belgium, which has a large ultra-Orthodox population. The lowest proportion (5%) is in Poland. More than three-quarters of Polish Jews are married to non-Jews, but only 14% of Belgian Jews. Intermarriage has been a “significant factor in the erosion of the Jewish population size” as children in such families are often not brought up as Jewish. The UK Jewish population had the smallest proportion (4%) of converts to Judaism, and Spain the largest (25%). In every one of 12 EU countries , Jews were more pro-EU than the non-Jewish population. In Hungary, there was the biggest gap, with 51% of Jews saying they had a strong attachment to the EU, compared with 19% of the total population. There were also big gaps in Poland, Austria and Hungary.
21||Lone Flyer: The Last Flight of Amy Johnson review – soaring spiritAmy Johnson is, in many ways, still the epitome of the romantic female adventurer. Finding international fame as the first woman to fly solo from England to Australia in 1930, she lived fast and died young, breaking a host of records before crashing to her death at the age of 37. In this revival of Ade Morris’s 2001 play about her life, we glimpse the woman behind the celebrity pilot and aviation engineer, as frustrated by social convention as she was determined to embrace adventure. We meet Johnson in her dying moments and her life flashes before our eyes over the course of the play. We flit back and forth from that frantic, final flight to her early years in Hull and at Sheffield University, then to finding her passion for flying and meeting the loves of her life. Lucy Betts’s direction navigates a socially-distanced stage so cleverly that we barely notice the lack of touch between its two actors. In flying jacket and cap, Hannah Edwards, as Johnson, is spirited, sparky and full of yearning for a remarkable life . She steers between steeliness and vulnerability in the narration of her story, while Benedict Salter switches with virtuosity between several roles, including Johnson’s gentle father, her remote first lover, Franz, and her husband and fellow pilot, Jim Mollison. It is Johnson’s poetic subjectivity that leads the storytelling and the script zings with colour as she speaks of a near-drowning in a “huge fist of sea” – the freezing waves were “a million needles of icy hot”. She refers to wartime zeppelins as “flying badgers” and to a teacher who has “a face like cold suet pudding”. A revolving trolley is the central prop and mostly functions as Johnson’s Gipsy Moth plane. Jamie Kubisch-Wiles and Thom Townsend’s sound design, together with Harry Armytage’s lighting, signal scene changes without any other big shifts in the set. The sea is suggested by undulating white light; a cinema hall is evoked with flickering illumination and piano music; and the sound of a school bell or an aeroplane engine’s thrum instantly create an atmosphere, alongside the eloquence of Morris’s script. It is clear that Johnson is a maverick, pushing against norms to be the woman she wants to be rather than the “teacher or nurse” she is expected to become. She speaks of her fear of being stuck in an unfulfilled life which, it is hinted, led her sister to kill herself. Travelling through a series of dull jobs, from a typing pool to the lingerie department of Peter Jones and a law firm, she finally trades it in for a “more precarious existence at Stag Lane aerodrome” in London. Her dilemmas feel strangely – even sadly –contemporary as she reflects on marriage, motherhood and personal freedom. “Love makes me dependent and I hate that it saps all my adventure,” she says, though she craves it, too. The play also, obliquely, shows how the world judges female heroism. She is described as a “blonde” and as a “daughter” by the press, even after her extraordinary accomplishments as a pilot. At the height of her fame, she seems to be caught in an uncomfortable and intrusive alliance with the press. “Fame is like battery acid – use it, don’t drink it,” she says, almost as a warning to herself. This aspect, while not heavily investigated, again feels contemporary and reminiscent of the way in which adventuring women such as the late Alison Hargreaves – the first female mountaineer to scale Everest alone and without supplementary oxygen – have been judged. Discordant cello music signals a return to her final moments in the air. It sounds slightly shrill by the end and we return to this scene too often, but the play holds its power right until that final crash, and all the hope of a magnificent, adventuring life in it. • At the Watermill theatre, Newbury, until 21 November.
18||Honest Thief review – low-stakes thrillerLiam Neeson is Tom Carter, AKA “the In and Out Bandit”, a bank robber who has swindled 12 banks in seven states, accruing $9m. Importantly, he’s “met a woman” and is ready to hand over the money and turn himself in. In this low-stakes thriller, FBI agents Niven and Hall (Jai Courtney and Anthony Ramos) scupper his plans for a quiet life by attempting to kill him and steal the money for themselves. Former marine Tom is having none of it. With Neeson well within the confines of his comfort zone, tailed by corrupt cops and diving out of hotel windows, the film should be better. Yet it drags, not least in tedious scenes of him earnestly telling new girlfriend Annie (Kate Walsh) how she’s put him on the straight and narrow.
20||Royal Mail to hire record number of Christmas tempsRoyal Mail is to hire a record 33,000 temporary workers for the Christmas period – two-thirds more than usual – to handle the UK festive parcel frenzy triggered by the surge in online shopping. Christmas is always the busiest time for the postal service, but this year it is seeking record numbers of temporary recruits to help to sort an even higher flow of packages as high-street closures during the pandemic have forced shoppers online. The UK has about 90,000 postal workers and Royal Mail typically hires 20,000 seasonal workers. This year, the extra staff will work mainly in sorting offices, delivery vans and data centres. Sally Ashford, the Royal Mail’s chief human resources officer, said: “During these unprecedented times we believe it is critical that Royal Mail continues to deliver. We want to do our best to deliver Christmas for our customers and support the effort on the pandemic. This helps the whole country to celebrate and stay safe during these difficult times.” The company aims to fill more than 13,000 vacancies in mail sorting offices in England, 1,400 in Scotland, 700 in Wales and 500 in Northern Ireland. About 1,000 additional workers are also sought for Royal Mail’s dedicated Covid-19 testing kit collection team, while other sorting and driving roles are on offer in logistics and at its Heathrow international hub. There are also temporary positions in data inputting. The pandemic has accelerated the shift to online shopping, with restrictions closing non-essential high street shops for months during 2020 and further closures not being ruled out. Royal Mail staff have worked throughout the pandemic, despite significant safety concerns from unions. Last week, Royal Mail announced that its postal workers would for the first time collect parcels on the doorstep, in one of the biggest changes to the service as it adapts to the decline in letters and rapid growth in online shopping. Royal Mail reported a £139m increase in total revenue in the five months to 30 August, as the pandemic caused a surge in parcel deliveries. While letter deliveries collapsed, parcel volumes during that period rose by a third year-on-year – an increase of 177m parcels. It normally carries 1.3bn parcels a year. Rivals such as Amazon and other parcel companies have, however, helped to erode its market share.
20||Desperate UK Covid home workers renting solace from nimble-footed firmsTired of working on the kitchen table or juggling conference calls and family life, and with no return to their desks in sight, many of the country’s office workers are seeking out alternative workplaces – from hotel rooms and cocktail bars to fitness clubs – for a change of scene. Businesses are hoping that the offer of a desk, reliable wifi and refreshments will attract workers weary of half a year of working from home, while boosting their income in challenging times. On a wet weekday morning, Edmund Weil has bagged a cosy corner table at Swift Shoreditch, a cocktail bar in the hip east London district. But he’s there for a business meeting rather than the drinks. “Everyone has seen a lot of home,” Weil said. “Lots of people who don’t have a home office are at the stage where if you have to choose between a face-to-face meeting and Zoom, they choose face to face.” The father of three children, including a four-month-old baby, Weil has been looking for places to work where there are fewer distractions. As a bar owner, he is more used than most to spending daylight hours in venues dedicated to night-time socialising, but he is part of a growing number of workers finding temporary desks in different locations. Coral Anderson, the general manager of Swift Shoreditch, said the 10pm curfew has hurt trade at bars that usually make most of their income in late-night trading. Swift Shoreditch has signed up to a “work from bars” initiative created by Fraser Campbell, ambassador for whisky brand Dewar’s. Its intention is to highlight venues that are now welcoming workers, while bringing new customers to businesses struggling with reduced trade and government regulations. “Bars have changed their opening hours to open at 12 o’clock, they have started doing food, they have amazing wifi, and tables with distance between them,” Campbell said. Campbell’s online map of 150 venues across the UK, from London to Aberdeen, has been visited almost 20,000 times in the four weeks since launch. Anderson hopes joining the map will help Swift Shoreditch to reach a wider audience. The number of British workers travelling to work has been falling since early October, according to official figures, and a quarter of workers are still working exclusively from home. Following the government’s U-turn over the return to the office in September, some of the country’s largest hotel chains have begun to offer daytime room rentals to workers in search of peace and quiet, as hotels grapple with a lack of international tourists and slump in business travel. Hilton has launched day rentals across the majority of its more than 160 UK hotels, from one of its most luxurious hotels, the Conrad London St James, which costs from £150 a day, to £44.85 a day for a room in York’s Hampton by Hilton. Meanwhile, European hotel group Accor, owner of brands including Novotel and Ibis, has launched a similar offering at about 220 locations from Brighton to Edinburgh. Hilton offers rooms with a desk and chair, facilities to make hot drinks, as well as room service and wifi, and use of the gym or swimming pool, with a promise of high levels of hygiene. “Hotels are having to be creative,” said John Rogers, the head of brands and franchise operations for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at Hilton. “Where historically there would have been large volumes midweek of corporate business, clearly those volumes are lower.” Beyond hotels, the David Lloyd fitness club chain has reported a 40% increase in online inquiries for corporate memberships, which it attributes to employers wanting to provide staff with gym access and a workplace. Growing demand for one-day desk rentals has sparked a change at flexible workspace provider Fora, which previously rented out offices for a minimum of one month. Fora, with 11 buildings across London and Reading and plans for more, offers a day pass at a cost of £40 in the capital and £25 in Reading. “People aren’t certain how much office space they need right now and how often they want to go into work,” said Enrico Sanna, the chief executive of Fora, who is himself working from the stylishly designed building on Broadwick Street in Soho. “There is a hardcore of people who don’t want to be at home. These are people who can do it for three months, but not past that, as it’s not the right setup mentally or physically.” Opening a new business during a recession is for the brave, but Dominic Cools-Lartigue jumped at the chance to open a restaurant, gallery and co-working venue in Shoreditch. The building, which houses the Tramshed Project, once an East End tram generator, became available after its former occupier, a fine dining restaurant, collapsed into administration in April. When the Guardian visited a few days after its reopening, about half of the well-spaced tables in the 1,860 sq metre (20,000 sq ft) building were occupied by laptop users. Laurent Louvrier, the chief executive of the artificial intelligence firm SuccessData, had booked one of Tramshed’s booths for a brainstorming day with three of his 11 staff. The startup terminated its lease in a building run by flexible office provider WeWork during lockdown, saving a “not negligible” amount of money. Instead, small groups from SuccessData meet once a week at venues such as the Tramshed Project, where a four-person booth requires a minimum daily spend of £30 on food and drink. “This is all we need at the moment,” said Louvier. “Just opening this vast space as a restaurant right now wouldn’t be viable,” said Cools-Lartigue. “The co-working will help the with the evening restaurant bookings. Hopefully one will feed the other.”
20||Sunak must extend universal credit or be forced into another U-turnRight from the start of the Covid-19 crisis the government was never in any doubt about the implications of putting the economy into deep freeze. The Treasury knew it was going to be bad, so there was a furlough scheme for employees, financial assistance for the self-employed, grants, loan guarantees, a business rates holiday, a deferral of VAT, and a £1,000-a-year increase in universal credit. The last of these – the £20 a week increase in UC – has tended to be overlooked in recent months as attention has focused on what should replace the furlough, but as things stand the temporary increase will be reversed next April. Make no mistake, this has all the hallmarks of a slow-burn crisis for the government that it would do well to address while it has the time. Otherwise, it will eventually be forced into yet another U-turn at a moment not of its own choosing. The Treasury says it is keeping UC under review, but its message is that the extra £20 a week comes at a hefty cost – £9b this year – and that there is only so much money to go round. More for welfare means less for other public services. It is as simple as that. Except that it isn’t. The increase in UC was supposed to be temporary for the same reason that the furlough was supposed to be temporary: the Treasury assumed that by now the Covid-19 crisis would largely be over and that the economy would on its way to a complete recovery. Rishi Sunak’s decision last week to beef up his job support scheme was an acceptance that the effects of the pandemic are going to be felt until at least next spring. New restrictions, either through the two-week circuit breaker in Wales or the tiered systems in England and Scotland, mean businesses will close and workers will be laid off. Sunak hopes that most of the closures and the layoffs will be temporary but many of them won’t be. It’s Sunak’s job to worry about the public finances and there is no question that the government has been borrowing a lot. The deficit stood at just over £200bn in the first six months of the 2020-21 financial year – comfortably a peacetime record. Yet faced with the threat of mass unemployment, the chancellor last week made the only possible decision: to extend the furlough in all but name and ignore the impact on the deficit. Sooner or later he is going to be faced with a similar decision over universal credit – and if he has any sense he will come to the same decision. The original increase in UC back in March was the right thing to do. Although no Conservative would admit to it, years of benefit cuts had left the UK’s welfare system unfit for purpose in normal times, let alone during a government-imposed lockdown that was certain to cost many jobs. Torsten Bell, the director of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, noted last week that low earners have been at the centre of the economic storm. Not only have they borne the highest health risks while higher earners have been working from home, they have been three times as likely to have been furloughed as high earners, and four times as likely to have lost their jobs in the first phase of the crisis. It’s not hard to see why. Many low earners are in consumer-facing jobs in sectors such as hospitality, tourism and leisure. These are the bit of the economy that faced the biggest hit in the spring and in the case of hospitality are about to suffer another tough period. Bell adds, though, that income inequality has not changed all that much during the pandemic, with the blow reasonably equally distributed among low, middle and higher income brackets. Why? Partly because those on the lowest incomes were less likely to be working going into the crisis, partly because of the wage top-ups provided by the furlough, and partly because of the cushion provided by UC. “This increase in income from the state, coming at the same time as the decrease in income from the labour market, meant that the overall incomes of the poorest fifth were close to being unchanged in the first phase of this crisis,” Bell said in an article for the online magazine Tortoise. “Without this policy action they would have fallen a full 8%.” There is one other reason why Sunak needs to make the welfare system more generous: it would be good for the economy, and ultimately the public finances. A paper produced by the TUC and the thinktank, the Institute for Public Policy Research, models the impact of either doubling child benefit or increasing the child element of UC by £20 a week. Either measure would lead to a reduction in child poverty, which would be welcome in itself, but the IPPR researchers found there were also sizeable multiplier effects, under which each one pound of stimulus produces more than one pound’s worth of output. The reason is that the poorest 40% of the population have a higher tendency to spend any extra income than richer groups. Put simply, if you are having trouble putting food on the table, the first thing you do if your UC goes up is to head down to the supermarket. The money feeds straight back into the economy, creating work for food suppliers and cashiers, who in turn spend some of their extra income. The study estimates that multipliers could be as high as 1.7 or 1.8 for the changes it is proposing. Something for Sunak to consider as he works out when to fly the white flag over UC. • Sign up to the daily Business Today email here or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk.
4||NRL grand final 2020: Melbourne Storm beat Penrith Panthers– as it happenedAnd with that, we should leave the Storm players to their celebrations. And the Panthers to their commiserations. Melbourne won it in the first half; Penrith ensured there was a period of squeaky bum time for the Storm as time ran out, but ultimately, Cam Smith’s team held on and are NRL premiers once again. Thanks for joining us. Here’s Emma Kemp’s match report: The Storm players get up onto the stage and one-by-one receive their premiership rings from Craig Bellamy. Time for Cameron Smith to speak again - plenty of thank yous, respect for Penrith etc. Peter V’landys and Andrew Abdo get a mention for getting the competition back up and running. But nothing about his future plans, natch. He signs off with some words of wisdom for his teammates: “Lastly, fellas, this 2020 season, it’s one like no other and what we’ve been able to achieve tonight, it’s - we’ll never forget it. We’ll remember it for the rest of our lives and a big congratulations to everyone, particularly the boys that are celebrating their first premiership. Hold on to that forever, boys.” Cue Tina Turner.... The kid looks a bit overwhelmed. “This is unbelievable,” he says. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history. “It’s been a great year. Been able to play with the GOAT and these boys again, thanks, Penrith. You are really good. 17 in a row is an unbelievable achievement. Well done to you guys. Thanks to our fans who stuck strong. Especially our ones back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back there at the moment and we wear the V on our jersey proudly. Can’t wait to go back there and celebrate with you guys, so thank you.” And your Clive Churchill medal winner is.... Ryan Papenhuyzen! Clive Churchill medal announcement is on its way... Josh Addo-Carr and Cam Munster, being nice about Penrith. Here’s JAC: “We knew the Panthers would come out firing. We got the start that we wanted. You know, full credit to Panthers. They will be a very tough side for many years to come.” And Munster: “We know what Penrith are like, the best team. Their attack outstanding. That’s the reason why they are the minor premiers. We knew we had to start well. We didn’t off the kick-off, but 50/50 in some tries there, just ended up getting the right bit of green. But full credit to Penrith tonight. It’s been the best team all year like I said.” And the maestro Cameron Smith: “We did it the hard way there, 11 men in the end. Penrith were coming home with a wet sail and playing the footy they played all year. It’s just been terrific. “As a club and team and organisation, we’ve admired what Penrith have done this year, to win 17 in a row in this competition, it’s a special effort. On top of what everyone’s been through this year, as I said before the game, it is going to be a great contest. There’s another couple of minutes on the clock, I don’t know what would have happened there. You’ve got to give credit to Penrith. They fought to the end. “I’m just really proud of this - not just this football team that played tonight, the entire squad. There’s a handful of players there that they trained, they trained hard every year and applied it every day, applied themselves every day to help the 17 going out on the weekend and they didn’t even get a game of football this year. You know, the entire squad has done a fantastic effort. We haven’t been home for about five months. You know, just with the conditions that we’ve been under, I think it’s just a remarkable effort to be here tonight and to get a victory.” A disappointed Nathan Cleary: “Super disappointing. I thought I let the boys down, but, yeah, hopefully we’ll be back. “There were a few moments through our intercept and obviously the one at half-time, and, just let in too many ordinary tries. They were too good. “We’ve got a taste of it now. It’s going to hurt for along time, but it’s fuelled us for next year. Train harder than ever now.” Melbourne tryscorer Ryan Papenhuyzen: “I’m so emotional.Oh, wow! The whole day was just the unknown. You don’t know what’s going to happen. You’re so confident in the boys, but these guys coming off 17 in a row, the most butterflies I’ve ever had. These boys, we’ve done it so tough this year. We have the V on our jersey because back home they’re doing it a lot tougher than we are. That is unbelievable, so proud of the boys. I didn’t think I would be able to do one of these and we’ve done it. “Our first half, that’s the best defensive performance I have seen from our side this year. We had confidence after last week that we could start well and done that. They came back strong at the end, but our first half definitely set the platform. That’s unbelievable.” What a finish to the game! My goodness, the Panthers made you think they could actually pull off a miraculous comeback. In the end, they fell just short, as Melbourne Storm once again prove they’re the best in the business. Stick around for the post-match interviews. 80 mins: Such drama late on but the Storm hang on! Melbourne are NRL premiers! 80 mins: Cleary scores! He runs at the Storm defence all on his own and goes over! He declines the kick and they’ll have one final chance to score - one play to go the length of the pitch... 79 mins: It’s been one hell of a fight by Penrith, but they’ve simply run out of time. Melbourne look like they’re going to hold on. Meanwhile, Smith is sinbinned for a professional foul and the Panthers will finish with 11 men on the pitch. 77 mins: Time is running out for Penrith. Mansour can’t get on the end of a loose ball in the Storm in-goal following a Kikau kick... it’s not going to be their night. 74 mins: The Storm defence looks slight ragged as Penrith turn up the offensive heat. Lui kicks a high swirling ball forward which Papenhuyzen does really well to hold in the Storm in-goal. It’s now that the nerves will be heightened and errors can be made. 73 mins: The Panthers are back in this! Incredible scenes in Sydney! Lui throws a brilliant ball over the top to Mansour who’s all alone out wide and touches down! Cleary’s kick is askew, but still, we have a game on our hands here. Are the Panthers about the stage one of the greatest comebacks of all time? 72 mins: The Panthers have the wind in their sails now - they can smell a comeback. They get anther six as the crowd turns up the volume. Clearly jinks forward... 71 mins: Panthers ball. Crichton threatens. Storm repel the attack. But hang on - they’re looking into a professional foul now – Hughes on Kikau as the Panthers man looked to race onto a kick. Cam Smith argues the toss but it’s ruled as a professional foul and Hughes is off! Drama at ANZ Stadium with nine minutes to go in the 2020 grand final! 69 mins: The crowd erupts as Crichton gives the Panthers a glimmer of hope! Cleary is at the centre of the move, passing to Lee who in turn feed Crichton. The youngster steps inside and out before barrelling across the line and, with 11 minutes remaining, do we have a game on our hands? 67 mins: Papenhuyzen! What an athlete! He leaps yards over the touchline to knock a high kick back into play. Amazingly he keeps it alive - tremendous effort! 65 mins: A brief moment of excitement for the Panthers as they look to break on the left hand side, but Mansour’s unexpected attempted kick is smothered and the move fizzles out. The groan from the stands is audible... 63 mins: The Storm are nearly through again here after a brilliant pass from Kaufusi to Lee, but he is held up. Last tackle is called and the pressure eases. 61 mins: Melbourne hold a 20-point lead, with 20 minutes to go, and they begin a new set on the 20m line. But they make a mess of it and Penrith come away with the ball. 60 mins: Even if Penrith received a boost from that try, time is rapidly running out for them to capitalise. A quarter of the grand final remains, and the Storm are again pressing forward. 57 mins: Dale Finucane is hit hard by Kikau, and the big man gets up gingerly. In fact, he’ll have to come off for an HIA. It’s a brutal game, rugby league. 54 mins: Are Penrith back in this one now? Certainly the crowd have been revived by that try - and the slice of luck finally afforded to them. 53 mins: But hang on, Penrith look to have got one back! Yeo dinks a kick through and Brian To’o races onto it and grounds the ball right in the corner! There’s a degree of controversy over the legality of the kick in the first place, Yeo having taken advantage of running behind one of his own players, but the Bunker isn’t bothered about that. To’o is adjudged to have stayed in play and the try stands! Cleary adds the two, off the post and through. 52 mins: It looks like the Storm have scored again, as play is switched from left to right. Hughes kicks through and Vunivalu sprints ahead of Mansour to touch down! But replays show it wasn’t a clean touch down, and the try won’t stand. Worrying signs for Penrith, regardless. 51 mins: Here come the Storm, surging down the left hand side of the ANZ Stadium pitch. The passing is slick, the running is hard... 48 mins: Mansour gets dragged back about 10m by three Storm players - not the direction the Panthers need to be going at this stage. Melbourne look in total control - and that feeling doesn’t go away as moments later Kikau is pulled up for touching the ball a second time as he tries to roll it under his boot. Oh dear, these errors are going to be costly for Penrith. 46 mins: Papenhuyzen scores! Is that it? Brilliant play from the Storm man who spots a hole in the Panthers’ line, puts his head down and hoons off to score what could be a crucial try for the Storm! Smith... misses with the extras! But still, a healthy lead has just got even healthier and the Panthers have it all to do. 45 mins: Moments later Penrith are called for a Leota knock-on. He challenges the call but after a brief break, it’s unsuccessful. 43 mins: Cleary launches a huge kick under pressure that Vunivalu allows to bounce. He recovers and the Storm go again with a fresh six. But Addo-Carr makes a hash of his handling, some confusion follows and there’s a knock on somewhere. Penrith will feed a scrum. 41 mins: And we’re back under way in Sydney. Given what Cleary just said, can the trophy engraver crack on with writing Storm on the premiership trophy as soon as Melbourne score again? Here they come early this second half... Munster kicks at the end of their six - a decent one at that. Ivan Cleary still believes. “Obviously didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next. Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try. We can do that. Anything can happen. Get some momentum going. That’s the goal at the moment. They don’t score again and we’re next to score.” Sterlo on the TV has just said it will be the greatest premiership comeback if the Panthers can get back into this one. He’s not wrong. Billy Slater, meanwhile, says of his old mate Smith becoming the all-time top points scorer in grand finals (42): “Just another record for Cameron Smith. Boy, didn’t he go to work in that first half. The great No 9, it started with an early kick out of dummy half. He turned the Penrith Panthers around and allowed his aggressive defensive line to get up and apply the pressure on it. He kicked multiple penalty goals and it’s just his true indication in defence, he’s so effective in that middle third of the field. He’s suffocating Penrith Panthers, but picking up the right options and also picking up the first try of his grand final career. So this is his grand final career. So this is his first grand final try. If this is his last game, he’s certainly making it count.” The first 40 minutes in brief: Melbourne took the lead through a penalty try after Tyrone May stuck out a leg on Justin Olam Suliasi Vunivalu scored a second after intercepting Nathan Cleary’s pass and running nearly the full length of the pitch Cam Smith, who also kicked two penalty goals, took advantage of a loose ball on the stroke of half-time to score Melbourne’s third Luckless Panthers have had two tries disallowed - first Josh Mansour and then Stephen Crichton What a half of NRL football! It’s going to take quite some comeback from the Panthers if they are to catch the Storm after the break. Penrith will feel disappointed to be 22 point down without a reply, but many have found out to their cost that Cameron Smith in this kind of mood is an awful proposition. The irrepressible Smith has been immaculate with his kicking this half, and added that try late on for good measure. If this is going to be his last game, he’s going about making it a memorable personal performance. There’ll be plenty more twists and turns to come. Time to take a breath for now though. Half-time show coming up... 40 mins: Smith celebrates a try! The immediate call is “no try”! Koroisau knocks the ball out of Smith’s hands as he tries to pass, but the veteran picks it up quickly, spots an opening and dives over the line. There’s no problem with that and Smith has his try! He adds the extras and the Storm will head into the sheds with a commanding lead! 38 mins: Oof, Asofa-Solomona surges forward as Melbourne threaten the Penrith line again. 36 mins: The intensity-ometer has just been turned up, as a couple of bone-crunching tackles come in from the Storm defence. The ball eventually goes forward and Melbourne will feed a scrum. The challenge for Penrith now is to keep Melbourne out until the half-time siren sounds. 34 mins: Melbourne get another set of six - and another chance inside the Panthers half to trouble the scorekeepers. Smith goes to Munster, who is brought down 5m out from the line before Kaufusi attempts a kick that is smothered. The Panthers survive. 32 mins: Channel Nine has done the analysis and Vunivalu was travelling at 33kph as he raced off towards the tryline there. Incredible sequence of play, and the Panthers must be feeling like it might not be their night already. 31 mins: Here come the Panthers, looking to get on the scoreboard for the first time tonight. Martin looks to break through on the right hand side, it comes back inside to Cleary who looks to fling a long high ball back to the left flank... but Vunivalu is there! He plucks the ball out of the air, falls to the ground but springs back up and hares off towards the Panthers’ try line. They’re not going to stop him in a foot race! Vunivalu takes to the air in customary fashion and dives over the line! No bother for Smith with the conversion. Again. 27 mins: With the resulting kick, Smith makes no mistake from a very similar position to his last kick and the Storm extend their lead again! 26 mins: Some big hits coming from all angles at the moment. Fisher-Harris is pulled up for a late hit on Brandon Smith, who joins Welch off the pitch for HIA. 24 mins: Smith attempts a kick to touch but it hits Martin in the legs, so it’ll be a Penrith feed in a scrum. 22 mins: It’s been quite the opening quarter of this match – hectic to say the least, and filled with plenty of attacking moments. And there’s more drama now as Kikau is called for picking the ball up in an offside position. Smith will have a chance to add another couple for the Storm. He’s deadly accurate and Melbourne edge further ahead. 17 mins: The crowd can sense something here... Martin leaps like a salmon to take an AFL-type mark to the delight of those in the stands, but it comes to nothing. An aside: it’s great to hear real fans and real reactions in a proper sized crowd at a sporting event. There must be plenty looking on from afar with a touch of jealousy that there’s a major sporting event that fans are able to enjoy in person. 16 mins: Now the pressure turns to the other end - Cleary flicks to Kikau, who bursts forward before Crichton gets the ball and tries to dive over the line! The call is no try, and judging from the Panthers’ muted reaction, that’s probably the case. Yes, he doesn’t get it down and we’re stil at 6-0. 14 mins: The Storm had momentum here, but Bromwich is hit hard and loses the ball. With that goes a bit of the pressure on Penrith, who can breathe again and look to build from deep in their own half. 12 mins: Here goes Mansour, making some metres for Penrith. Then Kikau takes up the mantle, but he turns the ball over to Melbourne after playing the ball after his arm hit the ground. Danger looms here. 10 mins: That’s two Bunker decisions that have gone against the Panthers already tonight. Not a great way to start the game for them, but both looked to be correct. 8 mins: Mansour leaps over in the corner to get the Panthers back on level terms! They look to get a little stuck in the middle of field, but some quick hands from Luai to Kikau and then to Mansour on the outside opens things up. But the Panthers are left disappointed by the review system again - this time Crichton is penalised for running into the defensive line and the try won’t stand! 5 mins: Well, that’s a turn-up for the books - penalty tries are a rarity in the grand finals. How will the Panthers respond to that now? 4 mins: Is this a the first try of the game? No, says the referee, despite Melbourne’s celebrations!. Addo-Carr keeps the ball alive for the Storm, flicking it back inside to Olam, who tries to burrow under May to the line. He doesn’t get the ball over, but on review the call is that May’s leg prevented Olam from scoring and he’s given a penalty try! Smith adds the extras from the sideline, and the Storm lead early! 3 mins: Melbourne hold their line despite the early pressure from the Panthers though, and will now get a first chance to move downfield. 1 min: And we’re off! Cleary boots the Black Hawk-delivered ball down field, where the Storm struggle to pick it up. Hughes let the ball bounce, the Panthers pounce and it’s Penrith ball from a scrum! Great start for the team in black. National anthem: Chloe Zoule has some pipes! She delivers a rousing rendition of Advance Australia Fair. And we’re just about ready to go (just the six minutes behind schedule so far, which isn’t too bad). Here they come! Smith leads the Storm down the tunnel and out into the stadium... to a chorus of boos from the “home” crowd. The reception as the Panthers arrive could not be more different. The minor premiers burst out of the tunnel to a rock soundtrack and a hearty welcome. 40,000 fans are inside the stadium tonight. The match ball has been delivered onto the pitch by.... a Black Hawk helicopter. Because, why not? We’re nearly at kick-off. The teams are just getting ready to leave the sheds and enter the arena. Ivan Cleary talks: “[This week has been] a little bit less commitments than usual but can still feel the buzz. In Penrith, the community is right into it so it’s been really cool. It’s obviously a difficult season for everybody involved. I just - the fact we have been so consistent’s been probably the thing that’s really pressed me andI’m most proud about. “[The weather] is definitely a factor, how you control are the ball, kicking game. Defence particularly in their end of the field is going to be key tonight. “We’ll have some definite things about how we start but you’ve also got to play the game. There are going to be moments out there tonight and you’ve got to be alive and ready to play. We have been able to do it all year and I think we can do it again tonight.” Craig Bellamy talks: “A bit excited, a bit nervous. You never get sick of coming to a grand final but it has been a lot different this year. Only came down yesterday. Usually you’re down here three or four days before the grand final.The guys have been great all year and they’ve handled what we’ve had to handle and it’s been a great year and hopefully we can finish off in style today.” Asked what his message was to the Storm players, Bellamy said: “I want them going out and playing their strengths. Back themselves and do what they do well. That’s why they are in the team.They are in the team for a certain reason, what they do well. We need them to go out and do that well today.” NRLW: In case you missed it earlier, the Broncos underlined their utter dominance of the women’s competition with a 20-10 win over the Roosters. That’s an incredible three straight Brisbane titles since the competition’s inception. The pre-match entertainment is under way at ANZ – Amy Shark has just wrapped up her set. If you want a view on that, head to Twitter – there are plenty of opinions on that website. I’ve no intention of labouring the point about what the NRL has been through to get to this point, so will instead point you in the direction of this, by Emma Kemp: Much like some sports stars, coronavirus does not adhere to regulations, and the line between risk and reward was as fine as they come. The NRL operated at the behest of the pandemic, and just about got away with it. Read the full piece here: Channel Nine’s update on the weather has the conditions “wreaking havoc”. Can’t wait. Cameron Smith: Will he? Won’t he? The Storm great is still giving nothing away (officially) about his future after tonight’s game. It’s been the talk of the town all week (and for ages before that to be honest), but Smith is not going to be drawn. Earlier Freddie Fittler had a go at getting him to, but with no joy. “I’ll just try to keep the team with a level head,” Smith said on Channel None. “A result won’t determine my decision past this year. Whatever the result is, I will go away and think about it after this game. Whatever will be, will be.” Team news: No late changes for the Storm, but Ivan Cleary has sprung one with Tyrone May starting in the centres for the Panthers. Brent Naden will start on the bench. It is just the eighth time utility May has started a game this season Panthers: Dylan Edwards, Josh Mansour, Tyrone May, Stephen Crichton, Brian To’o, Jarome Luai, Nathan Cleary, James Tamou (captain), Apisai Koroisau, James Fisher-Harris, Viliame Kikau, Liam Martin, Isaah Yeo. Interchange: Brent Naden , Kurt Capewell, Moses Leota, Zane Tetevano. Reserves: Mitch Kenny, Dean Whare, Matt Burton, Spencer Leniu. Storm: Ryan Papenhuyzen, Suliasi Vunivalu, Brenko Lee, Justin Olam, Josh Addo-Carr, Cameron Munster, Jahrome Hughes, Jesse Bromwich, Cameron Smith (captain), Christian Welch, Felise Kaufusi, Kenneath Bromwich, Nelson Asofa-Solomona. Interchange: Brandon Smith, Tino Faasuamaleaui, Dale Finucane, Nicho Hynes. Reserves: Tom Eisenhuth, Paul Momirovski, Tui Kamikamica, Ryley Jacks. Tonight’s referee is Gerard Sutton. The toss: This happened earlier – the Panthers won it and will kick off proceedings later tonight. Weather update: It’s been steadily raining pretty much all day in Sydney – the opening round of the Women’s Big Bash League has already been impacted by the rain – and slippery conditions, both underfoot at ANZ and in terms of ball-handling could well be factors in deciding the NRL grand final. My weather sources (the internet) tell me there’s a lot more rain to come tonight too. Well, here we are then. The final act of an engrossing, unique and plain bonkers season, the likes of which we will surely never see again. Coronavirus did its best to derail the 2020 campaign, but, given we are about to enjoy the spectacle of a grand final at ANZ Stadium, you could say it failed. Sure, the NRL had to demonstrate a degree of agility and deal with a few curveballs along the way, but a mix of stubbornness, determination and a large slice of luck has meant we are in a position where there will be a 2020 premiership winner. You could argue there will be an asterisk by the name of either the Panthers or Storm later this evening, given the disruption to the season, but that’s a discussion for another time. For now, there’s a grand final to be played, some elite rugby league to be enjoyed and a Kick off is scheduled for 7:30pm AEDT, which is about an hour away. Plenty to talk about before then, so why don’t you drop me a line at mike.hytner@theguardian.com or tweet @mike_hytner. It’s always more fun having others on board.
4||Melbourne Storm hold off late Penrith charge in grand final to claim fourth NRL premiershipIt started with an illegal outstretched leg and finished with a frantic flourish that was very nearly a Penrith comeback for the ages. Ultimately, though, Melbourne Storm confirmed they are the dominant NRL team of the 21st century. The Panthers were less than four minutes into their first grand final in 17 years when Tyrone May’s stuck out his right limb, which stopped Justin Olam burrowing under him and over the line. Josh Addo-Carr had kept the ball in play with a smart flick at the corner but, for the few moments after on-field referee Gerard Sutton ruled this a “no try”, May had seemingly done his job. Seconds later the indefatigable Cameron Smith had made the first of three conversions – he finished the 80 minutes with 14 points – in the Storm’s 26-20 triumph, a turbo-charged, sometimes grotesque, often spectacular affair. The scoreboard at ANZ Stadium read 22-0 at half-time; the Panthers scored three times in the last 12 minutes. That early penalty try was the first since one was awarded to Jamie Lyon in 2013. These oddities tend to happen in season-deciders. Just utter the phrase “six again” and every Canberra Raiders fan will understand its significance. Yet in the strangest of seasons, and after a 16-team competition somehow side-stepped a pandemic, order was, in a sense, restored via Melbourne's sixth grand final win – albeit the 2007 and 2009 titles were stripped due to salary cap breaches. And while Penrith must wait at least another year to add to their 1991 and 2003 premierships their counterparts, displaced amd living out of suitcases since June due to Covid-19, ensured their era of superiority continued. This was the Storm’s 10th grand final in 23 years, and one up against the youthful vitality of the minor premiers. But it was their first premiership without the other two-thirds of the big three in Billy Slater and Cooper Cronk, and may yet send the last out on a high, should 37-year-old Smith retire. He refused to shed any light on the subject on the night. It was also an individual triumph for coach Craig Bellamy who, at 61, is the oldest coach to win a decider, overtaking super coach Wayne Bennett who was 60 when he guided St George Illawarra to glory over the Roosters in 2010. And while Bellamy’s charges were pushed until the death – not to mention the late sin bins for Brandon Smith and Jahrome Hughes – the brutal first-half dismantling they had already inflicted proved a fine safety net in a game where little is safe. There was a sense in those first 40 minutes that luck was on the Storm’s side. Olam’s penalty try was the start. Then, Josh Mansour’s seventh-minute try was disallowed for Stephen Crichton’s obstruction. Soon thereafter Crichton himself thought he had touched gold only to be told he had only made contact with a bit of air. Smith kicked two penalty goals. There were also periods – before the frenetic finale – during which the Panthers’ play warranted a 19th straight win, when set after set and wave after wave had the Storm stretched thin, their every sinew strained. But there were others, too, like when Nathan Cleary misdirected a pass and had the misfortune of watching the intercept fall for Suliasi Vunivalu. The Fijian took it to ground, then he flew, melting away 80 metres at 33km/h as mere mortals in black chased vainly in his wake. This turn of events had a distinctly Houdini flavour - the Panthers appeared to have buried themselves alive despite their clear capacity to get themselves out of a bind. Except that, instead of emerging intact, Ivan Cleary’s men never resurfaced. The whole escapade wreaked of Vaudevillian wickedness, headlined by a Cameron Smith caricature. The veteran of “will he or won’t he?” fame made another cut 60 seconds before the break, right when Penrith needed to stem the bleeding. The initial call was “no try”, on the assumption Smith had dropped the ball before retrieving and dashing through an opening. But replays showed Apisai Koroisau had knocked it from his hands, and another conversion later it was 22-0. “Obviously it didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next,” coach Cleary said at half-time. “Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try.” Five minutes into the second half, Clive Churchill medallist Ryan Papenhuyzen sprinted 70 metres after the break to score untouched from a scrum. The game looked gone, but it was not the death knell it should have been. With 28 minutes to play, Penrith raced from 26-0 down, reducing the margin to six with three seconds remaining and one final play to level it from the kick-off after a late Cleary try. But after a cross-field back and forth the ball landed in Felise Kaufusi’s hands to wrap up Melbourne’s fourth title. “This is unbelievable,” Papenhuyzen said being named player of the match. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history.”
2||Possible Veronica Guerin murder weapon found in Spanish drug raidSpanish and Irish police are examining a revolver found during a raid on the Alicante villa of the convicted Irish drug trafficker John Gilligan to determine whether it was the weapon used in the murder of the journalist Veronica Guerin. Gilligan, whose gang murdered the campaigning reporter on the outskirts of Dublin in 1996, was never convicted in connection with her killing. He did, however, threaten Guerin and her young son when she investigated his wealth and lifestyle. A Dublin court acquitted Gilligan of ordering Guerin’s murder in 2001. Despite the judge having “grave suspicions” about Gilligan’s involvement, the uncorroborated evidence of his former criminal associates was not enough to convict him of murder. Spain’s national police force said in a statement on Friday that the weapon, a Colt Python, had been recovered during a series of raids in Torrevieja and Orihuela Costa. Gilligan and five others were arrested following the operation, which was carried out in collaboration with officers from Garda and the UK’s National Crime Agency. “Those arrested were led by a known Irish criminal and were part of a group of violent drugs and arms traffickers and were specialists in shipping illegal merchandise to the UK and Ireland from Spain,” the Policía Nacional said. The investigation led to the seizure of three 9mm pistols, eight kilos of marijuana and 26,000 pills, and a more unexpected discovery. “In one of the searches carried out in Alicante as part of the investigation, a Colt Python, the same model of revolver that was used in the journalist’s murder, was found buried in a garden,” said the statement. “Spanish officers are working with the Irish police to determine whether it is the same weapon.” At the end of Gilligan’s trial almost 20 years ago, Judge Diarmuid O’Donovan said he was responsible for a “haemorrhage of harm” and for which he had shown no remorse. “Never in the history of the state has one person been responsible for so much wretchedness to so many,” he said. The judge, however, told the no-jury court that he had no choice but to acquit Gilligan of murder because the main prosecution evidence, from one of his former accomplices, Russell Warren, a state-protected witness, was unreliable and uncorroborated. Gilligan was jailed for 28 years for importing 20,000 kilos of cannabis resin worth £32m, but found not guilty of four charges of possessing weapons and ammunition. Gilligan was released from prison in October 2013. He fled Ireland the following year after being the target of two gun attacks.
22||Saturday Night Live: Adele hosts as cast pulls off the Jeffrey Toobin gagsThis week we kick off with a send-up of the second and “praise Jesus, final” presidential debate. Donald Trump (Alec Baldwin) tries to play nice by complimenting moderator Kristen Welker (Maya Rudolph), although he’s his usual unhinged self when directing nutty personal attacks and lies against Joe Biden (Jim Carrey), who struggles to keep his temper in check. From the get, the sketch is riddled with awkward pauses, missed cues and bungled lines – a frustrated Carrey exclaims ‘Damnit!’ – and it quickly devolves into a mug-off between the guest stars (Carrey’s rubber-faced caricature captures almost none of the real Biden’s idiosyncrasies, serving instead as pure ego trip). Puttering to a weak end, it’s the worst of the election cold opens so far, which is really saying something. Adele hosts for the first time, talking about how her 2008 performance on the show was the catalyst for her breakthrough in America. She thanks Sarah Palin directly. She then addresses confusion over why she’s not pulling double duty as host and musical guest – “I’d rather put on a wig, have a glass of wine or six and see we happens” – tabloid obsession with her weight loss, and her penchant for cursing when nervous. There’s little in the way of humor, but Adele comes off as laid back, which is a nice change of pace from a couple of noticeably nervous hosts. The first sketch is set in 2019 and sees a group of friends visiting a fortune teller, Kate McKinnon, who relays blurry visions of the hellscape that is 2020, which none can comprehend. (She tells one, “In 2020 you do something so terrible none of your friends will ever speak to you again … you eat inside a restaurant!”) The best sketch of the season thus far, it really sticks the landing with a final revelation that one of the friends is Jeffrey Toobin’s daughter. A new Chad sketch finds Pete Davidson’s laconic slacker visiting a haunted house and being confronted by a restless ghost, who tries to confide in him about her murder but accidentally kills him. It’s slight even by Chad standards, but Adele acquits herself well as the spirit. On a new season of The Bachelor, Adele is a contestant. Looking for love after a series of public heartbreaks, she refuses to pace herself emotionally, breaking into song at the drop of a hat, much to the chagrin of the bachelor and the other contestants. It’s a mostly lazy excuse to have Adele belt out some her hits, but it’s hard to complain since she gives it her all. A campaign commercial for Trump Addicts of America sees Biden voters admitting their fear of a post-Trump world: “My entire personality is hating Donald Trump. If he’s gone, what am I supposed to do? Talk to my kids?” The premise is solid, since previously apolitical anti-Trumpers definitely deserve to be mocked, but SNL is absolutely no position to sit in judgement. It’s impossible not think, “The lady doth protest too much.” The night’s musical guest is HER, who performs the soulful Damage. On Weekend Update, Colin Jost compares Biden’s performance in the debate to Giants quarterback Daniel Jones much-memed trip at the 20-yard-line earlier this week (a comparison that doesn’t seem to bear out the post-debate snap polls, but whatever). In another bit of SNL’s patented both-sidesism, Jost laments how old and out of it both candidates are: “This election is the equivalent of a baseball team giving a four-year deal to Willie Mays NOW.” Melissa Villasenor joins the desk to talk about her summer quarantine. She quirkily rolls through a number of random impressions – the little Rascals, Link from Zelda, Stevie Nicks and Sia. Then, following another solid dig at Toobin, this time courtesy of Michael Che – “He’s from the New Yorker, so you know that jerk was dry as hell!” – they welcome the Village People, who respond to Trump’s playing their music at his rallies by singing “Cease and Desist” to the tune of YMCA. Next, Rudolph plays a grandmother paid a socially distanced visit by her grandchildren. They try to sugarcoat their struggles with jobs, money and marriage with millennial jargon, but her constant refrain of “WHA?” breaks them down until they’re forced to air their failures in the most basic terms: “We had a three-way and he liked the other girl more!” It’s good to see Rudolph playing a purely silly character again. A message from the tourism board of Africa sees Adele and McKinnon playing horny divorcees hot for the “tribesmen”. It’s a seemingly problematic bit – let’s see if it provokes the same outrage Bill Burr got for calling out white women a few weeks ago – but it’s hard to focus on anything other than Adele’s full-bodied breaking throughout. Then HER takes the stage for a performance of Hold On, taking a break from crooning for a solid guitar solo. The final sketch sees Adele and Rudolph in a commercial for Ass Angel Perfume Jeans – women’s jeans that use a dangerous amount of chemicals to cover up embarrassing “lady smells”. It hits all the beats of a modern-day prescription drug ad, despite being set in the 80s. This strikes me as indicative of one of the major problems of current-day SNL– half-decent ideas fail to land because the writers can’t commit to a basic premise. This episode was about on par with the last three, although it contained a few more laughs. H.E.R. put in a very good performance and Adele held her own, save for breaking in the penultimate sketch. Mercifully, we’ll only have to weather a few more election cold opens, although we can only pray a Biden victory won’t result in Carrey sticking around like Baldwin did.
8||Labour vows to force another Commons vote on free school mealsLabour has thrown down the gauntlet to Downing Street by pledging to force another Commons vote if it does not U-turn on its refusal to provide free school meals in England during the holidays, as a senior Conservative MP admitted the government has misjudged the country’s mood over the issue. In a fresh intervention that will boost the campaign being led by the footballer Marcus Rashford, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said on Sunday his party would push for another vote if there is no change of course before Christmas. Labour was defeated by the government in a vote on the policy last week, prompting businesses and councils – some of them Tory-led – to step forward to offer to feed children in the October half-term break, but the government has so far dug in to defend its position. In an apparent softening of tone after a No 10 spokesman last week refused to praise councils and firms offering help, the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, said Rashford deserved “huge credit” for his work on the issue although he stood by Downing Street’s line. It comes as Sir Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative chair of the influential Commons liaison committee, said the government had “misunderstood the mood of the country” on free school meals. As the government continues to resist appeals to reverse its move, Jenkin told the Sophy Ridge on Sunday programme on Sky News: “I think we have to admit that we have misunderstood the mood of the country here.” Highlighting that the government had funded local councils to provide support, he added: “The public want to see the government taking a national lead on this and I think the government will probably have to think again on that, particularly if there’s going to be more votes in the House of Commons. “I think when you have got the chairman of the education select committee [Robert Halfon] not supporting the government on this – and he’s a Conservative – I think the government has to listen to the Conservative party.” Asked how he would vote in any further Commons divisions, Jenkin said: “I shall wait to see what the government says and how they respond to the situation.” Halfon, who voted against the government on the free school meals motion on Wednesday, wrote in the Spectator on Saturday: “Combating child hunger should, therefore, be a cause that all Conservatives can embrace. That should include the temporary extension of free school meals over the holidays while (and only while) the economic impacts of the pandemic continue to be felt.” Downing Street has already been forced to perform a U-turn once on the issue, deciding to provide £15-a-week meal vouchers to eligible children over the summer after Rashford campaigned on the issue, but it has refused to do so for the holidays ahead. Asked what had changed, meaning children who got them then should not get them during the autumn or Christmas holidays, Lewis told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday: “There’s a couple of things [that] have changed. Obviously, back in the summer we had all the schools were closed, we had that full lockdown period. Things have moved on, we’ve now got about 99% of schools and children back at schools … that’s really good. So we are in a different place but there’s more than that.” He added: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over a £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.” Dr Rosena Allin-Khan, Labour’s shadow mental health minister, told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: “We are honestly hoping that the Conservative government dig deep and look introspectively and perform a U-turn on this, but we certainly will be pushing for a vote before Christmas.” The children’s commissioner, Anne Longfield, told the same programme she thought the government should provide free school meals over the holidays, adding: “I’ve been horrified by the debate, really disappointed about the debate over recent days. We’re a wealthy country, it’s 2020.” “To have a debate about whether we should make sure that hungry and vulnerable children should have enough to eat is something which is strikingly similar to chapters, I think of you know, what we’d expect to see in Oliver Twist, a novel published in the 19th century. So let’s stop the divisive and distracting conversations, and start focusing.”
12||On Connection by Kae Tempest review – persuasive and profoundKae Tempest has added one more string to an already crowded bow: On Connection is the first nonfiction work by this Mercury prize-winning musician, Ted Hughes award-winning poet, acclaimed playwright, novelist, and chief creative chronicler of the last decade. It’s also Tempest’s first publication since changing their name from Kate, and using they/them pronouns. On Connection is a book-length essay whose subject has been somewhat overtaken by recent events. Its thesis – that our need for connection can be fostered by creativity in general and live art in particular – has become all the more compelling since lockdown. Who hasn’t missed the electric charge that crackles between artist and audience? Or felt frustrated at how live music and theatre are undermined and dismissed by a government that fails to recognise their immense value? But Tempest isn’t talking about merely missing a good night out at a gig or show. On Connection looks at creativity as a means of counteracting the numbness of the modern world. We get so caught up in an ever-spinning consumerist hamster wheel that we neglect what is true within ourselves and one another. “In a disconnected state, self-awareness is one of the first frequencies to be scooped out and muted,” they write. “When this happens, I need creativity to reconnect me.” Throughout, there are familiar shades of mysticism and mindfulness, of anti-capitalist theorising and the hippies’ tune-in, drop-out arguments. More explicitly, Tempest writes about being inspired by Carl Jung’s The Red Book and his theory that we possess a wild, inner “spirit of the depths” as well as a “spirit of the times”, the everyday ego that’s concerned with more immediate goals and ambitions. Both are needed, Tempest feels, but we’ve got them way out of whack. “In order to regain our balance, we need to remaster the ability to go deep, to ‘turn away from outer things’. To face what is in ourselves.” Each chapter is prefaced by William Blake quotations, and it’s no wonder his writing appeals to Tempest: both artists’ work is concerned with tapping into something ancient and mythic. Tempest’s call to reconnect with what Blake terms the “infinite” within ourselves proves persuasive and profound. Anyone who has seen Tempest live has likely witnessed their talent for sparking connection, even if they insist this is a mysterious, unreliable thing. But when it does come, it is wondrous: “I am granted access to a freedom so resolute it leaves me shining head to toe… Looking out at the crowd, I see reality at last. People really feeling things.” While some of their thoughts may not be new, they are surely worth repeating in this disconnected, distracted world. And Tempest, as you’d expect, delivers them gorgeously, rhythmically, but also with clarity and a fierce grace. I drank On Connection down like a fresh glass of water. • On Connection by Kae Tempest is published by Faber (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
20||How are restaurants going to survive the winter? Outdoor heatersIt’s been a tough year for many small businesses, particularly restaurants and retailers. But they’ve been doing their best to survive, despite all the restrictions. In my home city of Philadelphia, many restaurants have moved their operations outdoors – and some with success. Tables are filled. And just last night I walked by an entire spin class going on outside a local fitness center. People are doing their best to adapt. That’s good news and I’m happy for them. But there’s a looming problem: winter is coming! Can these businesses keep operating even as temperatures begin to drop? “For sure,” a friend who owns a diner told me recently. “As long as we can get more heaters. Know where I can find a few?” The pandemic has created some booming markets in games and puzzles, cleaning products, technology tools, pools, organic cat food and just about anything you can buy online. When the pandemic began people were desperate for toilet paper. But now there’s a craze affecting many desperate business owners: outdoor heaters. “We couldn’t get any at Lowe’s, Home Depot, Ace Hardware – the only place where we were able to source them is [party rental company] Tablescapes, and they charge thousands for rentals,” a Chicago restaurant owner told Eater Chicago. “It doesn’t make sense financially to spend $8,000 on four heaters.” It’s not just restaurants that need the heat. My local fitness center wants to continue outdoor classes as long as possible and a zoo in Oregon wants them to keep visitors coming. (“After getting open and figuring out how to operate safely through Covid times, having outdoor space every year, we always have to think ahead,” Portland zoo co-owner Mark Miller told local TV station WGME). Many homeowners are putting in outdoor heaters on their patios as they plan for a winter of potential lockdowns. All of this means good news if you’re in the business of making, supplying, servicing and selling outdoor heaters. The Boston Globe has reported a 70% increase in heater searches on Wayfair’s website and the phrase “patio heaters” has its highest Google search volume, according to a report in USA Today, which also provides a handy list of places where you can try your luck finding one. “We’re ordering as much as possible,” Josh Rookstool, the director of sales for Sunheat outdoor heaters, which are stocked by Wayfair and Home Depot, told the Marker. “However, there are still major backups in production.” Rockstool’s company says that sales have increased more than 400% this year. And it’s not just small businesses selling heaters that are profiting. Companies that provide propane, accessories and repairs are also seeing enormous increases in demand. Can’t find an outdoor heater for your small business? Maybe you should consider what one restaurant owner is doing: building mini igloos for your customers. Yes, that’s right. Igloos. David Lahousse, who for the past 20 years has owned Kay’s Restaurant in Woonsocket, Rhode Island, has added two greenhouse-style igloos to his parking lot and plans to add eight more. The igloos, which cost about $1,400 each keeps the temperature 20-30 degrees warmer than the outside, with one party inside at a time. “I want to make it a winter wonderland, you know?” he told local news station WPRI. “It’s not all about the money for me. I want people to have these jobs. I don’t want to lay anyone off.”
18||Cordelia review – atmospheric but uneven thrillerIn Adrian Shergold’s uneven thriller, actor Cordelia (Antonia Campbell-Hughes) continues to suffer the aftershocks of trauma from an event that took place 12 years prior. When her twin sister (also played – though less convincingly – by Campbell-Hughes) leaves her alone in their London flat for the weekend, the fragile Cordelia begins to spiral, convinced a stranger has been rifling through her knickers. Johnny Flynn is fun to watch as sleazy upstairs neighbour and violinist Frank, and with its flocked wallpaper, claustrophobic hallways and dingy paisley curtains, the flat helps create a creepy atmosphere. Still, tension is frequently punctured by clunky dialogue. “I got mired in real life, and Rada was useless,” Cordelia says wistfully.
3||'Deep down, he's a terrified little boy': Bob Woodward, John Bolton and others on TrumpBob Woodward: ‘I can’t think of a time I’ve felt more anxiety about the presidency’ Bob Woodward is associate editor of the Washington Post and the author of 20 books on American politics. In 50 years as a journalist he has covered nine presidents. His reporting on the Watergate break-in and cover-up with his colleague Carl Bernstein helped bring down Richard Nixon and won the Post a Pulitzer prize. His latest book about Donald Trump, Rage, is based on 10 hours of interviews, spread over 19 taped phone calls, often initiated by the president himself, in which Trump proved “only too willing to blow the whistle on himself”, as the Observer’s review noted. There is an atmosphere in Washington of high anxiety. Trump is melting down, to put it charitably. His campaign has been about lashing out, about wanting his former political opponents – President Obama and Joe Biden, who’s now running against him, of course – to be indicted then charged. Then there was his announcement that he is not necessarily going to accept the electoral result against him. The idea that the president would put in doubt the basic process of democracy and voting is not only unacceptable, it is a nightmare. Now you have the added factor that Trump’s also had Covid-19 and he’s on steroids, saying things like, “It is a blessing from God that I got the virus”. I can’t think of anything more absurd, or crueller, than calling it a blessing from God. More than 210,000 people have died in the US. For the president of the US to talk like that is unbelievable, but I think people have become numb to it. The outrages pile up, in a way. People have forgotten the risks. I think Kamala Harris put it very well in the vice-presidential debate: what’s happened in the US with Covid-19 is the biggest failure of the president to exercise his responsibilities, perhaps in the history of the US. This is a really dangerous period before the election. I got to know Trump very well in hours and hours of interviews I did with him for my book, Rage, and I think if there were to be some accident, some problem, during the final campaign weeks, he would capitalise on it. Henry Kissinger, of all people, was warning recently that we should worry about some sort of crisis, and reminded people that the first world war started because of an accident. Probably no one’s wanting to start a war right now, but we have a climate in the Middle East, and in the South China Sea, which China has really militarised, where you could have some spark trigger a mild confrontation – not that I think Trump’s going to manufacture that. Trump is not sufficiently tuned into the attitudes and experiences of other people, which is an essential requirement of a leader. After George Floyd was killed, I asked him about the tensions ignited in this country not seen since the heights of the civil rights movement. I said we were men of white privilege, that we’ve got to understand the pain and anger black people feel in this country. That’s when he said something that astonished me: “Wow, you sure drank the Kool-Aid! I don’t feel that at all.” He just rejected the idea that somehow white people have to understand the pain and anger of others. I think that’s one of his chief problems. He thinks in terms of his own pain and anger, and what he wants to do, which is to be re-elected. Trump also told me the US has nuclear weapons that are so devastating even President Putin and President Xi of China don’t know about them. I’m not exactly sure even today whether he was exaggerating or talking about something real. But what’s a really important question to consider here is how much power is in the presidency: when we decide to go to war, whether you look at Vietnam or Afghanistan or Iraq, it’s all been led by the president, essentially, as commander in chief. As we’ve gone into a media environment of impatience and speed because of the internet, the president is also in this position to seize the airwaves. As his son-in-law Jared Kushner said, the news is going along and then Trump tweets something and everyone drops whatever it is. Trump realises this. He uses it. He has that power. He loves being in control. He loves the spectacle. The circumstances have all converged here to give him extraordinary power. Looking to the aftermath of the election, Trump’s set the table to say that if he doesn’t win, he’s going to be suspicious of mail-in votes. I think the question is: if he loses, will his political party get together and go see him and talk to him, and say, you can’t do this? You can’t do it to the Republican party and most importantly you can’t do it to the country. There has to be an orderly transference of power, if that’s what it comes to. This is the level of anxiety I have now as a reporter: I go to sleep and get up in the middle of the night and start checking the news because God knows what might have happened. We are sitting on pins and needles in this country about every moment, every action, every assessment, and it is draining. I think lots of people have got to the point where they are tuning Trump and the political situation out as well as they can. Unfortunately, the impacts on people’s lives carry on, given the virus, given there’s no plan, or organised way of dealing with this. It’s all seat-of-the-pants impulsive decision-making. I can’t think of a time – and I’ve been a reporter for nearly 50 years – where I’ve felt more anxiety about the country and the presidency and the future. JR Mary Trump: ‘If he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over’ Mary Trump is a psychologist and the niece of Donald Trump. Her father, Fred Trump Jr, the president’s older brother, died when she was 16. Her tell-all book about the president and the Trump family, Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man, sold almost 1m copies on the first day it was published in July this year. My theory about the way Donald has run his campaign is that he knows he’s in desperate shape, so he’s going to burn it all down, sow more chaos and division, because that’s where he succeeds. He knows that he’s losing – he’ll deny it mightily – and at some level he understands what’s at stake. If he loses, he’s probably going to prison. So, if he’s going down, he’s going to take us all down with him. I’ve always believed that deep down Donald is a terrified little boy. The amount of fear he’s feeling now has got to be unhinging him. Not only did he get sick with the virus, there’s the tax story and his prospects in the election looking really bad right now. He’s got to be absolutely panicked. Throughout the campaign I thought that the absolute worst scenario would be for him to get the virus and then get well. I know that sounds awful. He’s ignored the severity of the pandemic all year because the idea of illness as weakness is so deeply ingrained in my family, that even an association with it is unacceptable, and that’s why now we’ve got 210,000 Americans dead. But now his statement – you can beat it, don’t be afraid of it – is going to result in more people becoming sick, and many of those will die. Even before he said that, I believed he was engaging in mass murder, but that sealed it for me. Anybody who’s capable of putting hundreds of millions of people at risk to avoid looking bad doesn’t care about you. Since Donald was elected, I’ve been surprised by nothing he’s done or said. But I have been shocked by the wholesale abdication of responsibility by the Republican party during this election campaign and throughout the past four years. I didn’t understand the extent to which they would be willing to enable him in Congress and in his cabinet. If they had done their job and acted as a separate branch of government, he would have been contained. By siding with him 100% of the time, they have ensured we are now faced with several concurrent disasters that are getting exponentially worse. No other president in history has been able to push the envelope the way Donald does. He’s always trying to see what he can get away with and, as I have seen through the course of his life, he’s always got away with everything. No one holds him accountable. He constantly gets rewarded for failing. The Republicans understood what he was capable of and have allowed him to push through an agenda that is completely at odds with what the majority wants. In Donald, I see somebody who is afraid, lonely, desperate, unloved. I hesitate to paint a compassionate portrait of him because he’s so culpable. However, I do have compassion for the three-year-old who was without his mother for a whole year when she was sick. That loss of affection and having no one to soothe him was deeply harmful. And when she recovered to the extent that she did, she did nothing to heal the wounds of that separation, and that’s before we get to my grandfather, who was always an awful person, capable of such abject cruelty and sadism. So now we have an adult Donald who is sad, lonely, ignorant but who also has immense power – and that is a terrifying prospect. People need to stop worrying about what might happen if he loses but doesn’t accept the results and laugh in his face. That’s the best way to undermine him. If he wins, it won’t be legitimate. He’s already using the powers of his office to shake people’s confidence in mail-in voting at a time when people want to be voting by mail during the pandemic. He’s telling his followers if Biden wins it will have been rigged, telling them to show up at the polls to make sure there’s no fraud, which is voter intimidation. If you’re a black person in America and a bunch of white guys with automatic weapons are standing outside the polling station you won’t want to vote, which is exactly what Donald wants to happen. If he stays in the Oval Office, I’m going to try to get a British passport because I don’t think I’ll fare well. He’s an extraordinarily vindictive person surrounded by people who are willing to help him be vindictive. But that’s personal: in terms of the country, if he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over. The western alliance is over. We’ll be entering an incredibly dark period of autocracy on a global scale. JR John Bolton: ‘He was envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan’ John Bolton was US national security adviser under Donald Trump from 2018 to 2019. Having started his career as a lawyer, he held senior roles in the state department and justice department during the administrations of Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush and George W Bush, who appointed him 25th US ambassador to the United Nations. His book about the Trump presidency, The Room Where It Happened, was published in June this year. People complain that Trump has a short attention span, myself included. But when it comes to his own re-election he has an infinite attention span. Decisions are made not on the basis of the pros and cons of the policies being debated but on what the domestic political blowback could be. Every president takes politics into account but with Trump it’s qualitatively different. It’s not just a factor. It’s the factor. Everything is a distinct transaction – maybe that’s how you’re successful in the real-estate business. If he doesn’t see the immediate bottom line impact, he wants to move on to something else. For example, with our close allies, he says things like: “Here we are defending you and you don’t pay for our bases and you have trade surpluses with us.” Well, we’re not there to defend them. We’re there because we have a mutual defence alliance. We think it’s in our interest as much as the allies’ interest to be forwardly deployed. We’re not there as mercenaries. And we wouldn’t want to be there as mercenaries. But he doesn’t get that. I think his election campaign is in deep trouble. Because of what happened in 2016, when everybody thought Hillary was going to win, he can say the polls are fake news and that he’ll win anyway. And he’ll say that right up to election night and probably after it. But unless the pollsters have done absolutely nothing to try to fix their methodology since 2016, you have to say that he’s in trouble. Each day you get closer to the election, by definition it’s that much harder to make up the gap. Nothing in life is certain but it looks like he’s heading for a pretty substantial defeat. He’s trying to turn his Covid-19 infection to his advantage. I assume that’s what he thought he was doing with his grand entrance to the White House, posing on the balcony like Il Duce. I think it had the opposite effect. One thing I’ve been waiting for is the wave of sympathy that you would expect from the American people when their leader is taken ill. Maybe it’s out there but there isn’t any evidence of it at this point. I had certainly heard all the criticisms of Donald Trump before I took the job of national security adviser but I felt that the gravity of the presidency, the weight of the responsibility, would have an effect on him the way it’s had on every contemporary American president once they took office. It turned out I wasn’t right. The transition and opening six months were bungled and a lot of Trumpian habits and attitudes were formed in that period. Although I had aspirations to create more orderly policy processes in the national security area, it was too late to do it. I was in retrospect overly optimistic that I could correct problems that were inherent in Trump’s approach to the job from the get-go. It became clear in ways that I previously found impossible to contemplate that he had no philosophy, no grand strategy, he didn’t think in policy terms. Every day was a new adventure. And the way I think successful foreign policy is laid out is by careful analysis and deliberation, careful implementation, review and persistence. All of these are things that basically don’t exist in the Trump administration. There was so much that he didn’t know and he has very little inclination to learn it. It’s hard to have an evolving conversation when his data base never changes. I don’t regret taking the job. I went in and lasted for as long as I could and then I came out and wrote a book so everybody would know exactly what was going on. There are still people in there now who are trying to get him to do the right thing. One thing I worry about in a second term is that people like that will simply not join the administration. Up until now, it was reasonable to say, I’ve got enough confidence I can make a difference. It’s very hard to make that argument now after four years. I don’t think he has the character or fitness to be president. I once said to a psychologist that Trump doesn’t have character and the psychologist said, sure he does, he has a character defect. So I’ll leave that to the shrinks. We never should have nominated him. Nobody ever said that politics ends up with the best people for government. But there’s something wrong when someone like this can prevail. I think he was kind of envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan. They are big guys and they do big guy things and he wants to be a big guy too. I can’t explain why he has this affinity for authoritarian leaders but there’s no doubt he does. I don’t believe he was reluctant to employ me because of my moustache, as some people say. Would he have made a flip remark about it at some point? Sure, that’s entirely possible. Whatever his flip remarks – and he’s derogatory about almost everybody, sooner rather than later – he did hire me and I actually lasted 17 months. If Trump loses and leaves on 20 January, of the four national security advisers, I will be the longest serving. It’s not like there was a battle between us over two competing worldviews, because he doesn’t have a worldview. And that was the hardest thing for me to understand and appreciate. AA Anthony Scaramucci: ‘He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world’ Anthony Scaramucci was a little-known New York financier when Donald Trump made him the White House director of communications in July 2017. He was fired just 11 days later after a string of public relations gaffes but remained a vocal Trump loyalist for the next two years. However, the president’s racist attacks on four Democratic congresswomen of colour led Scaramucci to withdraw his support. Since then he has become an outspoken critic of Trump, who frequently lashes out at Scaramucci on Twitter. His book, Trump: The Blue-Collar President, was published in 2018. In our country we’re so polarised now you have to hate the person you disagree with. But I don’t hate Donald Trump. If anything I’m somewhat sympathetic to him because there’s obviously something wrong with him. There’s a screw loose and you don’t have to be a psychiatrist to see that. You just have to look at the manic behaviour, the absurdity, the lack of maturity. He’s not a fully developed adult. He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world and I fear for the country. There’s something wrong with him and the people around him are too afraid of him to intervene on his behalf. He talked about “draining the swamp” but the swamp is now like a gold-plated hot tub. He’s taken the corruption up to a whole new level. I think if he loses the election, it’s over for him. I don’t see how he can survive this. He’ll probably get indicted. However, if he does, he probably won’t serve in jail – I don’t think America likes putting its ex-presidents in jail. So he’ll most likely get prosecuted with his sentence commuted. He likes to mud-wrestle his opponents but he can’t do that with Joe Biden because Biden is an old-school disciplined politician. His positive-negative differentials are 20% higher than Hillary Clinton’s. But I’m smart enough to know that the polls are closer than people think. If Trump wins, there is going to be a further destruction of American society. He’ll start to dismantle the institutions of our democracy, and the country will become weaker as a result of it. There’ll be more disorder, more protests, more racial tension. The move back to the White House, after hospital, tried to create these optics that he’s a superman. But you’ve got 210,000 Americans dead, so if you do a matrix, there’s about 9 million Americans who have had family or friends hurt by the virus, so that’s not going to play with them. He’s a minority politician, he’s a minority president. He’s never had the popular vote; he will have won the electoral college twice, and lost the popular vote twice. The fact is he’s an idiot. He’s unfit to serve in the office of the president. He doesn’t have the management capability. He doesn’t have the ability to empathise. He’s not a leader. He’s an un-American bully. You could say he had a lot of those attributes as a candidate in 2016 so why did I support him? And I would say, yes, I chose to overlook that because I was trying to be loyal to my party and its nominee. I started out disliking him. Then I thought, OK, I’m in the Republican party, he’s going to be the Republican candidate and now he’s won the presidency, so he’s going to be the first Republican president since George W Bush, let me figure out a way to like him. I worked for him and I have to own that for the rest of my life. I’ve acknowledged my mistake, I’ve apologised for it, and I’ve admitted that I was wrong in my political judgment and assessment of him as an individual and as a political leader. People say to me, he hasn’t changed at all, and I accept that. But I’ve changed. I’m way more psychologically minded. I’m more aware of the pain and trouble he’s causing people. I’m very happy I got fired. It probably saved my marriage and my business career. I was loyal to him for two years but the year after my book came out he told four women who were democratically elected to Congress – three of whom were born in the US, the other a naturalised citizen – to go back to the countries they originally came from. They told my Italian-American grandparents that 100 years ago. When I said that he was being racist, he started going after my wife on Twitter. I told Mayor Giuliani: “You’re disavowing your personal integrity and your family’s history by supporting this man.” You can’t talk like that as the American president in 2020. He’s a despicable guy. I don’t think most of his supporters think he’s the best man for the job. They see him as a culture warrior, though. The conservative news outlets have told them that we have a full-on culture war going on in the United States, and he is the last white man standing to protect America from the black and Hispanic latte-drinking transvestites who are going to take over their government and culture. The president’s strategy is let’s see if I can turn out every racist in America, and he hopes there are enough to beat the non-racists. The secretary of state Mike Pompeo’s supporting him because Pompeo looks in the mirror and sees a future president. We have 63 million people in the US who have voted for Trump for one reason or another, and what I can do is explain my change of heart. We now have almost four complete years of data on his ineptitude. It’s nothing personal, he’s not the right person to be president of the United States. AA
2||'Cycling capital of death': Bogotá bikers battle violence on city's streetsAndy Villalba, a tattooed and scrawny bicycle mechanic in Colombia’s capital, has long been wise to the dangers of cycling in such a chaotic city. Now, amid a boom in both cycling and bike theft, he is giving workshops in road safety and self-defence. “Welcome to Bogotá,” said Villalba, who has lost count of the number of times he has been threatened for his bicycle. “The cycling capital of death.” Cycling in Colombia is thriving. As in other cities around the world, the pandemic has prompted many commuters to forgo taxis or buses, and bike use is up 40% since last year. More than 100km of bike paths were laid in Bogotá during the lockdown. Meanwhile, professional cycling has proven to be the country’s most successful sport: elite riders have won medals at tours across Europe and last year Egan Bernal became the first Colombian to win the Tour de France. But as more people step into the saddle, bicycle thieves and homicidal drivers are forcing them to fight back with self-defence classes and weapons. “The most effective use of violence is to avoid a physical confrontation, but if it comes to it, the D-lock is your best friend,” said Villalba, 33, at a recent workshop. “Hold that in one hand and with the other use the frame of the bike as a shield.” Villalba also advises cyclists to build a network of fellow cyclists, avoid slow bike paths at night, and to cover any expensive branding on their bikes with stickers. Though Bogotá has significantly reduced violent crime over the past two decades, robberies are still a daily reality. From January to September this year, 8,023 cases of bicycle theft have been reported, up 36% on the same period the previous year. Some riders have taken to carrying baseball bats and extendable batons to protect themselves. “Carrying bats and weapons is necessary in some of the rougher neighbourhoods on the edge of the city,” said Jaime Mercho, an enthusiast. “But D-locks and chains are just as good.” Cyclists across the country united in outrage this month after José Antonio Duarte, a 56-year-old security guard, was killed by a van driver while cycling over a bridge north of Bogotá. Footage of the incident went viral, showing the van running straight into Duarte, flipping him over the railing to fall 4.5 metres, landing on his head. “Do me a fucking favour,” tweeted Bernal, when he posted the video. “How easy it is to end someone’s life … I hope there’s justice.” The local governor promised a thorough investigation, though many cyclists said they were unsurprised by the incident. Abdon Bermúdez came to Colombia four years ago from Venezuela, and works as a bicycle messenger. “My bike is my means of transport and work,” he said. “And I see all the time that drivers don’t respect cyclists – they don’t care that we have as much of a right to be on the road as they do.” A common complaint of cyclists is the lack of consideration from other road users. In Bogotá, drivers routinely neglect to use indicators, and all road users run red lights. A law passed in 2016 gave cyclists more rights on the road, though motorists often honk at riders in their lane. Sandy Millares runs a small bike messaging company in Bogotá, covering dozens of miles a day across the city. During her five years as a courier, Millares has seen it all. “People have used their cars to drive into me, motorcyclists have run their hands over me as they pass, and I’ve had bikes stolen,” the 30-year-old said, taking a break after a delivery. “I love my job but I know it’s dangerous,” she said. “And I love my city, but I know there’s certain neighbourhoods and routes that I can’t go to – as a cyclist and as a woman.”
11||Tory leader’s £1bn office buying spree ‘leaves dangerous legacy’ for councilIan Harvey cannot help but chuckle when recalling how easy it was to borrow £385m from the Public Works Loans Board to buy BP’s vast Sunbury-on-Thames research centre soon after he became Conservative leader of Spelthorne borough council, Surrey, in 2016. “I found it laughably easy, to be honest with you,” he said. “There was no real control over it. I’m told it was pretty much a phone call. It took about three days.” Harvey, who was ousted as leader of the council in the summer, went on to borrow millions more from the PWLB, a Treasury agency, to purchase seven other commercial buildings, including £170m on an office in west London and £285m on three offices in the Thames valley. By the end of his four-year reign, the council had borrowed £1.1bn – about 100 times Spelthorne’s core spending power of £11m. “There were other local authorities that did small-scale things before us, but BP broke the mould because it was so much bigger than anything else,” he said. Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spree is just the most dramatic example of how councils have been encouraged to make commercial investments to offset budget cuts during a decade of austerity. Richard Watts, the chair of the Local Government Association’s resources board, said some councils are now faced with mounting losses: “Ten years of massive cuts to local government forced councils to look elsewhere for money, but as a result of the pandemic some of these new sources of income are drying up . “If the government doesn’t step in to make up the shortfall, the losers are going to be ordinary residents because we’re going to see another very deep round of local council austerity.” The latest local authority financial returns to the government – which have not yet been published – show English councils have already lost £372m of income from market investments, including commercial property, since the country went into lockdown in March and expect to lose a total of £541m by March 2021. While many councils have invested within their boundaries to improve local areas, some smaller councils – like Spelthorne – have poured millions of pounds of borrowed public money into speculative property acquisitions much further afield. This has prompted concerns that authorities dependent on rents from largely empty office blocks and struggling shopping centres may find it increasingly difficult to service the huge debts they have built up, and ultimately be forced to cut services. Councils are supposed to base their investment strategies on a statutory code, which prohibits borrowing to invest solely for profit. Don Peebles, the head of policy at the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, which is responsible for the code, said public money is being misused: “It is like somebody going to a building society to borrow money to buy a house, but instead of buying the house they put it on a horse.” Peeebles adds that councils are taking huge risks: “It means public services are exposed to the vagaries of the market. If there is some volatility in the market, then it could impact adversely on their ability to deliver those essential services – and that is what we are seeing at the moment.” The backdrop to Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spending spree was the tight squeeze on local government budgets after 2010. Harvey argues he was forced to look for other sources of revenue because the council’s funding from central government was forecast to sharply fall. “We were basically living on reserves and selling things off. Morale was on the ground because [council officers] couldn’t achieve much,” he said. “It was hugely unfair.” However, nearly 30% the council’s budget for services is now dependent on rent from properties purchased by Harvey, who resigned from the Conservative party after he was deposed. While the financial figures so far released indicate the vast majority of the rent has been collected, the council admits: “Covid poses the most extreme economic stress test for more than two centuries”. Since the beginning of the pandemic it has already agreed £1.27m worth of rent deferrals. Restricted council papers seen by the Observer show that Harvey, in one of his final acts as leader, agreed to another deferral, worth £4.46m, with the troubled workspace firm WeWork to help “absorb the difficulties brought about by the Covid crisis”. Harvey admits this is “not ideal” but insists the council is performing better than other commercial landlords. “There is risk in anything, but it is negligible,” he said . Not everybody in Spelthorne is reassured. Lawrence Nichols, a Liberal Democrat who chairs the council’s audit committee, said Harvey left a “potentially dangerous” legacy for the borough that could unravel in 10 or 15 years when all break points in the contracts come up. “High-value decisions are not getting the scrutiny they need. The financial acumen here is really thin,” he said. “It is a rotten borough.” This month it emerged that KPMG, the council’s auditors throughout most of Harvey’s leadership, warned in August that the investment properties the council purchased in 2017-19 might be unlawful because the authority failed to have regard to the statutory code prohibiting borrowing purely to profit from investments. Spelthorne council said it had complied with all legislation and guidance, including having regard to the prudential code. It said it was completely transparent, with the council’s investments listed on its website. It added that it had assembled an experienced team to manage its commercial investment strategy and had built up a £20m sinking fund to protect services from fluctuations in rental streams: “Even on the worst case modelling, the figures indicated that we have more than sufficient sinking funds to ensure that the revenue budget is not adversely impacted at any point over the next 10 years.” The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government said it had provided councils with £6.4bn worth of support during the pandemic. It added that councils must properly consider the risksand opportunities when they made investment decisions: “We share concerns about a minority of councils that continue to expose themselves and taxpayers to unnecessary risk. We have a set framework which councils must observe and we will continue to monitor this,” said a spokesperson.
0||Chelsea dig in to foil Manchester United in a game that felt out of timeOle Gunnar Solskjær can do one big thing well, and that is sit his side deep and attack on the counter. Frank Lampard has one big thing he has struggled to do well, and that is set his side up to defend well against the counter. That’s why when these sides met at Old Trafford last season, Chelsea had 54% possession, won the shot count 18-10 and lost 4-0. Everything Lampard did on Saturday seemed aimed at avoiding a repeat. And it worked. As in last season’s FA Cup semi-final, Chelsea set up with a back three, left no space behind their defensive line, and successfully thwarted United. At Wembley, individual errors from United players handed Chelsea victory; here the arm Harry Maguire hooked around César Azpilicueta’s neck should at the very least have handed them a penalty. Personnel, of course, helps. Thiago Silva was a calm and authoritative figure at the heart of the back three, while Édouard Mendy made three very good saves. He looked lively, sharp and, crucially, didn’t radiate the sort of panic Kepa Arrizabalaga has recently. But having failed to keep an away clean sheet since December, this was at heart a tactical victory for Lampard. The next stage, as he acknowledged, is to add goals to successive clean sheets; given the quality Chelsea have in the front half of the team, that should come, even if it takes time to forge the sort of coordinated attacking patterns that characterise the very best sides. To which there is one very obvious caveat: Solskjær’s United habitually struggle to break down teams who sit deep against them. It’ll be a long time before a goalless draw at Old Trafford ceases to be a decent result, and in context it has a specific value for Lampard, but it is not the prize it once was. Solskjær’s results fit a pattern. United have won their last 10 away games in all competitions but none of their last five at home. This is why he has beaten Paris Saint-Germain twice at the Parc des Princes, why he has three wins against Pep Guardiola, why United were the only team to take league points off Liverpool last season until the end of February. He can organise the rearguard and United have the speed and talent up front to expose teams who operate high up the pitch. But against teams who drop off, United are far less adept. That’s why home defeats to Crystal Palace feel just as emblematic of Solskjær’s reign as away wins against PSG. It’s why the defeat to Sevilla in the Europa League semi-final was so crushing: it wasn’t just that United had missed out on a European final, it was that they had done so in such a characteristic way, flailing hopelessly like Scrappy Doo meeting a longer-armed opponent able to keep him at bay with a calm hand on the front of his head – and that despite taking the lead. The biggest tactical criticism of José Mourinho at Real Madrid from his own players was the way he left them to improvise in the final third: his refusal to do what Guardiola and Jürgen Klopp do and work relentlessly on attacking cohesion. Over the past decade, the ability to create cohesive attacking patterns has probably been the single biggest factor that distinguishes the very best coaches from the tier below. United have consistently failed to achieve that fluency. In the opening quarter of the game, in particular, there were constant diagonals from Maguire, Fred and Scott McTominay aimed at the space in front of Daniel James. Except there was no space, because Chelsea had a deep-lying back five. Reece James advanced only rarely and when he did, Azpilicueta, as a regular right-back, was perfectly equipped to cover behind him. The barrage did eventually stop, but it was replaced by safety-first sideways passing. Solskjær, never shy of appealing to romantic myth, spoke of how a full Stretford End might have sucked in Marcus Rashford’s late effort; more likely they would have been groaning in frustration at the witlessness of much of what had gone before. United created four meaningful chances: snapshots from Rashford and Juan Mata, a break by Rashford after a Jorginho error and Edinson Cavani’s improvised flick into the side-netting after some sharp movement. None of them were the result of coordinated play. Against diligent opponents, that can happen, but it is happening to United every time they meet a team that sits deep. In that sense, this was a logical fifth step in the sequence. Solskjær had won his first three meetings against Lampard, who in the past two has found a way of correcting what had been going wrong before. Given Chelsea’s continuing defensive problems and the fact United had let in nine in their previous two home games, the caution was understandable. The outcome was a game that felt oddly out of time, like a top-six clash from 15 years ago. But given the wildness that has characterised the start to this season, the obvious risks of operating a high line with a lack of time properly to organise the press, it may be that more sides adopt a more traditional approach. There were specific reasons for the conservatism of both sides but, in a highly unusual environment, it could be a glimpse of a broader immediate future.
17||Police investigating Grenfell Tower fire make first arrestPolice investigating the Grenfell Tower disaster have arrested a man on suspicion of perverting the course of justice. The unnamed 38-year-old was arrested on Saturday in Sussex and taken to a local police station, Scotland Yard said. Detectives released him the same day under investigation. The arrest is the first by police investigating the June 2017 fire that claimed 72 lives. It follows fury among bereaved and survivors at revelations emerging from the public inquiry about the handling of potential evidence. Scotland Yard said in a statement on Saturday the arrest in Sussex did not relate to events heard at the Grenfell Tower inquiry this week. They did not name the arrested man. The inquiry is not scheduled to finish hearing evidence until December 2021 at the earliest, after which the inquiry panel is likely to need several months to produce a report.
23||Joe Trivelli’s recipes for lamb chops, panada, bagna càuda and apples cakeThese are dishes with which to warm up. Hearty, simple, warming food that I like to share. It’s time to stoke the fire, or the bonfire, and treat yourself well. Arrivals from the south of Italy have asked me why there isn’t a friggitoria (fry shop) in London. I pointed them to the chippies, to demonstrate there wasn’t the gap in the market they thought. The fried vegetables and lamb here is something that I am adding to the menu at my fantasy friggitoria. Something to eat with your fingers and worth the bother of disposing of the oil the following day. Panada is also something of a fantasy dish. Pure comfort food, a savoury bread pudding with a Renaissance touch of grapes. It’s a great way to use up some of the extra bread you’ve been baking. It’s also a good one to prepare ahead and then pop in the oven after a march around, if not the countryside, the block. Lucky me, I often find myself in Piedmont for a few days at this time of year. I know of no other place that excels at winter food as much. Bagna càuda is a regional highlight and this recipe is the traditional one. Once you’ve spent a good hour making it, you could be forgiven for thinking that dunking vegetables in this mostly oil sauce has lost its appeal, but the flavour is like nothing else and the experience not half as heavy as you expect. It is the best dipping dish in the world, the variety of the raw and boiled vegetables spicing up each bite. Fried vegetables and lamb chops Frying at home is to be undertaken when you have no distractions. You may like to feed these to your guests “à la minute”, frying in batches, or keep everything warm until all is ready. This recipe makes a lot and takes patience to fry. Serves 6 plain flour 150g olive oil celeriac ½ sprouting broccoli 300g sage a bunch caperberries 40g lamb cutlets 12 thyme a few sprigs eggs 2 semola flour 200g egg whites 2 sunflower oil for frying salt, pepper chilli flakes lemons 2 To make the batter, sieve the flour into a bowl. Add 3 tbsp of olive oil and whisk in 230ml of water until smooth. Cover and set aside for at least 30 minutes. Peel the celeriac and cut into irregular pieces, a few centimetres thick. Blanch these in boiling water for 4 minutes and then the broccoli for 2 minutes. Set aside. Pick the sage leaves. Soak the caperberries in water. Trim the fat from the lamb cutlets and bash them with a rolling pin until they are 1cm thin. Make a couple of incisions into each and insert some thyme leaves and sprinkle with a little salt. Whisk the eggs and, holding by the bone, dip each cutlet into this wash, then dredge in the semola, then back to the egg and once again the semola to make sure it’s well coated. Set aside on a plate ready for frying. Whisk the egg whites until stiff and fold into the batter. Drain the caperberries and dry with kitchen towel. Now you are ready to heat the sunflower oil. Do so in a pan that is at least double the height of the oil – a large, stable wok is ideal. Use a thermometer or a dollop of batter to check the temperature; 180-190C is ideal. In batches, put the lamb straight in and then fry the vegetables and sage leaves dipped first into the batter. Place carefully into the oil so that they don’t splash. Use tongs or a slotted spoon to turn everything over. Please don’t try to cook everything at once, but do so in batches, ending with the caperberries. Drain on a serving plate lined with kitchen paper. Season with salt and pepper and dust all with a sprinkle of dried chilli – I like to pound it very well in a mortar and pestle until it’s like powder – and serve with lemon wedges. Eat with your fingers. Panada with grapes and Gruyère I think that’s what you call this. I’d eat it with a bitter winter green salad for supper in front of the fire. Serves 6 savoy cabbage ½ (about 250g) onion 1 salt fennel seeds 1 tsp Muscat grapes 250g olive oil pepper bread wholegrain, 3 doorstep slices Gruyère, fontina or similar 100g parmesan 1 tbsp grated Shred, wash and blanch the cabbage in salted water for 4 minutes. Don’t throw the water away. Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Slice the onion and fry over a medium heat with a pinch of salt in a pan you can move to the oven. Add the fennel seeds, and add dashes of water if you think the onion may catch. Once the bottom of the pan is browned but not burned, add the grapes. Stir for 2 minutes, scraping the bottom of the pan as you do so, allowing the grapes to burst but not squishing them. Turn off the heat, add the cabbage and combine with another couple of tbsp of oil, and a liberal amount of roughly cracked black pepper. Use several ladles of the cabbage water as stock to loosen. You could use meat stock instead if you prefer. Cut the bread into thick doorstep slices, 3 will probably do. Tear these over the top of the pot and sink into the cabbage and grapes. Make sure some of the grapes and cabbage show through. Cut the cheese into slivers and dot around, following with the parmesan and a drizzle of oil. Bake for 25 minutes until golden. Bagna càuda The way to serve this is to give everyone a small amount of sauce in their own hot bowl and serve the vegetables separately: raw and boiled. Use the vegetables to stir the sauce. Serves 6 garlic 1 head extra virgin olive oil 200ml salted anchovies 125g unsalted butter 80g, softened potatoes 3 large carrots 6 celery 1 head red chicory 3 white chicory 3 fennel bulbs 2 Peel the garlic. Cut it in 2 and remove the central new green growth. In your smallest saucepan, over the lowest heat, add half the oil and the garlic. (On a gas cooker, adding a heat diffuser might be your best bet.) The garlic needs to cook without frying or browning until completely soft – 30 minutes at least. Should the garlic start to fry, take the pan off the heat for a moment. While this is happening, wash and dry the anchovies. If they are under oil, just drain the fillets, but do make sure you have enough actual fish, as they will include the oil as part of the total weight on the tin. Add the anchovies to the oil and continue stirring with your wooden spoon, encouraging them and the garlic to “melt” into the oil. Then add the rest of the oil and continue stirring until a thick sauce is achieved. There is no need to adjust the temperature. Then add the butter and mix in. The sauce needs to be kept warm until served. Boil the potatoes, then cook the carrots and celery as much or as little as you like – with a bit of crunch or a whole lot of give. Cut the potatoes into fat fingers. Wash and slice the chicories and fennel. You’re ready to go! Get dipping! Apples, walnuts and ricotta This simple and delicious pudding is the ideal way to finish a meal. Serves 6 shelled walnuts 100g golden caster sugar 40g, plus extra for sprinkling sea salt olive oil apples 6, medium-eating, not too soft, (about 600g) ricotta 500g, fresh cinnamon ⅛ of a stick brown sugar 2 tbsp Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Blitz the walnuts with the sugar and a good pinch of salt until they are fine crumbs, but not so much that they are paste. Scrunch up a large sheet of baking paper and flatten it out again. Barely oil the centre and then sprinkle with extra sugar. Use it to line a small 20cm loaf tin. Peel the apples and bob in a bowl of cold water so they don’t discolour. Slice the apple into ultra-thin 3mm slices, turning through 90° to avoid the cores. (You can use a Japanese mandolin if you have one and are good at that sort of thing.) Make a layer in the bottom of the tin with some of the apples and sprinkle over some of the walnuts. Add another layer of apples and walnuts and so on, building it up like a lasagna. It takes me 4 layers to come out even – it’s nice if the last layer is apple, but with some walnuts peeping through. Bake for 25 minutes. Remove from the oven, turn the heat down to 160C/gas mark 3. Sprinkle with a little more sugar and return to the oven for an hour. Allow to cool before serving. Reheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Without ceremony, turn the ricotta out on to a nonstick baking sheet. Grind the cinnamon in a mortar and pestle and sprinkle it on to the ricotta with brown sugar and a tiny pinch of salt. Bake for 20 minutes. Slice while still warm and serve with the cold apple flan. Joe Trivelli is co-head chef at the River Café
5||Republicans want to open pristine Alaska wilderness to logging. It's a tragedyForests are the lungs of the Earth. Around the world, every minute of every day, trees perform magic. They inhale vast amounts of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, and exhale oxygen, the stuff of life. They keep things in balance. And no single forest does this better – contains more living plant life per area, or stores more carbon – than the 17m-acre Tongass national forest in coastal Alaska. Take a deep breath. The oxygen you just pulled into your lungs that entered your bloodstream and nourished your mind was once in a tree. The Amazon of North America, the Tongass is mostly a roadless, wilderness kingdom of mosses, lichens, salmon, deer, bald eagles and bears – all beneath ice-capped mountains, ribboned with blue glaciers, blanketed with green, shaggy stands of Sitka spruce, western red cedar and western hemlock. Trees up to 10 feet in diameter, 200 feet tall, and 800 years old. But while the Amazon is a tropical rainforest, the Tongass, found at the mid-latitudes, is a temperate rainforest, one of the rarest biomes on Earth (found only in coastal Alaska and British Columbia, the Pacific north-west, the southern coast of Chile, and the South Island of New Zealand). A true old-growth forest, the Tongass represents a council of ancients. Indigenous Tlingit elders say it is rich with answers – even wisdom – if we ask the right questions and show proper restraint. And what does the Trump administration intend to do with it? Open it up for business. Their plan, more than two years in the making and spearheaded by the Alaska senator Lisa Murkowski, secretary of agriculture, Sonny Perdue, and Alaska governor, Mike Dunleavy – all Republicans bereft of a science education and an ecological conscience – is simple and wrongheaded: put the Tongass back to work as a so-called “healthy” forest, according to Mr Perdue. How? By re-introducing large-scale clearcut logging and extensive road building on 9.3m acres. To do this, they must exempt Alaska from the 2001 US Forest Service “Roadless Rule”, an enlightened conservation initiative that applies to 39 states. In short, the Tongass would no longer be protected. A final decision is likely to be released later this month. Never mind that 96% of thousands of recent public comments say the Tongass should remain roadless to protect clean water, salmon streams, wildlife habitat and old-growth trees. Never mind as well that logging the Tongass would create few jobs while adding to an already bloated federal deficit. Logging in Alaska is heavily subsidized. Back in the 1970s, 80s and 90s, taxpaying Americans anted up an average of $30m a year. One deficit sale offered every 1,000 board feet of timber for less money than the cost of a cheeseburger. All while many of the trees were shipped “in the round” (as whole logs) to Asia to become rayon, cellophane and other throwaway consumer goods. Another sale generated only 2.5 cents on every dollar the Forest Service spent building roads and preparing paperwork. And today? To build roads in the Tongass would cost taxpayers up to $500,000 a mile. Anthropologist and former Alaska writer laureate Richard Nelson, who lived in Sitka, on the edge of the Tongass, once said he wasn’t bothered when he found a stump in the forest. What broke his heart was when he came upon a “forest of stumps”. Entire mountainsides, valleys and islands shorn of trees. Yes, parts of the Tongass can be responsibly cut, and are. Many local Alaska economies use second-growth stands to harvest good building materials. And yes, a ravaged forest will return, but not for a long time. The Alaska department of fish and game estimates that large, industrial-scale Tongass clearcuts need more than 200 years to “acquire the uneven-aged tree structure and understory characteristic of old growth”. That is, to be truly healthy and robust again. This according to scientists, not politicians. The wholesale destruction of our imperiled planet’s most life-sustaining forests has to stop. How? A good first step: vote for politicians who make decisions based on solid science. Between 2001 and 2017, 800m acres of tree cover (an area nearly 50 times larger than the Tongass) disappeared worldwide, all while global temperatures climbed, wild birds and mammals perished by the billions, and fires, hurricanes, tornadoes and droughts intensified. And since 2017? Witness Australia and California. What few large, primal forests remain intact today, such the Tongass, become increasingly valuable for their ability to mitigate climate change. Scientists call this “pro-forestation”: the practice of leaving mature forests intact to reach their full ecological potential. The Tongass alone sequesters 3m tons of C02 annually, the equivalent of removing 650,000 gas-burning cars off the roads of the US every year. The better we understand science and indigenous wisdom, the better we’ll recognize the living Earth as a great teacher that’s fast becoming our ailing dependent. We each get three minutes without oxygen, and we’re not the only ones. It’s a matter of having a deep and abiding regard for all life. Call it respect. “What makes a place special is the way it buries itself inside the heart,” Nelson wrote in his memoir, The Island Within. “[N]ot whether it’s flat or rugged, rich or austere, wet or arid, gentle or harsh, warm or cold, wild or tame. Every place, like every person, is elevated by the love and respect shown toward it, and by the way in which its bounty is received.” Kim Heacox is the author of books including The Only Kayak, a memoir, and Jimmy Bluefeather, the only novel to ever win the National Outdoor Book Award. He lives in Alaska, on the edge of the Tongass
14||The lynx effect: Iberian cat claws its way back from brink of extinctionSpotty of coat, tufty of ear, and teetering on the verge of extinction less than two decades ago, the Iberian lynx is continuing to claw its way back across Spain and Portugal. According to the latest survey, the lynx population on the peninsula has increased ninefold over 18 years, rising from 94 in 2002 to 855 this year. Experts say that if the current conservation and reintroduction efforts can maintain their momentum, the species could be out of danger by 2040. The 2019 census, carried out using camera-traps and large reserves of patience, revealed that more than 80% of the lynx population is in Spain, that 311 kittens were born on the peninsula last year and that there were 188 females of reproductive age. There are populations in the Sierra Morena and Donaña national park. At the end of the last century, however, things looked decidedly bleak for the bearded cats – and for rabbits, which make up 90% of their diet. Government efforts to get rid of creatures considered to be vermin, which lasted until the mid-1970s, took a terrible toll, as did a catastrophic drop in rabbit numbers following the arrival of myxomatosis in the 1950s and then rabbit hemorrhagic disease in the 1980s. Both those factors were compounded by the destruction and isolation of habitats that came with motorway building and a greater human presence. Miguel Ángel Simón, a biologist who spent 22 years conserving and building up lynx numbers before retiring last year, remembers the daunting scale of the task he and his colleagues faced.“When we started back in 2000, we didn’t even know how many lynxes were left,” he says. “We found out from the first census that there were 94 and we thought that they were going to disappear. We just didn’t know if there was any way to save them – they were right on the edge and in critical danger of extinction. Back then, they were the most endangered felines in the world. Our first aim was just to stop them becoming extinct.” Their strategy of seeking money and engagement from politicians, and cooperation from landowners and the public, gradually paid off. A series of projects, coordinated by the Andalucían government in conjunction with other Spanish regions, the Portuguese authorities and conservation NGOs, has arrested the decline, expanded populations and seen lynxes reintroduced to other areas. “Today, the situation is pretty good and I think we can be optimistic and fairly calm because we haven’t just recovered the population in Andalucía, we’ve also built populations in Portugal – where the lynx was extinct – and in Extremadura and Castilla-La Mancha,” says Simón. The latest phase of the programme, the five-year Life Lynxconnect project, has a budget of €18.8m, 60% of which comes from the EU. Javier Salcedo, the project’s new leader, said the main aim was to join up existing populations and increase their genetic diversity. “We need to see an exchange of animals that will give us an exchange of genes,” he says. Ramón Pérez de Ayala, the large carnivores coordinator for WWF Spain – one of 21 partners in the latest project – warns that lynx populations are in danger of developing genetic problems if they remain isolated. “We’re going to do some genetic tracking so we can monitor the situation and see if we need to move individuals artificially.” Pérez de Ayala is also upbeat about the future of the lynx and hopes to see it move from the endangered category of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of threatened species into the vulnerable category. He estimates it will take another 20 years of hard work before Spain and Portugal can claim to have saved the lynx. “If we carry on, if we can maintain the population growth momentum, and if luck stays on our side, we’ll have at least 750 females of reproductive age – which means more than 3,000 lynxes in total – by 2040,” he says. Between now and then, existing populations will have to be blended and increased, and new ones established in rabbit-rich habitats. Equally important will be the mapping and marking of blackspots: in 2019, 34 lynxes died after being run over. For Pérez de Ayala and many others, protecting the lynx is a moral and ecological imperative. “Every species has an intrinsic value that can’t be lost – it would be like demolishing a cathedral,” he says. “And you’re talking about an animal that does a really good job of balancing out the food chain of the Mediterranean ecosystem.” In the absence of lynxes, medium-sized predators that eat rabbits – such as foxes and Egyptian mongooses – put prey species under a lot of pressure. When a lynx comes along, explains Pérez de Ayala, the density of foxes and mongooses goes down and rabbit populations increase. But, he adds, environmental harmony is only one of the many reasons why the peninsula’s unique wild cat must remain well spotted. “On a more emotional level, the lynx is a jewel and a thing of beauty to behold.”
17||Windrush man wrongly classified as illegal immigrant left destitute for a yearAn electrician who was wrongly classified as being an illegal immigrant, despite living in London for more than 45 years, was destitute as he waited a year for the Windrush taskforce to decide on his application to stay in the UK, the parliamentary ombudsman has ruled. Applications to the taskforce were meant to be processed within two weeks. The year-long wait was described as “shocking” by the ombudsman in a detailed report published this week – the latest of a series of highly critical reviews into the performance of the Home Office over the Windrush scandal. The parliamentary ombudsman has ruled that the Home Office should apologise and pay Mr R £5,000 in compensation for “maladministration and delay” in processing his case. Officials wrongly told him that he would be able to claim benefits while he waited for a decision, but he found himself unable to claim any support. “He could not work, had no money and could not buy food,” the report stated. “He said he was destitute and felt ‘worthless, broken, with no hope or prospects’. “He told us everyone slept in the same room at the homeless shelter and he had no privacy. He was not allowed to stay in the building during the day; he spent his time walking the streets or going to the library. All he wanted to do was get his status confirmed so he could work again and begin to rebuild his life.” Mr R arrived in the UK in 1970 from Nigeria aged eight, but had no way of proving that he had arrived at that time. He lost his home and job as a result of being wrongly classified as an illegal immigrant by the Home Office in 2014. When the government apologised in April 2018 for wrongly categorising thousands of legal residents as immigration offenders, he applied for his right to remain in the UK to be formally recognised. His case was complicated because, like many applicants to the scheme, he struggled to find documents proving that he had been in the UK since the early 1970s; staff told him it could take six weeks to come to a decision. Although a decision was made internally on his case after about two months, officials waited 10 months to communicate the decision to him, the report found. Mr R was not granted status under the scheme because of ongoing difficulties finding documents proving his arrival but was eventually advised about how to make a different application to remain on the grounds of long-term residence. The ombudsman’s report found that UK Visas and Immigration was “well aware” of Mr R’s “desperate situation yet it repeatedly refused requests to expedite its decision”, and that “UKVI gave responses on the delay that were not in line with our principles of being ‘open, accountable and truthful’”. The report concludes: “The Windrush scheme was set up to rectify past wrongs and do so with urgency and purpose. It has fallen well short of that in this case.” Emily Thornberry, the Labour MP for Islington South and Mr R’s MP, said: “It is appalling that this man, who was particularly vulnerable, remained homeless for more than a year due to disgraceful delays on the part of the Home Office. The hostile environment has caused enormous hardship, and the Windrush scheme has let so many people down – the Home Office should be ashamed of themselves.” The parliamentary and health service ombudsman provides an independent and impartial complaint handling service for complaints that have not been resolved by the NHS in England and UK government departments. Rob Behrens, the ombudsman, said he was handling a number of other Windrush complaints. “We encourage anyone who has complained about their treatment under the Windrush scheme to come to us via their local MP if they are not happy with the response they have received.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Mr R’s application under the Windrush scheme was refused and the decision has been upheld following independent review. UKVI apologises for the delay in issuing a decision.”
5||Since we’re talking fantasy Brexit deals…In 1981, tarnished by a legacy of nuclear embarrassments, the leaky Cumbrian atomic power plant Windscale was rebranded as Sellafield and the problems of public perception simply melted away, like hot uranium seeping into a water table. Likewise, we are no longer about to embrace a similarly contaminated no-deal Brexit. We are instead welcoming a nice, new Australia-style deal. But Australia doesn’t have a deal with the EU (even though it wants one). We are embracing a no-deal Brexit in all but name. It is, as the secretary of state Alok Sharma admitted to an unusually uncooperative Nick Ferrari on Monday, “just a question of semantics”. Ah yes. The Conservatives’ old enemies! Words! And their actual meanings! On Monday evening, I opened my Anglo-Asian tandoori lamb vindaloo delivery and found a request to contribute to one of Dominics Cumming’s blue-sky, out-of-the-box think-boxes inside it, written on my poppadum in mango chutney. Cumming’s omniscient net-lords knew my every move. As usual, Cumming was looking for hot-ass cyber-freaks and batshit Ballardian head-jobs who could furnish him with shamanic sci-fi solutions. Apparently I was such a person because I had both written a comic book about a ghost and sung in 10th-century Anglo-Saxon on a dance record. Cumming needed a way to avoid identifying the incoming no-deal Brexit, which no one had wanted or expected, as the no-deal Brexit it clearly was. Sharma’s public admission that the Australia-style deal rebrand was linguistic smoke and mirrors had proved potentially problematic and threatened to unravel a number of other flimsy, fictional Conservative constructs, the implausible public persona of Boris Johnson having been deemed the most vulnerable to a moment’s scrutiny. Normally I wouldn’t sell my skills to a Tory brainstorming session, but I am principally a live comedian and I haven’t worked since March. Under lockdown, my principles, like my trousers, inexplicably became elasticated and I was to be offered the usual £25,000-a-day consultancy fee, as long as I worked through a company run by an old schoolfriend of any current cabinet member. I was picked up and taken to the agreed secret location – a boarded-up, underground, art deco gentleman’s convenience on Shepherd’s Bush Green – where I joined four other futurist-warlocks round a socially distanced, circular marble table. One had blue-lensed granny specs and a green parrot on her shoulder; another was dressed as a kind of disco Rudolf Hess; a third wore tracksuit bottoms, espadrilles and a plain brown Primark T-shirt, but his bangle was festooned with runes. All were inscrutable, carried satchels and had produced incendiary content for opaquely funded libertarian blogs. They regarded Laurence Fox as a Trojan horse, Michael Gove as a stink bomb and Boris Johnson as an unpleasant but useful clump of sausage meat that could be animated to mouth whatever words were necessary, within its limited capacity. In the centre of the table, Cumming’s head appeared inside an illuminated glass crystal ball full of pink gas. Initially, I assumed it was a three-dimensional holographic projection, like Laurence Olivier’s head in Dave Clark’s Time musical, Cumming broadcasting his image from elsewhere. He had previous form in being in two places at once, such as Islington and Barnard Castle, for example. But every now and again, Cumming’s face would groan and the head would shift uneasily and I realised the eyesight-anxious political fixer was actually crouching uncomfortably beneath the table with his skull through a hole, gas pumping into the simple goldfish bowl that encased it so it looked mysterious, like a shit Wizard of Oz. If any of my fellow situationist-idea-terraformers realised his ruse, they didn’t let on, fearful of dismissal. “Sharma’s careless breakfast lips have exposed the semantic hollowness of the ‘Australia-style deal’ language virus, immunising some sections of the electorate against its charm,” Cumming’s head began, his voice condensed behind the glass, like someone speaking into a plastic cup to do an impression of Melvyn Bragg. “We must use our sock puppets in the internet, the press and the BBC to obscure it, flood the info-sphere with synonymous ideas, fabricating post-Brexit deals with nonexistent places and creating plausible backstories to stiff any grots that would verify them. Be about it!” And with that Cumming popped down beneath the table again to conceal himself. By Wednesday lunchtime, the airwaves were abuzz with our distractions, expendable loyalist MPs swamping Sharma’s indiscretion with expedient lies. On 5 Live, Banbury MP Victoria Prentis said she was looking forward to an Eternia ™ ® style deal with the planet Eternia, He-Man ™ ® having already promised timber from the Skytree ™ ®; on Talk Radio, Torbay’s Kevin Foster spoke enthusiastically of our Equestria ™ ® style deal and of the untapped financial value of the manure of his magic Little Ponies ™ ®, especially the thick dung of Pinkie Pie ™ ®; and on Sky News, West Suffolk’s Matt Handcock nervously commended a Gor ™ ® style deal to Adam Boulton, while explaining it wasn’t his place to criticise the fantasy kingdom’s human rights violations, most notably the compulsory sexual captivity of all women, when it offered such valuable access to the slave markets of the Insectoids ™ ®. By midnight, I had helped publicise fictional deals with the nonexistent realms of Atlantis, Plutonia, Pellucidar ™ ®, Lemuria ™ ®, Skartaris ™ ®, Etheria ™ ®, Lyonesse and Wakanda ™ ®, whose coveted metal, Vibranium ™ ®, did not exist either. And by the time Cumming spat me out into the Shepherd’s Bush night, I was so disoriented I almost believed it all myself. I drank a few cans of strong cider alone on the darkening green. All-but-empty night buses circled me, masked passengers staring out. “Everything will be OK,” I thought, “we have a Fantasy Island-style trade deal. The Plane! The Plane!” Stewart Lee contributes 10th-century Anglo-Saxon poetry to a track on the new album by Asian Dub Foundation, Access Denied, out now
19||Swing out, sisters: the nuns singing through lockdownSocial distancing and lockdown come naturally to the Poor Clares of Arundel in West Sussex: after all, they’ve been doing it for 800 years. “In our day-to-day life the pandemic has hardly affected us at all,” says Sister Gabriel, who joined the order of enclosed nuns in 1994, aged 23. “The biggest sadness for us is that we’ve not been able to have visitors – we’ve hardly seen any outsiders for months.” Now, though, the outside world is hearing from the Poor Clares, because on the eve of lockdown, back in March, the nuns were in the final stages of recording their debut album. The sisters hope it will bring some of the simple, balanced principles of cloister life to those struggling with the fallout from Covid. “It’s been a time of great anxiety and stress, and people really need to zone out and find a place of peace,” says Sister Gabriel. The Poor Clares – who wear long brown habits, beige-coloured veils and sandals – practise a kind of ancient mindfulness: they focus on the present, and other than visits to the doctor or dentist, they stay within the confines of their monastery. At the height of lockdown, says Sister Leo, who’s in her 60s and entered the community in 1976, people would contact her to ask for advice on how to cope with having to stay in the same place, day after day. “I always said the same thing: pay attention to regularity in your life, and do things by a timetable. That’s how it works for us. And I think it’s helped others when I’ve said, ‘We live like this the whole time, and we have done for many years.’” All the same, the sisters acknowledge there’s a world of difference between choosing to live separately from others and having it forced on you. “We’re very conscious that for many people the last few months have been truly hellish,” says Sister Aelred, who’s in her 70s and entered the community in 1961 aged 18. “I’ve got friends in their 80s who are self-isolating, and I know how lonely and difficult it’s been for them.” We’re talking around a big table in the nuns’ parlour, which, due to Covid restrictions, is the only part of the convent I’m allowed to enter. And though they’re a largely silent order, with speaking restricted during the day other than at recreation, and strictly adhered to from nightfall to dawn, the sisters certainly know how to chat. Assuming them to be meek and mild and reticent is one of the many mistakes people make, says Sister Gabriel. “People expect us to be sombre, whereas there’s a lot of fun and laughter in our lives. They think we’re not in touch with politics – they think we’re not ordinary women, when in fact we very much are.” “People would be surprised to hear we fall out,” says Sister Aelred. “And they would also be surprised that we enjoy a glass of beer or wine, from time to time.” What’s different about life in the community isn’t that nuns are a different species, they explain, but that they’ve bought into a simpler life. In a complex, upside-down world, could it be that their daily routine has wisdom to impart to the rest of us? The sisters rise at 5.30am (5am in summer) to embark on a day that follows more or less the same structure Poor Clares and other monastic orders have followed for hundreds of years. After breakfast and an hour’s meditation (“to centre ourselves”, says Sister Gabriel), the nuns gather in their chapel for prayers and, two days a week, for mass. “Then we have a period for work, which might be anything from cooking to working in the vegetable garden, to doing our paid work, which is spiritual direction – we’ve switched that to Zoom,” she says. Lunch, the main meal of the day, is eaten in silence while one sister reads aloud from a spiritual text; the same happens at supper, but the text is what Gabriel describes as “a lighter book – it might be a biography, for example”. After lunch comes a rest period and more work, before (on three days of the week) “recreation”, where the sisters are free to chat and catch up with one another’s news. “The thing about structure is, it helps you to use your time more wisely,” says Sister Gabriel. “We often waste time: if you’ve got an eight-hour window for work, you dissipate and end up on the phone or computer. But if you’ve only got two hours, it forces you to use the time wisely. Structure creates space, to achieve what you want, and to simply be.” Music is at the heart of the nuns’ worship – but the idea of recording an album, explains Sister Aelred, came about initially as a bit of a joke. Music producer James Morgan got in touch to ask whether he could come to vespers – one of the offices of the day – to hear the sisters sing. “We thought once he’d heard us that would be it, and we’d never hear from him again.” “We were sure we wouldn’t be good enough,” adds Sister Gabriel. “But then he got back in touch and said he wasn’t bothered about the mistakes we’d made – we could be trained not to do that. What he liked was the tone of our singing.” For many singers, the idea of a contract from a record company is a dream come true, but the Poor Clares had a different take on it – as they would on many elements of becoming recording artists. “We said we don’t want auditions. You have to include everyone who wants to be included,” says Sister Gabriel. “The people who hear it will have to accept the ability of all of us – we’re not going to tell any of our sisters, ‘You can’t sing, so you’re not in.’” Of the 23-strong community, all but two sisters eventually took part. “We have sisters who sing tunefully and beautifully, and we have others who sound tone-deaf,” says Sister Leo. “And we’re all on the album.” For their part, the sisters hope the album will allow them to share what matters to them with the outside world. “We certainly didn’t do it to become famous,” says Sister Gabriel. “We want people to know the essence of our lives, what we believe in and what brings us joy.” The music on the album – which includes a traditional Ave Maria, Psalm 27 (O Lord, Hear My Voice) and In Paradisum, sung by the nuns at their funeral liturgies – also features the words set to music of St Francis and St Clare, the order’s founders. “They lived eight centuries ago”, says Sister Gabriel. “But they knew many things we still struggle with today, including how important it is to understand our relationship with the environment. So we live as sustainably as possible. We grow what we can – not everything, but certainly lots of our own vegetables. We’re very careful about waste – anything not eaten at lunch one day will be supper the next.” “And we share with others – we support the local food bank,” says Sister Aelred. “We’ve not felt called to be on Twitter,” says Sister Leo. “We’ve taken a vow of poverty and we don’t own anything. And we believe that’s what needs to happen with the world. We all need to use less, so people with less can have more.” Each sister wears a Tau cross, based on the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet and worn by St Francis. “Of course, we know many people don’t believe in God, but many of them recognise some kind of higher power. I think being connected to something bigger than ourselves stops us being narcissistic.” Do they, I ask, worry about the future? Like most religious communities in the west, numbers of enclosed nuns are falling, and their own convent is top-heavy, with the youngest nun aged 47 and the oldest in her 90s. Surprisingly, Sister Gabriel says she’s not bothered what happens next. “I think we have something to share and something to speak out about, but things happen in waves and if this has reached full circle, that’s OK. We’ve still got our lives to live, and this isn’t just about numbers. The truth is, it’s a wonderful way to live.” Light for the World by the Poor Clares of Arundel is out now on the Decca record label (£12.75 for the CD)
14||'It feels like a nightmare': Sussex villagers aghast at road plan“It’s like they are torturing us. Each step, it just gets worse.” Gilly McCadden is in tears. She has just learned that the route chosen for the £250m dual carriageway around Arundel in West Sussex will bring four lanes of 70mph traffic within metres of her house and garden. The new route of the A27, bypassing a bypass built in the 1960s, has been planned – and resisted – since the 1980s. Now Highways England has unexpectedly chosen the “grey route” – a longer, more expensive plan that slices through three villages but avoids the South Downs national park. For locals in the village of Binsted who fought previous iterations of the plan for destroying ancient woodlands, it means the proposed road will crash through their gardens and peaceful meadows. “We are glad the wildlife is getting saved,” said McCadden, a garden designer. “But you learn a lot about how these roads are constructed. You learn that the one element that doesn’t matter is people.” The new road has been portrayed as a deeply polarising issue, with support in Arundel and opposition from residents of three affected villages – Binsted, Tortington and Walberton. But in Highways England’s latest public consultation, just 7% of the 5,000 respondents chose the grey route, while 64% of people called for no road to be built or for “online” improvements only, closely following the existing route of the 1960s single-carriageway bypass. “That’s an absolutely astonishing result,” said Emma Tristram, a Binsted resident. “Highways England tried to stack the dice in their favour and they failed. They’ve shown the consultation is democratic rubbish.” Mike and Diane Evans bought their dream home – with orchards, paddocks and a small ancient woodland – two years ago after careers in the armed forces. It had been anticipated that the road would pass relatively harmlessly behind their wood, but the grey route cuts across their front garden. They will have to sell up. “I’ve served pretty much everywhere – Northern Ireland, the Falklands, Iran, Afghanistan. I’ve been in some pretty nasty places,” said Mike Evans. “This [house] has been just total heaven. I don’t know what we’ve done to deserve this. It feels like a punishment of some description.” For McCadden, the “punishment” of the new route was compounded when she was informed that Highways England would not purchase her home, which she designed and built 21 years ago, nor consider it blighted. She must now prove she needs to sell for a reason other than escaping the bypass outside her front door, and try to sell the house herself for up to 20% beneath her asking price before the government’s roadbuilding company will consider buying it from her. “It feels like we’re living in a dystopian nightmare now,” she said. “They keep adding layers of horror.” The proposed route avoids the national park but now crosses the edge of an estate in Walberton and close to the village primary school while bypassing a mile and a half of existing dual carriageway. Despite the reprieve for the national park and ancient woodland, environmental groups including the Woodland Trust, the Campaign to Protect Rural England and the Wildlife Trusts continue to oppose the new road, arguing that it will fragment habitat for dormice, endanger bat populations and ruin rare flushed fen habitat. In Binsted, villagers say it will destroy the tight-knit community of 38 homes and pass within metres of Binsted’s 850-year-old church – built on a 2,000-year-old iron age embankment – and the scenic village pub. Mike Tristram said: “This is a place where people can step into a life that was sustainable before industrialisation brought us into the climate and ecological emergency that we’re in.” Maggie Moore Alexander said her ill husband, Christopher, 84, a renowned architect and theorist of human-centred design, chose their Grade II-listed house after observing the peace of its garden, and now faced having the highway cross their land. She said the anti-bypass campaigners had barely heard a familiar charge. “Somebody mentioned ‘nimby’ the other day and I thought: that’s interesting, I haven’t heard that in a while,” she said. “We’ve done a terrible job of protecting the world we live in and the natural systems around us that keep us afloat. One of the Highways England people said they didn’t consider Covid because it was just a blip. But there’s more and more evidence that this bypass is a stupid thing to do. The economic situation says it’s a stupid thing to do. There’s less and less traffic here.” Tony Hunt, the mayor of Arundel, said the town council welcomed Highways England’s plan. “For over 40 years the A27 has run straight through the town, dividing our community into two halves,” he said. “With the growth of traffic, Arundel has become a bottleneck, with 21,000 journeys made each day on the single-lane section of the A27 that bisects the town.” Andrew Griffith, who was one of Boris Johnson’s first appointments as chief business adviser before he became Arundel’s MP in 2019, said he had worked with the government to “secure the necessary support for Highways England to proceed” with the new road. “It will reduce congestion, enhance air quality, improve road safety and support much-needed employment and economic growth,” he said. “Some question whether we need to improve our roads at all. Whilst I support a rapid switch to cleaner and quieter vehicles – and the UK is a leader in this respect – they will still need roads to drive upon and there is nothing environmentally friendly about pollution caused by congestion.” • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the misspelling of Binsted in the picture caption.
3||Can California’s top wine region survive the era of megafire?The Silverado Trail, a two-lane road that weaves through the bucolic hillsides in the heart of California’s wine country, is the quintessential vision of Napa Valley. Home to dozens of wineries, it is a destination within a destination – one that welcomes both vacationing imbibers and oenophiles from around the world. But recently the amber hillsides have been laced with the ashen aftermath of wildfires that have torn through the region, leaving behind charred rubble that is fast becoming as much a part of the landscape as the neatly trussed rows of vines. It is a sign of an increasingly uncertain future for the crown jewel of California’s $43bn wine industry – one in which vintners must adapt to a changing climate and increasingly unpredictable fire seasons in order to survive. Devastating wildfires have pummeled Napa and Sonoma over the last five years, most recently this summer’s Glass fire, which torched close to 67,500 acres and destroyed 1,555 structures, including damage to numerous wineries. Annual evacuations, smoke-filled skies and the existential threat posed by higher and drier temperatures have taken a toll. This year Covid-19 has compounded the impact on tourism, restaurants and labor, with losses from the crisis expected to total close to half a billion dollars. Yet even with the risks, California’s wine industry is growing, with the market rising roughly 42% in retail value over the last decade. Napa has attracted a steady flow of newcomers who may not be willing to withstand the obstacles ahead. But many winemakers and growers, some with generational ties to the region and its industry, are counting on research, innovation and sheer determination in a race against the changing climate. “We are resilient,” says Nicole Bacigalupi who runs Bacigalupi Vineyards with her twin sister, Katey. Bacigalupi, the third generation in her family to farm the land, is finding ways to mitigate the threat of fires. Speaking under a giant oak tree, the sound of cow calls ring out from an adjacent pasture. The animals are there to help keep the vegetation down. The vineyard is also building its own fire truck, she says, adding that a friend helped protect them when the Walbridge fire, which morphed into the sprawling LNU Lightning Complex fire, got close last month. Bacigalupi admits that three terrifying fire seasons in a row have prompted tough questions about the future. “You get to a point where you are so overwhelmed that you are not sure if it’s worth fighting for,” she says. Winemaking in the era of wildfires Since 2015, California Alcohol Beverage Control has received roughly 170 new wineries registries a year – up from roughly seven registered annually in the 1990s. Some critics have called for crackdowns on the continuing expansion, and have concerns about how crowding affects safe and sustainable land use practices, especially in the face of faster-moving flames. “It has gotten to the point of absurdity now, there are so many wineries in that little valley,” says James Conaway, the author of Napa: The Story of an American Eden. “Global warming is here and the changes are not going to turn around in anybody’s lifetime,” he adds. “Napa is going to have to alter what it is doing.” He champions the idea that newcomers might move out, and make room for those most dedicated to sustainable winemaking. “Some of the people who have been there a long time are doing it – there are some really nice wines still being made in Napa,” he says. “But, it is not the nice sociable agrarian dream that it was back in the 80s.” Kirk Venge, a third-generation veteran of the wine industry who was born and raised in Napa Valley, is optimistic, and says he’s not going anywhere. “We just have to be patient and not give up,” he says with a smile during a bustling day on his namesake vineyard, Venge, housed on the Silverado Trail. He has faced the dangers of Napa Valley’s new normal up close. On this sunny afternoon in October, it would be hard to tell just how close the Glass fire came to his property, were it not for the surrounding scorched hillsides. Venge describes watching embers rain down from the sky and treetops and explode on the horizon, feeling certain he’d say goodbye to his winery that morning. “The whole valley was starting to go up,” he says, pointing at the blackened landscape. But his vineyard was spared and within hours, Venge and a small crew got back to work. “We have to keep making the wine,” he says. “People depend on us for their livelihood and we can’t just stop, we can’t run away.” Now, he’s better preparing the property by increasing its “defensible space” – areas without debris or vegetation that can serve as a natural fire break. “No more bark around the building!” he laughs. Venge is also dealing with another major challenge – the effects of persistent wildfire smoke, which is dangerous for workers to breathe and can also be absorbed by the grapes, altering the feel and flavor of the wine produced from them. A 2015 study by the Australian Wine Research Institute found that just a half-hour of smoke exposure was enough to have an impact. This year, some areas were cloaked in the grey haze for weeks on end. “Smoke taint” has affected harvests in Napa already after bad fire seasons, and this year’s was no different. Venge says he lost more than two dozen tons of grapes as a result. “We didn’t pick any pinot this year at all,” he says. “Anything picked after the Glass fire is going to have smoke taint.” To make up for the loss, Venge and his team are getting creative, replacing the unusable year with new products from the 2018 and 2019 stock, and hoping they are spared in 2021. Searching for solutions California’s wine country has always been disaster-prone, the land primed for floods, fires and earthquakes. Now, with winemakers around the world facing similar climate-related issues, the region is looking elsewhere for answers. California has already benefited from lessons learned in fire-prone areas such as Australia and Chile. Resources are being shared up and down the west coast – Oregon and Washington are dealing with the same threats – and the winegrowing associations are collaborating on a taskforce to study smoke taint. There are also robust research centers based locally, including UC Davis, where viticulturalists are working to develop more resilient vines, and Sonoma State University, where there are studies into strategies for better sustainability and risk mitigation. “The one thing we know about California farmers and ranchers – and I view the wine sector as a real leader in this – is they are all trying to look around that curve and trying to get ahead of that curve,” says Karen Ross, the secretary of the California department of food and agriculture, who also spent more than a decade serving as the president of the California Association of Winegrape Growers, and helped usher in a sustainable winegrowing program. Ross admits that the effects of the climate crisis have descended on the region sooner than anticipated. “We have always talked about these kinds of impacts as the future – but the future is now,” she says, adding that Golden State growers are relying on research and science to navigate new obstacles. “It may look different but I think it will still be an important and leading part of what California agriculture is all about.” Still, there is a long road ahead, and adjustments will have to be made quickly. Already, winemakers are predicting warming weather will mean the end for some wines in the region in the future, including favorites like pinot and chardonnay. Even cabernet, the valley’s most prized varietal, is under threat from the changing climate. Because vines can take years to cultivate, the wine business is by nature future-facing, but Dr Judith Ford, a sustainability and resilience fellow at Sonoma State University hopes the latest fire season spurs a sense of urgency. “There is a saying to never let a good crisis go to waste,” says Ford, who evaluated the wine industry’s preparedness following 2017 North Bay Fires, which hammered the region, and found that those who were directly affected were more likely to make changes. “Right after 2017 there was a real drive to do some things and then it got back to business as usual,” she says. Speaking at a wine industry conference at the beginning of this year, she was dismayed to see that only a dozen people showed up for a panel on disaster preparedness. “Our region feels like it has been hit with crisis after crisis after crisis – and that can really freeze you,” she says. “But this is escalating and it is important to keep moving forward.” Despite the obstacles, many longtime residents like Bacigalupi are determined to stick it out. She says she could see how less-dedicated hobbyists might be driven away from the crisis-stricken area, “but we will stay”, she says, resolutely. Her 95-year-old grandmother is still alive to see the legacy she built continue to grow. Bacigalupi says that is a big part of what keeps her going. “I feel strongly that you are given a gift in a generational family,” she says. “You are supposed to take the land, make it better, revive it if you need to and continue to make it healthier to pass down to the next generation.”
24||The dementia that can be curedWhen John Abraham began to lose his mind in late 2019, his family immediately feared the worst. Abraham had enjoyed robust health throughout retirement, but now at 80 he suddenly found himself struggling to finish sentences. “I would be talking to people, and all of a sudden the final word wouldn’t come to mind,” he remembers. “I assumed this was simply a feature of ageing, and I was finding ways of getting around it.” But within weeks, further erratic behaviours started to develop. Abraham’s family recall him often falling asleep mid-conversation, he would sometimes shout out bizarre comments in public, and during the night he would wake up every 15 minutes, sometimes hallucinating. To his son Steve, the diagnosis seemed inevitable, one which all families dread. “I was convinced my dad had dementia,” he says. “What I couldn’t believe was the speed at which it was all happening. It was like dementia on steroids.” Dementia is not just one disease – it has more than 200 different subtypes. Over the past decade neurologists have become increasingly interested in one particular subtype, known as autoimmune dementia. In this condition, the symptoms of memory loss and confusion are the result of brain inflammation caused by rogue antibodies – known as autoantibodies – binding to the neuronal tissue, rather than an underlying neurodegenerative disease. Crucially this means that unlike almost all other forms of dementia, in some cases it can be cured, andspecialist neurologists have become increasingly adept at both spotting and treating it. At the John Radcliffe hospital, University of Oxford, neurologist Sarosh Irani is one of the world’s leading experts in treating neurological conditions caused by a malfunctioning immune system. When Abraham was admitted under his care in early January 2020 following a seizure, Irani soon realised that the source of his problems was an autoantibody which targeted a protein in the brain named LGI1. The main telltale clue was the speed of onset, one of the key distinguishing features of autoimmune dementia. “The symptoms usually come on very quickly,” Irani says. “Over a few weeks or months, patients develop memory problems, and change their behaviour and personality. Patients with neurodegenerative forms of dementia can develop movement disorders or seizures, but this typically happens later in the illness once degeneration has set in. In autoimmune dementia, these are early problems.” Abraham underwent a treatment called plasma exchange, which aims to wash the blood of the disease-causing antibodies. The impact was almost instant. “For me it caused a complete transformation, in one or two days,” he says. “My family came in to see me in the hospital, and they just looked at each other in amazement.” Such dramatic improvements are often reported as soon as treatment – which can also include steroids and other immunotherapies – begins. “Patients can go from being in a nursing home, unable to communicate, to returning to work, being able to drive again,” says Eoin Flanagan, a neurologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, one of a handful of centres in the world along with Irani’s research group, that is actively studying autoimmune dementia. This is one reason why the condition, though rare – Mayo Clinic neurologist Sean Pittock estimates that it makes up less than 5% of all dementia cases – is so important to identify. The data available suggests that it is often missed. Among autoimmune dementia patients who were successfully treated at the Mayo Clinic between 2002 and 2009, 35% had been initially misdiagnosed with either Alzheimer’s or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. “A lot of patients over 60 are misdiagnosed,” says Flanagan. “That’s a concern because if you miss these cases, you’re committing them to a presumed neurodegenerative course when they could respond to immunotherapy, and their symptoms resolve.” But autoimmune dementia is also an illustration of a broader trend. Over the past 15 years, treatable diseases have been identified across an entire spectrum of neurological illnesses from epilepsy to multiple sclerosis and psychiatry, all caused by autoantibodies binding to different parts of the brain and central nervous system. “It’s become one of the most exciting areas of neurology,” says Irani. “There are subgroups within all these illness groups that have very treatable diseases. If you’re a dementia doctor, a small percentage of your patients will have this condition, the same if you’re a psychiatrist or a multiple sclerosis doctor. And with these patients you can actually directly treat the underlying cause by suppressing the immune system.” The rise of treatable neurology In October 2019, another patient was admitted to the John Radcliffe hospital.Pippa Carter, aged 19, had just begun an English literature degree at the University of Leeds when she noticed that her vision seemed to be strangely distorted. “I would be in lectures and I was really struggling to focus with my eyesight and with concentration in general,” she says. “I was trying to audition for a university play, and I had to stop because I couldn’t really read at all. Initially, I thought it was just nerves because I was starting a new chapter in life.” Within weeks, she found herself unable to get her words out properly, before she was taken to hospital after suffering a large seizure. Just like Abraham, it was the speed of her decline which alerted doctors to a potential autoimmune cause. “Within a week she was hallucinating, shouting things,” remembers Irani. “In her hospital room, which she was in for several weeks, she drew these bizarre childlike pictures on the wall, like the sorts of things a four-year-old would draw. It was like something was causing her to regress in her behaviour.” Carter was suffering from a neuropsychiatric syndrome caused by an autoantibody binding to the brain’s NMDA receptors, proteins which play a key role in learning and memory formation. Soon after she began treatment, first with steroids, and then an immunotherapy called rituximab, she began to improve. Now more than a year on, she is hoping to resume her university studies soon. Since 2004, scientists have been steadily discovering the autoantibodies behind these various neurological conditions, making it possible for clinics to test for them. Irani says that so far they have discovered approximately 25, with one or two new autoantibodies detected every year. “There are probably many more out there still,” he says. “We’re not at the tip of the iceberg, but I think we’re probably nowhere near the base either.” Precisely what stimulates the body to produce these autoantibodies remains unclear, but it is thought that there can be a variety of environmental triggers ranging from viral infections to tumours, along with an underlying genetic susceptibility. Due to the number of patients who can be successfully treated, specialists are looking to raise awareness of the importance of keeping an eye out for them. “It’s really a not-to-miss set of conditions,” says Irani. “Our clinic runs a diagnostics lab where we receive UK-wide samples for many of these diseases. One in 100 are positive, and these patients clearly get better with steroids and similar medications.” There are signs that the interest is growing. In November 2019, data was published from the first clinical trial looking at the effectiveness of different treatments for patients with a type of epilepsy caused by LGI1 autoantibodies. Two more trials are under way looking at new experimental therapies aimed at trying to stop the body from producing these damaging antibodies. Irani is hoping that this will yield many benefits in years to come. “There’s definitely an under-recognition of these conditions,” he says. “But as the field continues to expand, there will be more and more of these patients who get picked up. I’m sure that if you look hard enough in acute psychiatry wards, and in nursing homes, there are patients out there with treatable conditions who are being missed.”
20||Why China's dramatic economic recovery might not add upBeijing prompted envy, admiration and not a little resentment when it released data last week confirming that it was the first major economy to start growing again after the devastation caused by Covid-19 in the first half of the year. China appeared to have achieved the V-shaped recovery being chased by finance ministers around the world, after pioneering mass lockdowns to contain the virus that had taken hold in Wuhan, then shutting its borders to stop it filtering back in from abroad. With the country largely virus-free, people could return to something like normal life in offices, schools, shops and restaurants, and the government encouraged a splurge in investment across infrastructure and new manufacturing. Government data showed growth of 4.9% between July and September, slightly lower than economists had expected, but still an astonishing achievement. Analysts have warned, however, that apparent data manipulation, and the details of how China returned to growth – relying more on investment than consumption – raise questions about the strength and durability of the economic revival. Nick Marro, lead analyst on global trade at the Economist Intelligence Unit, said the figures appeared to show a shuffling of some data to boost the overall GDP growth rate for the third quarter, although he cautioned there was no direct evidence of any data fabrication. “The Chinese statistical agency is opaque about their methodology, and unless we get more details about their adjustments, we’ll never know the full story. But there does seem to be evidence of a targeted adjustment to help lift that headline figure,” he said. “The September figures were smoothed by quietly altering the historic basis of comparison; basically, some of the numbers from September 2019 were re-apportioned into October of that year, in order to lower the comparison base. That led to a statistical distortion where the September 2020 growth figures might’ve been artificially inflated.” The difference in growth rate was not huge, Marro said, but the manipulation suggested the economy might not be as strong as Beijing would have liked people to think. “The bigger implication is that the investment landscape might be more fragile than the official numbers suggest heading into the last quarter of 2020. That’s perhaps the bigger risk for companies to be aware of.” Leland Miller, chief executive of the China Beige Book consultancy, which tracks the Chinese economy with data it collects itself in addition to government statistics, flagged up what he considered a far more disturbing alteration in the data. China recorded growth of 0.8% in fixed-asset investment for the first three quarters of the year, compared with 2019, but the absolute figures for the same period showed a drop of several trillion yuan. “This is not toying at the margin. This is making 2.5 trillion yuan in fixed asset investment disappear,” he said. The only explanation given by Chinese authorities for the discrepancy was that the data had been adjusted to reflect “results of the fourth national economic census, statistical law enforcement and regulation of statistical programmes”, so economists have no way to assess how accurate the revisions are or compare them to other data. If fixed-asset investment had actually fallen, as the raw data suggested, while consumption was also down, overall GDP growth could be much lower than the headline figure, Miller said. “There are very big lessons here, because people think that China’s back. They’ve done a pretty good job but ... they’re not anywhere near being back to where they were before.” Meanwhile the pandemic has pushed many western companies to reconsider their dependence on Chinese factories. And while Beijing has for several years called for a “rebalancing” of the economy to boost domestic consumption, it has struggled to make it a reality. Other long-term challenges including debt and an ageing population have been overshadowed by coronavirus temporarily, but remain no less problematic. “Even if growth leaps from a low base next year there are still underlying structural problems,” said George Magnus, former chief economist at UBS, and an associate at the China Centre, Oxford University. “These include growing debt, demographics, poor productivity, a much more hostile external environment for trade, commerce and investment. All of these things are going to weigh on China’s potential for expansion and development.”
2||Dread of history repeating itself grows in Italian town as infections rise againThe well-tended graves are neatly lined up one after the other, each with a photo of the dead. The youngest was in his mid-30s, the rest from their 40s to their 90s. What distinguishes the plot from others in Bergamo’s Monumental cemetery is that they all died between March and May. “The dead arrived in force – 50 or 60 a day – they didn’t stop coming for two months,” a cemetery manager, who asked not to be named, told the Observer. “It was horrendous. And now infections are rising again. Young people are infecting older people, and so soon the dead will start arriving again.” When the pandemic struck Bergamo, mortuaries and cemeteries quickly filled up. Haunting images of army trucks carrying coffins away from the same cemetery to be buried or cremated elsewhere in March, when the northern Italian province was at the centre of the unfolding pandemic and funeral services struggled to cope, gave a hint to the rest of the world of what was to come. Now, after Italy took a dramatic turn for the worse following months of relative calm, nowhere is the fear of history repeating itself more palpable than in Bergamo. Covid-19 is estimated to have killed more than 7,000 across the province during the first wave. Speak to Bergamo residents, and everybody knows somebody who either died or was infected. This wasn’t so much the case beyond the surrounding Lombardy region, which accounts for the lion’s share of Italy’s almost 37,000 coronavirus deaths, because the tough two-month national lockdown shielded the south from the ravages of the first wave. “I don’t think people really understood what happened here,” said Luca Remondini, the owner of i-Lounge bar. “My aunt died – she was in her late 60s but otherwise healthy – and my mum, who is recovering from cancer, was infected but survived. Many of my customers became infected or lost loved ones.” Nationally cases rose by 19,644 on Saturday, of which 4,956 were in Lombardy, followed by Veneto, Campania and Lazio. The economic hub of Milan, about 30 miles from Bergamo, is Lombardy’s new epicentre, with caseloads tripling over the past week. Bergamo and other provinces in Lombardy that were hit early on in the pandemic, including Lodi, where Italy’s first locally transmitted case was detected in February, are recording among the lowest daily rates in the region. But knowing how quickly the tide can change, people in Bergamo are absorbing news from Milan with a chilling sense of deja vu – overstretched hospitals, health workers getting sick, outbreaks in care homes. And deaths creeping up. “We’re afraid the nightmare will return,” added Remondini. “Things are calm right now, but we are so close to Milan, and the nearby regions of Piedmont and Liguria are not in great shape either.” Lombardy was the first of Italy’s 20 regions to impose an 11pm to 5am curfew, beginning on 22 October, after scientists warned that without the measure, intensive care admissions would increase sixfold by the end of the month and general hospital admissions would quadruple. Temporary hospitals set up in conference centres during the first wave have reopened in Milan and Bergamo, initially providing Lombardy with an additional 201 intensive care beds. Campania, in the south, and Lazio, the region surrounding Rome, imposed a similar curfew from Friday night amid rapidly increasing infections and hospital admissions. Other regions have introduced a variety of targeted restrictions while the government is mulling tighter national measures. “The second wave is different from the first,” said Giorgio Gori, the mayor of Bergamo. “In March it was concentrated in the north, now it’s everywhere. For some people it’s the first real experience of the pandemic, so they might live the same experience we lived.” A big concern is the ability of hospitals in poorer southern regions, where healthcare cuts have been deep in recent years, to cope. “Lombardy hospitals are superior to those in other regions, so if the same phenomenon happens in Campania, Puglia or Calabria, it would be much worse,” said Gori. However, despite Lombardy’s wealth and expertise, medics say nothing has been done to better prepare hospitals for the expected autumn resurgence. In a recent letter to regional authorities signed by more than 600 health workers, they claimed the same mistakes were being made as in March. “For example, we should have had a plan right from the beginning that separated Covid patients from non-Covid,” said Pietro Brambillasca, an anaesthetist at Bergamo’s Papa Giovanni XXII hospital. “That’s what they did in China, they built Covid hospitals. We should have done the same, and be ready by now to treat all Covid patients outside of main structures to be able to control the contagion within them while being able to treat other illnesses.” One explanation for the relative calm in Bergamo province is that a significant proportion of the population may have built up immunity. “Thirty per cent have been exposed to the virus, either they were symptomatic or asymptomatic,” said Gori. “Together with our heightened awareness, maybe this is why we are better protected than others right now.” Gori and other leaders across Italy have renewed their appeals to people to stick to basic safety rules – wear a mask, maintain distance and frequently wash hands – while encouraging them to stay home as much as possible. “In a few days the government will probably introduce new restrictions,” he said. “But we can’t wait for things to happen, we need to plan ahead.” The sound of ambulance sirens still torments residents of Bergamo province and other badly affected areas. “You would hear 10 ambulances an hour,” said Diego Federici, who is from the town of Martinengo and lost his parents to Covid-19 within days of each other. “You don’t hear as many any more, but the sound is returning, it’s horrible.” Federici is sceptical of Italy’s capacity to face a second wave. “I worry it will end in another massacre, mostly because of ignorance,” he said. Only a few days ago, a man from Milan told him “the virus doesn’t exist”. “I told him I watched my mum struggling to breathe. Only then did he seem to change his mind,” he added. “There are so many virus deniers, only getting their information from social media. I implore them to not be stupid – I wouldn’t wish what happened to us on anyone.”
23||How a canny Kilmarnock grocer took whisky from the glens to the worldJohnnie Walker has come a long way. Two centuries ago bottles of the blended whisky were confined to the shelves of John Walker’s modest grocery store in the little town of Kilmarnock in west Scotland. Today it is the planet’s best selling scotch and is sold in bottles by the billions. It is an extraordinary success story – and it was achieved by a small family firm whose members were notable because they were “stubborn, thrawn and as hard as nails”, according to a newly published study of the Johnnie Walker blend. Written by Nick Morgan, A Long Stride, published by Canongate, reveals the extraordinary pains the Walker family went to in order to ensure bottles of their brand, above all other whiskies, was the one that sold in the greatest numbers. As family diaries and papers reveal, it was a relentless effort to promote and advertise their product and to make technological improvements to its distillation to ensure previous, wildly inconsistent levels of taste and quality were subdued. In this way, the Walker family dragged Scotch “kicking and screaming from illicit bothies in sequestered glens onto the world stage”, says Morgan. Crucially the story reveals how scotch whisky become Scotland’s gift to the world. “And it is a gift that keeps on giving to a remarkable degree today,” adds Morgan, a former historian and head of outreach for Diageo, the current owners of Johnnie Walker. The Walkers took a cottage industry, made massive improvements in its manufacture, launched national promotions and laid the foundations for an industry that today has a massive impact on the Scottish economy. In 2018, the nation’s whisky industry sold the equivalent of more than a billion bottles of scotch – vastly more spirit than is exported by any other nation on Earth. And while Johnnie Walker sells the most, many other leading blends also sell vast quantities abroad. These include Ballantine’s, Chivas Regal, Grant’s, Dewar’s and several other hugely popular whiskies that are drunk in bars from Hong Kong to Manhattan and from Rome to Buenos Aires. This output is now worth £4.7bn a year, representing 70% of Scotland’s food and drink exports and 21% of the United Kingdom’s. (Scotland’s second largest food and drink export is seafood – in particular salmon – and earns about £950 million a year.) Yet the beginnings of the Johnnie Walker enterprise were modest and can be traced to John Walker’s decision to sell the family farm after the death of his father and to set up a shop in Kilmarnock in 1820 to sell tea, sugar, soap and, of course, whisky which he would have blended himself from casks of malt and grain whisky. Most grocery businesses went bust within a couple of years in those days, says Morgan, so Walker – who appears to have led a life of studied reticence – did well merely to thrive as a shopkeeper. One myth even suggests he was a teetotaller. Morgan is unimpressed. “I have found absolutely no evidence for this, and given he ran a thriving grocery business which specialised in blended whisky and other wines and spirits, I am pretty sure he would have taken a dram himself.” Walker died in 1857 and left it to his eldest son Alexander to promote the family business which he did with remarkable, focused energy. “He was driven by an urge to make constant improvements, to make his blends better and better. He also realised he could only do so much in west Scotland to sell whisky. By contrast, London was a shop window for the world. Fashions were made here, he realised.” In London, Alexander Walker launched advertising campaigns and promoted his whisky at international trade fairs, while constantly driving for improvements to his distilleries. And by the 1880s and 1890s, Walker had succeeded in making whisky the most fashionable drink of the day, with the Johnnie Walker blend in the vanguard. In some ways, he was lucky. Brandy had until then had been a hugely popular drink but in the wake of the grapevine pest phylloxera’s arrival in France in the late 19th century, the country’s vineyards were devastated, triggering a collapse in the production of quality French brandy. Scotch filled the void very neatly. On the other hand, there were hard times which the Scotch market managed to survive, from the Boer war to the first world war to the Great Depression. “Johnnie Walker went up and down every time but it always came back stronger. It has been a remarkably resilient brand, if nothing else,” says Morgan. Yet the whisky we drink today is not quite the one that the Walkers would have perfected, he reveals. “Today’s whiskies, and not just the Johnnie Walker blends, are slightly lighter, fresher, and fruitier than they would have been in the 19th century. “We don’t have a bottle of 19th-century whisky to study to prove this point but we know scotch was drunk differently then. It was usually combined with lemon and sugar to make toddies and would have had to have been heavier and oilier for its taste to survive the mixing.” Habits changed, however, and in late Victorian and Edwardian times, soda became popular and whiskies became lighter in responses to being mixed with it. “It was a little thing but the soda syphon had a big impact on whisky,” says Morgan.
2||Tier 2 lockdown rules in England: latest Covid restrictions explainedThe government has announced that in England, areas deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. Places in tier 2 include London, parts of Essex, Elmbridge in Surrey, Barrow-in-Furness, York, North East Derbyshire, Erewash in Derbyshire, Chesterfield, Cheshire West and Chester, Cheshire East, and Warrington. Leicester, Nottingham, the West Midlands and Tees Valley are also in tier 2. The restrictions also cover West Yorkshire including Leeds, Bradford, Kirklees, Calderdale and Wakefield, and the north-east including Newcastle, North and South Tyneside, Gateshead, Sunderland, Durham and Northumberland. Coventry, Stoke and Slough moved into tier 2 restrictions on Saturday 24 October. These local restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart (or 1 metre with a face covering or other precautions). For areas in tier 2, the additional Covid restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody outside their household or support bubble in any indoor setting. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply for socialising outdoors, for instance in a garden or public space like a park or beach. Businesses and venues can continue to operate, but pubs and restaurants must ensure that customers consume food and drink only while seated, and close between 10pm and 5am. Takeaway food can continue to be sold after 10pm if ordered online or by phone. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open, but people may not mingle in groups of more than six. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the numbers attending (15 and 30 respectively). Exercise classes and organised sport can continue to take place outdoors but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with those they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travel is permitted to amenities that are open, for work or to access education, but people are advised to reduce the number of journeys where possible. If you are living in an area that is in tier 2, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in “Local Covid alert – high”. You can also check your area’s alert level by using the government’s postcode-checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
16||The moment that Daddy became ‘Sheemiss’It started last week, amid gales of laughter. ‘Sheemiss!’ my son cried from the stairs. I drew nearer to find my son pointing at me as he said one more time; ‘Sheeeeeemisssss’. He was calling me by my first name, in an adorably sincere little act of rebellion that reduced him to dribbling, full-bellied hysterics. I laughed along, struck by the effect that this, the smallest possible act of defiance, was having on the 3ft-tall comic in front of me. The idea that the man he calls ‘Daddy’ might also be Séamas had broken him so entirely that it broke me, too. At the very least ‘Sheemiss’ is a pretty good attempt at the name by my son, who may know me very well, but is also an English person. I’ve had Same Ass, See-Ya-Mass and Seems. After six years, a guy I played football with admitted he’d been calling me ‘Shameless’ all that time. Worst – or best – of all, however, was the driving instructor who spent the entire six months of our acquaintance referring to me as Semen. But I digress. The root of my son’s joke is that it’s somehow ridiculous for a child to call a parent their own name. I say ‘somehow ridiculous’ when it is, in fact, plainly ridiculous. No matter how you rationalise it, any other way of thinking is just bizarre. Think of someone who addresses their parents by their first name and tell me you wouldn’t go to great lengths to avoid them at a wedding. It started me thinking what I’d actually like to be called, since my wife chose this moment to tell me that she expects ‘Daddy’ will be retired eventually. She’s from Dublin and has called her parents Mum and Dad since she was about seven. I, on the other hand, am from Derry, where we obey different rules, which she claims are confusing. It’s simple really. For as long as you live, your parents are Daddy and Mammy when spoken to directly, or referred to in conversation with your family. They’re ‘me ma’ and ‘me da’ when speaking to Irish people and then ‘mum and dad’ when speaking to those further afield. Moreover, I can comfortably refer to my dad as ‘my dad’ in these columns, because that’s his job title, but his name is Daddy, and addressing him in person as Dad would not just be unusual, but a near psychotic breach of family protocol and basic human decency. I mean, what’s so hard to understand? I suppose the issue is that, in England, ‘Daddy’ is only used by a) small children b) the very posh, or c) those deploying its numerous kinky uses that I won’t be exploring here. I may call my father Daddy and exhibit an unflappable air of faultless cool, but my son is from London and the idea of a grown Londoner calling his father Daddy brings to mind an adult baby, complete with silk bonnet and giant lollipop. It’s one rule for me and quite another for him. Given the choice, maybe Sheemisss would be best, after all. Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeats
17||Asylum seekers sue UK over unlawful detentionA group of asylum seekers, including victims of torture, who were illegally detained in the UK are suing the Home Office. More than 20 people have launched a claim for compensation, which lawyers believe could be owed to thousands held unlawfully between January 2014 and March 2017, a time when concerns about the government’s “hostile environment” policy towards migrants were paramount. The claimants were arrested and detained by the UK Border Force under Home Office guidance and the Dublin III regulation, which states that refugees must claim asylum in the first EU country in which they arrive. The regulation permitted the detention of asylum seekers before they were returned to the country of their arrival in Europe – but only if there was a significant risk of them absconding and if it was proportionate. In November 2019 the supreme court found that the Home Office policy was unlawful and ruled that the claimants were entitled to substantial damages. Among the claimants is a Sudanese national arrested and tortured in Sudan on suspicion of being loyal to an opposition political party. Another is an Iranian national arrested and tortured in an Iranian prison for his political activities. “Many of our clients are vulnerable individuals who were forced to flee their countries not out of choice, but due to the most horrific experiences which most of us in the UK will fortunately never witness, let alone experience,” said Waleed Sheikh, a solicitor at the law firm Leigh Day, who is representing the claimants. “Having made the brave and perilous journey from across the world, in the hope of finding safety and a secure future in a free country, they were instead put into detention centres.” He said it was likely that thousands of other asylum seekers in Britain are also entitled to make a claim. Sheikh added: “But it is difficult to trace them. Some are now abroad and many do not speak English. And there is no obligation for the Home Office to contact those who were held illegally.” It is estimated that the department may have to pay £8,000-£10,000 for each month a claimant was held. Other factors, such as the detention’s contribution to any health problems, could increase the payouts. A Home Office spokeswoman said: “The individuals in question were only detained to facilitate removal to a safe European country. We took immediate corrective action in March 2017 to ensure that we remain able to detain those in a similar position, who we determine are at risk of absconding.” The spokeswoman stressed that the department was committed to fixing a “broken asylum system, to make it firm and fair”. But Sheikh questioned this commitment. “The hostile environment has not just been tolerated but nurtured and championed by successive home secretaries. That it should then foster a culture within the Home Office of dehumanising asylum seekers, of detaining almost by default and without proper checks, should surprise no one.”
22||The week in TV: Roadkill; DNA; The Same Sky; Out of Her Mind and moreRoadkill (BBC One) | iPlayer DNA (BBC Four) | iPlayer The Same Sky (More4) | All 4 Out of Her Mind (BBC Two) | iPlayer Count Basie: Through His Own Eyes (BBC Four) | iPlayer At least Roadkill isn’t as bad as Collateral, David Hare’s last big-budget BBC outing. It doesn’t water-cannon us with message – asylum seekers good, security services bad – or strain so hard to avoid cliched cops that it creates an unbelievable one. And it’s blessed with Hugh Laurie and Helen McCrory, who almost redeem it from itself. And it doesn’t, for once, wear its Tory-hating credentials on its ragged academic sleeve; indeed, Hare has said that he tried, for once, to get to grips with the mindset of a “good” or at least maverick Tory. And Laurie plays Peter Laurence MP with a superb credibility: a corrupt Tory MP, yes, with secret plans to carve up the NHS to benefit American privatisation, but a charmer of a man, too, with the common touch and a genuine zeal to make a difference for the better, particularly in prisons, against the stultifying hand of the civil service. Because of this, the promise of a crusading reformist PM in the making, with a secret (and secretly charming) daughter in one of his own prisons, I could forgive the tick-boxing – the spiky journo, the corrupt prison private-security firm, the haughty plotting between Tory chairman and arms-dealer cartoon villain. But I can’t forgive the many plot impossibilities. Laurence’s own defence lawyer, having won a famous case, getting an anonymous call saying “look into him” and somehow agreeing. The driver to the justice secretary, presumably having signed something or other, being asked who his mistress was and just blurting it out. Laurence himself saying with wicked glee, early on after a prison riot: “Let’s hope there are injuries. Better still, fatalities”, which, after you’ve watched the whole, sits entirely against his character. Collateral was, oddly enough, Hare’s first-ever TV serial after a life of rightly garlanded plays and screenplays. And I’m sadly reminded of little so much as the time Dorothy Parker and pal Robert Benchley decamped from New York to California, to write B-movie plots under that golden sun and make some easy money: surely such talents, such wits, could outwrite formulaic by-numbers stuff? After a slew of rejections and flops, they fled back to the rain and Parker ruefully concluded: “Seems shit has its own integrity.” DNA, in Danish, French and Polish with subtitles, is, I’m convinced, our new The Bridge for double-bill Saturday-night autumn binges. It’s not as if we’ve anywhere else to go, but, quite apart from that, it’s every bit as enthralling as the Saga Norén chiller – indeed, this eight-parter is from the imaginarium of the co-creator of The Killing, Torleif Hoppe. A happy Copenhagen cop gets a ferry, in a rancid storm, to Poland, with his infant daughter, to chase a child abductor. Leaves the pram on deck to be, briefly, seasick. Guess what? Cut five years forward: a once-happy Copenhagen cop chances on a crucial flaw in the Danish DNA database of offenders and curdled hope flutters into life. Four episodes in, I too am truly, appallingly, gripped by hope, and it’s also got Charlotte Rampling as the incroyably chic older French investigator. Barely less captivating is The Same Sky, a Paula Milne creation for German TV, which rather disappeared into the maw of Netflix three years ago. Happily resurrected by C4’s sainted Walter Presents strand, it’s a genuinely exciting 1974 true tale, of a young East German “Romeo agent” sent west to honeytrap and pillow-talk an ageing single mother working for a western listening post atop Teufelsberg (Devil’s Mountain) in Berlin. Talking of Saga, this also has Sofia Helin as you’ve never seen her before: dowdy, lonely, old before her time, vulnerable. It’s hooksomely, toothsomely watchable: how swiftly recent history can become moral anthropology within a generation or so. I was mystified by the new Sara Pascoe thing, Out of Her Mind, and can only conclude that I am of the wrong gender or cultural sensibility to review it. Relentlessly, scattily modernist, with tricks such as meta-references to its own sitcom-ness, the breaking of the fourth wall, the “real” Sara Pascoe commenting on the “fictional” Sara’s disaster of a life, it also felt very dated, just not in a good way. Fictional Sara, who couldn’t seem to decide whether she was bitterly life-cynical about being dumped 15 years ago or childishly, naively, irritatingly self-obsessed and rude, had to cope with the twin outrages of her sister becoming engaged and her best friend being pregnant, apparently events on some manner of end-of-days scale. Cue some stock catty rudeness about rings, dresses, weight, pinkness. The real Sara, meanwhile, got on with making some decent points, albeit while rollerskating in a pink leotard, about, say, how advertising makes women feel inferior in order to sell them stuff or how fairytales offer girls false stereotypes, yet both points agreed on, surely, in the last decades of the last century? The show is almost saved by Juliet Stevenson as the mother, utterly lacking in self-awareness: indeed, the entire supporting cast are strong, though I could have done with more Cash Holland. Yet such things have been done better, in the last couple of years alone, by This Way Up, Catastrophe, I May Destroy You, even Motherland… hence my mystification, because so often Pascoe, a wise author in her own right, is the wittiest thing going on any panel show. Some rather marvellous insights into the life of Billy James “Count” Basie snuck unheralded on to our screens, courtesy of a remarkable little film, Through His Own Eyes, from Jeremy Marre. It told the story of the boy from Red Bank, New Jersey, who went on to become one of the famous people on the planet, yet who managed to keep his private life remarkably unrevealed. With grand access to interviewees and forgotten footage, it related seamlessly how the lad who stood in at 14 for an absent cinema pianist would achieve greatness. Aided only by a quasi-magical gift of understanding every wrinkle and flounce and offbeat and sway of what “swing” is – and it must help, too, when you have Lester “Prez” Young on tenor sax and Quincy Jones as your band arranger – he went on to become the first musician on the moon (Buzz Aldrin took the Basie/Sinatra/Jones ’64 recording of Fly Me to the Moon with him on tape). Unshowy and even-handed, this also related how much he loved his daughter, Diane, born with cerebral palsy; yet she, hardly able to walk, able to speak, would become something of a muse to him. He wrote endless loving letters to her, talking about music, places, weather, blues – and 50 years on the road, on a hired Greyhound bus with the band, 48 weeks a year, that’s a shedload of letters. We heard how deeply he loved his wife, Catherine, yet how he was in the doghouse for much of his early life thanks to on-the-road, um, affiliations. Above all, we got a measure of the man, a bugger for gambling and the ladies yet unfailingly unpompous, controlling the band with a whip hand, yet a subtle and steady one, immensely popular with all his musicians to the end. I could have watched eight hours of this.
2||Tier 3 lockdown rules in England: latest coronavirus restrictions explainedThe government has announced that areas in England deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. South Yorkshire, Greater Manchester, Lancashire and Liverpool City Region including Knowsley, Wirral and St Helens are all at the highest level of restrictions. These local lockdown restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, the use of face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart. For areas in tier 3, the additional restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody they do not live with, or have not formed a support bubble with, in any indoor setting, private garden or at most outdoor hospitality venues and ticketed events. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply to outdoor public spaces, such as parks, beaches, public gardens or sports venues. Pubs and bars are only permitted to remain open to operate as restaurants, in which case alcohol can only be served as part of a substantial meal. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open but household mixing is not permitted. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the number of people attending (15 and 30 respectively), but wedding receptions are not allowed. The rules for exercise classes and organised sport are the same as in tier 2. They can continue to take place outdoors, but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with others they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travelling outside, or entering, a tier 3 area should be avoided unless for work, education or youth services, to meet caring responsibilities, or if travelling through the area as part of a longer journey. Residents of a tier 3 area should avoid staying overnight in another part of the UK, while people who live in a tier 1 or tier 2 area should avoid staying overnight in a tier 3 area. If you are living in an area that is in tier 3, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in Local Covid Alert – Very High. You can also check which level your area is rated at using the government’s own postcode checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
15||Sacha Baron Cohen: After Borat, what’s left for the savage satirist?Thirteen years ago Sacha Baron Cohen announced that he was retiring the character of Borat Sagdiyev, the Kazakh journalist in the ill-fitting grey suit and Saddam moustache. It was a logical step in what is, as Baron Cohen has called it, a “self-defeating” line of work. Borat’s satirical power was dependent on being unknown. But the global success of the 2006 mockumentary feature film Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan, for which Baron Cohen won a Golden Globe, rather blew the fake Kazakh’s cover. Hence his discontinuation. Unlike most celebrity retirements, this one appeared to be permanent. And aside from a brief appearance a couple of years back on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Borat was as good as buried. Now, however, he’s back in Borat Subsequent Moviefilm: Delivery of Prodigious Bribe to American Regime for Make Benefit Once Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan. Borat, his fans will be relieved to know, hasn’t changed much, but the world has. In 2006, when the first film came out, George W Bush was president, Iraq was in flames and North Korea claimed to have conducted its first nuclear test. No garden party but, looking back, it seems almost a golden era of sanity. The thought that Donald Trump would become president would have seemed only slightly less ridiculous than Borat ending up in the White House. Like Shakespeare’s proverbial coward, satire has died many times, but seldom has reality made it look quite so redundant as over the past four years. Baron Cohen is keenly aware of the shift in the political culture. “In 2005,” he recently said, “you needed a character like Borat, who was misogynist, racist, antisemitic to get people to reveal their inner prejudices. Now those inner prejudices are overt. Racists are proud of being racists.” They have been empowered, he explained, by a president who is “an overt racist, and overt fascist”. That president, who walked away from a TV interview with Baron Cohen’s Ali G character after less than a minute in 2003, is no fan. “I don’t find him funny,” Trump said last week. “To me, he’s a creep.” Trump’s America, as it appears in the film, is a familiar one from the Louis Theroux genre of documentary-making, richly peopled with faultlessly polite freaks and likeable rednecks with unpalatable opinions. If making fun of conspiracy theorists and antisemites doesn’t break any new ground, it’s not going to upset anyone, except for conspiracy theorists and antisemites. The watching world, however, has become much more ready to take offence and Baron Cohen’s brand of humour is not ideally suited to modern woke sensibilities. He is from the generation of comedians, including Steve Coogan and Ricky Gervais, who invented winningly grotesque characters to ventriloquise the unsayable. By this method, a shocking racist comment could be transformed into a stinging comment on racism. Some critics saw it as a dishonest transgression, arguing that Ali G, the wannabe black character who brought Baron Cohen’s initial fame, was little more than a postmodern version of The Black and White Minstrel Show. That seems a rather crude reading, but it’s hard to imagine that in an era of righteous cancellation, in which cultural appropriation is a cardinal sin, Baron Cohen would “get away with it” today. That Borat is from Kazakhstan, a country with a tiny expat community in the UK and about which censorious Generation Z’ers know very little, has afforded Baron Cohen some protection from the Twitter mobs. But cracks about the Kazakhs’ backwardness, sexism, homophobia and antisemitism hark back to a more robust understanding of irony. Younger audiences may not bother with any layered interpretations and just decide that it’s racist. There is no doubt that the Kazakhstan government was not amused. It threatened him with legal action in 2005 and removed his Kazakhstan-registered website. In the character of Borat, Baron Cohen replied: “I’d like to state that I have no connection with Mr Cohen and fully support my government decision to sue this Jew.” In any case, this is almost certainly Borat’s last outing. Baron Cohen has plenty of other projects to keep him occupied. The signs are that he is expanding into drama, after sporadic ventures in the past, including Tim Burton’s Sweeney Todd and Tom Hooper’s Les Misérables. While Borat Subsequent Moviefilm is released on Amazon Prime, over on Netflix the big hit of the moment is Aaron Sorkin’s The Trial of the Chicago 7. It’s about the court case involving leading figures of the counterculture arrested after protests at the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago. Baron Cohen is quite brilliant as Abbie Hoffman, an early advocate of flower power. Aware that Hoffman’s provocative style was heavily influenced by Lenny Bruce, Baron Cohen portrays him as a kind of natural standup comedian. Having played the surrealist prankster and buffoon throughout the trial, Hoffman is called on to make a rousing speech on the witness stand. Baron Cohen has to prove his acting chops in this big climactic scene. Sorkin has said that the sense of anticipation around the set before the Londoner filmed the scene reminded him of when Jack Nicholson performed his famous courtroom scene in A Few Good Men. “Everyone wanted to watch. One hundred and twenty extras didn’t care that the camera wasn’t on them, they stayed to watch.” And, despite wrestling with a tricky Boston accent, Baron Cohen nails it. Nor is it the only speech that has brought him attention in recent times. Upset by the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017, he offered his services to the Anti-Defamation League, whose director, Jonathan Greenblatt, asked him to give the keynote speech at last year’s ADL summit. Though wary of celebrities who use their fame to promote their political views, Baron Cohen delivered what he has said was his first “major speech in my own voice”. One of his main targets was Facebook. Had the social media platform been around in the 1930s, he said, “it would have allowed Hitler to post 30-second ads on his ‘solution’ to the ‘Jewish problem’”. The speech led to the Stop Hate for Profit campaign that caused hundreds of companies to temporarily remove their advertising from Facebook. It was a high-profile stance for a star who, when not in character, likes to stay out of the public spotlight. The reticence is a mixture of natural shyness and professional pragmatism – the more he’s seen as himself, the less, he thinks, he’ll be believed as someone else. This reservation has left a slight air of mystery around Baron Cohen. His biography has a credible spine but is lacking in animating flesh. Brought up in Hampstead Garden Suburb by Jewish parents, a dance teacher mother and a journalist father who went into menswear, he attended the Haberdashers’ Aske’s boys’ public school. At Cambridge, where he studied history, he joined the Footlights and appeared in Fiddler on the Roof. Legend has it that on leaving Christ’s College he gave himself five years to make it as a comedian. After a brief stint as a male catalogue model, he began performing at a comedy club in Hampstead, and worked for a couple of small satellite channels. At one of them he created a spoof character based on the hip-hop DJ Tim Westwood, the bishop’s son who speaks like he’s down wiv ver kidz. From there Ali G was born and, as the five-year deadline was closing in, he grasped his opportunity on Channel 4’s The 11 O’Clock Show in 1998. The rest is hysterics. Now ensconced in Los Angeles, Baron Cohen forms half of that most rare of Hollywood entities – a long-lasting joint-celebrity marriage – with the Australian actress Isla Fisher. They have three children. Baron Cohen has been mining excruciating moments of comedy gold for over 20 years. There is another collector’s item in the latest film featuring Rudy Giuliani and Borat dressed as a woman, offering the Trump adviser and former New York mayor anal sex. There are only so many times that he can be the subject of a sentence like the last one. Next year he turns 50. Enjoy him while you can.
11||Legal loophole allows children to get free vape samplesHealth campaigners have expressed alarm after it emerged that a loophole in the law means it is legal for marketing companies to hand out vapes to children for free. British American Tobacco (BAT) is investigating after a 17-year-old was offered a free sample of the company’s Vype brand. The minor was not told that the product contained nicotine and was not asked for proof of age. Vape companies regularly distribute free samples to adults using paid, third-party promotional companies operating in city centres and at festivals and transport hubs. The promotional teams are young, personable and sport the livery of the vape brand they represent. Some use additional free offers – such as soft drinks – to engage with passersby. Action on Smoking and Health (Ash) said teams working for Vype had been recently promoting the brand in Brighton, Bristol and Bath, where a 17-year-old girl working on a market stall was approached and offered a free sample, in return for her email address and with no attempt to establish her age. “The hypocrisy of BAT is staggering,” said Deborah Arnott, chief executive of Ash. “The company’s website piously states: ‘It’s essential that any tobacco or nicotine products are not marketed to youth. Given the nature of our products, we take seriously our commitment to market them responsibly and only to adults.’ “How can they say that doling freebies out like sweets to children counts as responsible marketing?” When it was alerted to claims that minors were being offered free vapes, Ash approached National Trading Standards and was shocked to learn that a loophole in the law means it is not illegal to hand out free e-cigarettes to children. This is because e-cigarettes are not covered by the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act “prohibition of free distribution” rules as they are not considered a tobacco product. And Ash said that the wording of the relevant sections of the Tobacco and Related Products regulations pertaining to e-cigarettes was too vague when it came to prohibiting the distribution of free products to minors. Pushing e-cigarettes on young people is a concern for health experts, who fear that the UK will go the way of the US, where vaping’s popularity among teenagers has reached epidemic proportions. In 2019, a quarter of high-school students in the US reported using electronic nicotine products within the past 30 days and 11.7% reported daily use. But youth takeup in the UK has been much slower. Regular use among teenagers doubled from 2.4% in 2015 to 4.9% last year. “A review of the regulations is required by law and is expected to be launched imminently,” Arnott said. “We have written to the public health minister to make her aware of this gaping hole in the government’s e-cigarette regulations and to urge her to use the review to plug this legal loophole. This is yet another example of Big Tobacco saying one thing and doing another, living up to the letter of the law but not the spirit.”,” Arnott said. BAT said: “We take our responsibility to prevent underage access to vaping products extremely seriously and are clear that they are intended for adult smokers and nicotine users only. “Our one-to-one consumer engagement activities in the UK market are conducted by a third-party supplier who has been extensively trained to ensure that the only people who are engaged are over 18 years old, are an existing smoker, and are informed that the product contains nicotine. We are speaking to our third-party supplier about this alleged incident.”
2||Australia demands answers after women taken from Qatar Airways flight and strip-searchedThe Australian government has registered “serious concerns” with Qatari authorities after women on a flight from Doha to Sydney were ordered to disembark the plane and subjected to a strip search and a medical examination. Flight QR908 to Sydney was due to leave Hamad International airport at Doha at 8.30 on Friday 2 October, but was delayed for four hours, apparently after a newborn infant was found dead in the airport. Among the 34 passengers on board was Dr Wolfgang Babeck, who was returning to Australia after spending a month in Germany with his ailing father. Babeck told Guardian Australia that, after about three hours of waiting on board the plane, the airline requested that all the women on board disembark. They returned some time later, and “most of them were very upset”, he said. “At least one of them was crying, they were discussing what had happened and saying that it was unacceptable and disgusting.” The plane was then allowed to take off. Babeck said he then spoke to some of the female passengers, who said they had been taken off the plane and led into a non-public area of the airport and subject to a medical examination. “They were taken by security personnel into the cellar, not knowing what was going on,” he said. “And then they were presented to a female doctor and they were basically strip searched and had to take everything downwards off, all their clothes, even their underwear. “And then the doctor would try to feel in the uterus and stomach area or lower abdomen to see whether they may have given birth recently. “Someone had been told that a baby had been found in the toilet and they were trying to find out who the mother was.” Channel Seven, which first reported the story on Sunday, said the inspections involved 13 Australian women, and took place in an ambulance on the runway. A spokesperson for the Australian department of foreign affairs and trade told Guardian Australia earlier the department was “aware of concerning reports regarding the treatment, in Qatar, of passengers on a Qatar Airways flight to Sydney”. “DFAT is seeking further information from the Qatari authorities and Qatar Airways.” On Sunday night an updated statement from the department said the Australian government had “formally registered our serious concerns regarding the incident with Qatari authorities and have been assured that detailed and transparent information on the event will be provided soon”. Qatar Airways told Guardian Australia it had not been contacted by any of the passengers on the flight and said it could not comment. “We appreciate the concerns and distress expressed to you by the Australian passengers who you have spoken to, and will be investigating these matters with the relevant authorities and officials,” a spokesperson said.
23||Chocolate meets liquorice in a Danish treatWhen I was growing up, Sainsbury’s bonbons were coveted. We rarely had sweets, except when we went back to Italy where every aunt south of Rome had a crystal bowlful of boiled choking hazards. So bonbons were special. Though I loved them, two was the limit, because pure sugar, unless it’s mixed with fat – yum – has never really done much for me. But it was the shape of them that appealed: the imperfect sphere, the self-containment, the dusting of icing sugar. This is what attracted me to chocolate-coated liquorice balls by Lakrids by Bülow (£8/125g, lakridsbybulow.co.uk). Lakrids means liquorice in Danish, whence these babies come. As I’ve said before, I don’t mind liquorice in small quantities, but I don’t go mad for it like some. I’m sure many of us have read the terrible news about a man dying due to excessive liquorice consumption – and you should be careful not to eat too much of it – but that’s hard to do with these. Not because they aren’t delicious, but because they are incredibly satisfying and also not cheap. They come in core flavours: the original is just a liquorice piece at its heart, liquorice powder and coated in 35% cocoa milk chocolate. But there’s also salt-caramel, some fruit flavours and coffee. Specials appear seasonally, in limited edition, such as the newly arrived cinnamon-sugar coated Christmas cookie. For those who really love liquorice there’s the Christmas Advent calendar (£36), which counts you down to Christmas Eve in liquorice treats. Just as the baby Jesus would have wanted.
25||Would you trust your teenager with an online bank account?Cash is far from king for teenagers. And as society moves away from paper and coins, banks and tech companies are ramping up the competition to get children aged between 13 and 17 to manage their spending online. Last week saw the launch of an account aimed at teenagers from gohenry, a pre-paid card provider that lets kids manage their money within controls set by parents. The online account tells parents when, where and how much their offspring are spending, and sets tasks to earn pocket money. It’s the latest product in a busy market – and there are other apps offering similar features to gohenry. How to spend it Along with gohenry, other companies such as RoosterMoney, nimbl and Osper operate apps and prepaid cards. They all work in a similar way: money is loaded on the cards and both parents and the child can monitor how much they spend via the app. Money can be divided into various “pots” to allow for saving; limits on spending can be applied, and blocks put on places, such as where there is alcohol or cigarettes on sale, or on gambling sites. Parents can restrict spending and ATM use, and limit exactly where the cards can be used – online, on the high street and at cash machines, for example. There’s a monthly fee, up to about £3 per child. Gohenry says 720,000 children use its existing app – which is aimed at six- to 18-year-olds – mostly in the UK, with some in the US. The new account, specifically for teenagers, offers the same features as the existing account but lets employers pay wages on to the card. The banks have their own range of current accounts for children, although they typically start later than the apps at age 11. Some, such as Barclays Young Person’s Account, start at 16. Usually parents will have to open the account for those under that age and there are no overdraft facilities, so they cannot go into the red. But if the card is used aboard, they may be liable for withdrawal fees. A review of the accounts on the market by consumer group Which? named Nationwide, Metro Bank and the Co-Operative Bank the best performers of the high street banks. When is too young? Many parents may be concerned that the new-found independence of a teenager having their own bank card, even one with limits, could lead to the child burning through their money quickly on online games or impulse spending. Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk, says contactless cards can result in teenagers spending without realising how much is leaving their account. “We never see or psychologically feel the money leave us, and this can easily lead to uncontrolled spending on short-term whims,” he says. “This is a problem for all of us, but likely to be exacerbated in teenagers, for whom impulsivity is often higher, and focus on long-term habits lower.” However, the various limits and monitoring that the apps can offer can teach children how to spend, adds Davies. “If there is sufficient functionality over and above what you’d get from a bank account with regard to education, spending management tools, nudges and prompts on overspending, etc, then there is certainly a case to be made for them,” he says. Educating without paying MoneySavingExpert’s Martin Lewis has said that financial education has a huge impact on the future wellbeing of young people. In 2018, he donated £325,000 so that all 3,400 state-funded secondary schools could get 100 free copies each of a financial equation textbook. A survey from the Money &amp; Pensions Service showed that children from low-income families were much less likely to receive education on their finances at home. But providing a financial education does not necessarily mean parents have to spend almost £3 a month per child on an app. The Money Advice Service suggests one way to start children’s education on budgeting is to use three containers – one for immediate expenses, one for savings and one for a fund for rainy days. As the child gets older, this idea can be transferred to the bank, where they can have a few accounts for the same needs. As children start to use cards for their spending, they should be keenly aware of limits. From April of this year, the spending limit for contactless went from £30 to £45. Monzo and Starling Bank have contactless debit cards for 16- and 17-year olds. “It’s vital that when kids tap their cards they realise that the money they’re spending can drop quicker than they realise. Also, if a card is pinched, or leant to a mate, it can be maxed out very quickly by people spending just under the limit on contactless,” says Martyn James of complaints website Resolver. A key part of a financial education for a teenager is to allow them to develop maturely with money, says Davies. “The key is a safe environment – limits on the available amounts to spend, the size of individual purchases and the spend within given time frames,” he advises. “And making sure there are trade-offs and that these are visible and that they need to choose between things: If you buy this now, you can’t also buy that other thing; or if you buy this smaller thing now, you won’t be able to save for the larger, more important thing you will otherwise be able to get later.”
12||That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry review – wild, witty storiesKevin Barry’s darkly glimmering third collection of short stories arrives prefaced with a quote from the film-maker Jane Campion, all about the romantic impulse. “It’s a heroic path and it generally ends dangerously,” she cautions. That isn’t always the case for the protagonists of these 11 tales. One character, himself a writer, steps back just in time. Another’s lot turns out to be happiness – the single outcome he professes himself unable to handle. But by and large, passion proves hazardous for the loners and oddballs who drift through Barry’s forceful landscape. This is the west of Ireland, its wild emptiness teeming with lore and legend. As a publican says of his 10-streetlight town: “the winter bleeds us out here”. Come fairer weather, there’s the billowing whitethorn blossom to worry about, laden with doomy superstition. And what of the romance of the place? That gets short shrift, too. “The silly, silly moonlight,” sighs one man, rueing the calamity that comes from its enchantment. He is Sergeant Brown, whose forebears all “drank themselves into the clay of the place”. He appears in Ox Mountain Death Song, a story whose steady momentum carries it to an unexpected climax as he pursues a felon named Canavan, himself one of long line of ferret-grinned good-for-nothings. As Brown notes of the Canavans: “they had for decades and centuries brought to the Ox elements that were by turn very complicated and very simple: occult nous and racy semen”. And there it is, that canny laughter – vital, knockabout and unpredictable, it grounds in earthy reality the folksongs and fables that flit through the gloom here. Elsewhere, it adds a soulful complexity, enabling truths to disguise themselves as throwaway lines. Here’s the heroine of the title story, for instance, 17 years old and pregnant by her mother’s shiftless lover, gazing at herself in a car mirror: “She had a face on her like a scorched budgie. She detested herself.” Written over the course of eight years, these stories aren’t quite of equal strength, but throughout, their language is exhilarating, its verve evoking the very best of Barry’s compatriots while further carving out a territory that’s all his own. • That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry is published by Canongate (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
26||Arctic: Culture and Climate review – visions of a vanishing worldThere is a vision, in this magnificent show, of the strange hinterland where Arctic ice melts into the snow-covered ocean. There is no obvious distinction, indeed the water’s edge is all but invisible. What you see is a series of dark boats drawn on sledges across a white plane dotted with walruses and long-legged birds. All the images are inky black, exquisitely carved into the tusk of one such walrus, caught on exactly this kind of boat. Its ivory is beautifully used to stand in for the all-encompassing Arctic whiteout. Carved around 1900 by a celebrated Iñupiat artist known as Happy Jack, this is not just a graceful engraving-cum-sculpture. It shows life as it was lived on Alaska’s freezing Seward Peninsula, long lines of huskies pulling kayaks, tents and vessels across the gliding ice. Children learned from these images, elders discussed them and now here we are in the future looking back at this body of knowledge carved into the tusk of a long-dead walrus that once swam in those dark seas. Man and beast, life and art: all are fused in this object. The British Museum’s new exhibition plunges deep into the mysterious icescapes of the Arctic, where 4 million people still live in a culture shaped by the climate. There are fragments of ancient bone jewellery, discovered in newly thawed ice; sculpted figures of reindeer and caribou so sinuously streamlined as to be almost abstract. There are needles made of walrus bone and monuments of balanced stones, a kind of ancestral land art that abides for centuries, marking memories or indicating reindeer paths through the wilds. The monument in this show, made by Piita Irniq in 2019, is titled Silent Messenger. Enthralling period films show summer festivals, where thousands of Inuit gather in immense circles that revolve like wheels in the continuous daylight. Contemporary video celebrates the stupendous skill of an artist who scrapes seal skins into ultra-fine fabric for the pleating of shoes. Watercolours imagine seals beneath the ice-bores, prints depict human beings inside walruses, like Jonah in the whale. A pair of 19th-century Russian snow goggles takes the form of an eerie face, described in glass and uranium beads. The people of the Arctic live in the circumpolar regions of Greenland, Canada, Alaska, Russia and parts of Scandinavia. There are more than 40 ethnic groups. This is made marvellously apparent in the opening gallery, which is nothing less than a catwalk of spectacular costumes from the different groups, including a navy and scarlet Sami coat with a four-cornered hat (representing the four winds that blow across the ice) and an Alaskan child’s parka of brilliant blue, embroidered in red, its hood lined with soft wolverine that never freezes outside. A team of huskies appears to be drawing you onwards into the snowbound landscape, the dogs’ fierce beauty a marvel projected into infinite white space. This illusion is orchestrated by the brilliant Opera Amsterdam, who have designed something akin to the experience of Arctic light in the old London museum. Walk out of one gallery and you are confronted by a lone figure rising against a pink-tinged twilight: the only surviving sealskin suit for hunting whales, waterproof, inflatable and made centuries ago, standing stark and upright as the hunter. Everything is used and in every way. Seal skins, worked upon with fine blades for many months and stitched together with seal gut, become sails so strong yet diaphanous that it is easy to imagine moonlight shining through them as mariners crossed dark waters. And sure enough, there is a drawing of just such a scene, made by a Victorian explorer. The seal’s meat is made into a hundred different dishes. Its bone becomes the embodiment of itself: finely carved into captivating silkies. The art has a characteristic combination of delicacy and strength that seems to reflect the whole society. It runs all the way from 17th-century engravings of fur-clad drivers merrily bowling across the snow in reindeer-drawn sleds to the terrific photographs of the Alaskan artist Brian Adams, large as life and presented on lightboxes. Who could not love the powerful portrait of an Inuit woman surrounded by what might almost be fallen leaves, in glowing colours, but are in fact chunks of whale meat: a worker shown in her professional element? Knowledge of snow is lightly scattered throughout. Here is an ancient Sami sled, shaped like a boat so that it can float, almost, through the deep powdery snows of Scandinavia. Here are snowshoes made from wood to distribute the wearer’s weight so that they do not sink into the grainy snowdrifts of western Alaska. Boots fitted with walrus-ivory crampons give vital stability on snow that has thawed and then frozen again into a luminous but frightening slipperiness. The reindeer-fur soles of Sami boots were sewn with the fur ends pointing towards the toe to create a friction that stops the wearer from slithering. A breathtaking film of a woman making such boots shows her powerful hands forcing a needle through two layers of reindeer pelt as if it were thin as silk. Her white boots, embroidered with stars, are wondrous to behold. The soundtrack stealing through the galleries takes you straight to the Arctic – the cracking of ice, wind blowing across water, the barking of huskies and, occasionally, the singing of historical roundelays. And there are stories everywhere you look. A wooden visor, made around 1778 to block out the sun’s blinding glare, doubled as a seal’s head, acting as an ingenious decoy. A strange soapstone sculpture condenses a whole narrative in one semi-abstract medallion, telling of a family who became stranded on pack ice. They hunted seals for food and then used the skins to build the kayak on which they eventually paddled to safety. You might think of the Arctic as a barren, white expanse. But summer brings sea algae and plants spring into life, spreading their greenness. A wonderful wall hanging is embroidered all over with the multicoloured leaves that bud forth in the tundra. Sami men appear in a silent movie, leaping and wrestling in a meadow like some gleeful Arctic Olympics. But there will come a time when the ice no longer forms. The Arctic is heating more rapidly than anywhere else. A devastating projection of the north pole and its great white landmass is shown vanishing fast on the floor beneath your feet. Arctic peoples are literally on the shoreline of the climate crisis. Nothing could give a greater sense of the threat to their society than this exhibition, so revelatory of their art and their lives. And the show ends at the very edge of that ice, fading away on film, as dark figures moving about in the dusk try to haul in a fish from the rising waters. You watch with your heart in your mouth, as they stand upon this curious line – water lapping away at the ice, something solid returning to its liquid self. Arctic: Culture and Climate is at the British Museum, London, until 21 February
19||Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review – playful and potent collaborationThe Now Now (2018) was one of those Gorillaz albums that dispensed with the hip hop-led collaborations that have often defined this band of ink and flesh. Guests are in full effect, though, on its follow-up: what’s billed as Season One of the band’s Song Machine concept, compiling the tracks Gorillaz have released monthly via their YouTube channel since January, plus extra helpings. Everything that has ever been engaging about Gorillaz is present in spades here. Playfulness and conceptual ambition are all anchored by Damon Albarn’s melodic melancholy and his side-eye at the suboptimal state of things. His Bowie fixation waxes hard on unreleased tracks – such as The Lost Chord – as well those already in the public domain (Aries). Lifers might miss the very old school flows of the band’s earlier hook-ups, but the dizzying array of present voices – from 6lack to Octavian via US producer Mike Will Made It – renews Gorillaz’ relevance as beat merchants, while the assured application of other talents (from Robert Smith to Fatoumata Diawara, Peter Hook to St Vincent) ensures textural breadth. A strangely cogent album for wildly unstable times.
5||Mayors are a force for good. And it's time Johnson recognised thatLike so many around the world, the people of Greater Manchester and London have suffered terribly as a result of Covid-19. Thousands have died and years of hard-won economic progress has been undone in a matter of months – with businesses closed, jobs lost and unemployment predicted by some to hit 1980s levels. We must be honest that things are likely to get worse before they get better. The nations and regions of the UK should have been the government’s biggest ally in the battle to control the spread of this virus and to protect jobs and livelihoods. We are uniquely well placed to help. As mayors, our focus is exclusively on the city regions we run. But the Westminster Punch and Judy show struggles to relate to this more grown-up and pragmatic “place before party” approach. Proof of this is the cross-party coalition that stood up for Greater Manchester over recent days; the joint decision by the mayor and council leaders from all parties in London to go into tier 2; and the genuine collaboration and support shown by metro mayors, whatever their political colour, throughout the crisis. Mayors work hand in glove with local NHS leaders and regional public health experts. We have a deep understanding of the complexity and diversity of our communities. We have strong links with local business leaders and understand the strengths of our local economies. Crucially, we have shown ourselves capable of reacting to events more quickly and devising more innovative solutions than national government. However, instead of treating us as part of the solution to the pandemic, the government has at times treated us as the enemy. Westminster has sadly shown it is not mature enough to deal with devolution. The government may have all the money and power, but ministers simply cannot cope with differences, disagreements or compromise. Rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation. The prime minister has taken decisions with huge consequences for our regions. Offers of help on everything from the still-failing test and trace system to supporting vulnerable residents have been ignored. Increasingly desperate appeals for the funding we need have been rebuffed – and not just from us, but from Conservative mayors too. Now in London, meanwhile, the government must urgently come up with a deal that keeps TfL services running and doesn’t punish Londoners. While the government acted too late in March to save thousands of lives in London, it began lifting the national lockdown in the summer too early for the people of Greater Manchester – while the virus was still spreading too quickly. The region was then left languishing in restrictions similar to tier 2 from late July – with catastrophic consequences for local businesses, but no additional support for employers and workers facing those restrictions. Having underfunded places to deal with tier 2, they are now doing the same with tier 3. Though Greater Manchester succeeded in getting backdated support from the government, it won’t be enough to deal with the consequences of a crude tier 3 formula that penalises cities. The chancellor takes no account of the number of businesses in an area and the fact that busy city centres like ours have more hospitality enterprises. But there is a class issue here too: the businesses being forced to close are concentrated in the poorest communities. They will be hurt most by tier 3. This isn’t about wanting preferential treatment. It’s about basic fairness. It’s about treating cities fairly – wherever they are – given they are hit harder by lockdowns. The problem with money and power being concentrated in Westminster is that Whitehall doesn’t see the direct impact of policies in Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield or even parts of London. Ministers want us to bite our tongues. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London. It doesn’t have to be like this. Other countries have shown that with strong co-operation between regional and national authorities, it’s possible to get the virus under control and protect the economy. As we approach a difficult winter, we invite the prime minister, as a former mayor himself, to sit down with us to chart a better way forward. Levelling up will fail if it’s dictated top-down. So let’s now draw a line over the arguments of recent days, work together to control the virus and lay plans for a recovery led by the regions. Mayors are here to stay. It’s time for Westminster to grow up and work with us, not against us.
2||Coronavirus symptoms: how to tell if you have a common cold, flu or CovidWith winter approaching, the UK is entering the traditional seasons for colds and flu, with the additional complication this year that symptoms of those two illnesses can be broadly similar to those experienced by people who have caught the coronavirus and may be at risk of spreading it. The NHS in England has produced online Covid-19 advice and a guide to differentiate between the three types of illnesses, which health experts hope will make it clearer to people whether they have an illness they would have most likely brushed aside last year, but which this year might lead them to think they need to self-isolate or seek to have a coronavirus test. • If you are in any doubt and are concerned about your wellbeing or the health of someone you are caring for, you should seek medical assistance in the UK by dialling 111 or by following the Covid-19 advice on the NHS website. The NHS says that if you have any of the main symptoms of Covid-19 you should obtain a test as soon as possible and self-isolate. Coronavirus or Covid-19 The most common symptoms of coronavirus or Covid-19 are a fever – a temperature of 37.8C (100F) – a new persistent cough (usually dry), and a loss of their sense of taste and/or smell. Patients may also sometimes suffer from fatigue, aches and pains, sore throat, headaches and shortness of breath. Diarrhoea and a runny or stuffy nose are rare. The NHS says symptoms can range from mild to severe. Colds The most common symptoms of a cold are sneezing, aches and pains, a runny or stuffy nose and sore throat. A mild cough can be experienced. There is sometimes fatigue, and it is rare to experience a fever or headaches. Colds do not cause diarrhoea. The NHS states that with a cold there is usually a gradual onset of symptoms. Flu Flu most commonly consists of a fever, fatigue, a dry cough, aches and pains and headaches. Patients will sometimes experience a runny or stuffy nose or a sore throat. Diarrhoea can sometimes occur in children. There is usually no sneezing with flu, but a severe shortness of breath can develop, and the NHS notes there is usually a rapid onset of symptoms. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy. • This article was amended on 19 September 2020 to include a loss of taste and/or smell as a common symptom of people with coronavirus.
2||Covid world map: which countries have the most coronavirus cases and deaths?Since first being recorded late last year in China, the Covid-19 coronavirus has spread around the world, and been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. However, differences in testing mean that the number of cases may be understated for some countries. Obviously, larger countries tend to have higher numbers both of cases and of deaths. But there are many other factors in play, such as the demographic profiles of the countries; countries with ageing populations may be hit harder because the disease is more dangerous to older people. The number of deaths is a more dependable indicator. The disease has hit certain countries, including the US, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK with particular cruelty. Johns Hopkins University publishes cases and deaths data for most countries in the world (a notable exception being North Korea, which claims to have had none). But JHU concedes that it collects data from many sources, some of which disagree with each other. Even where the collection is less contentious there are significant differences in the ways countries test, and in the way they report cases and deaths. Belgium, for instance, attributes deaths to Covid-19 if the disease is a suspected cause, even if no test has been carried out. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
2||Fighting tyranny with milk tea: the young rebels joining forces in AsiaThe language, the demands and the backdrop were different, but the protests across central Bangkok last week would have looked familiar to anyone who followed the mass demonstrations that roiled Hong Kong for a year from June 2019. Crowds of young protesters, dressed in black and wearing hard hats, poured through the streets to locations announced at the last minute on social media. As the police closed in and the protesters prepared for confrontation, hand gestures and human chains ensured supplies including protective masks and water reached the front lines. Tactics adopted from Hong Kong demonstrations have helped the movement survive both the jailing of most of its leaders and direct attempts by the prime minister Prayuth Chan-ocha to ban the demonstrations. But Hong Kong has not only provided inspiration in Bangkok. In recent months an unexpected solidarity has developed between young protesters and activists across Thailand, Taiwan and Hong Kong, at first online but increasingly now in protests on the streets, in law courts and in the corridors of power. Their fights are serious ones, against governments with a ruthless track record of crushing dissent. But the symbol of east Asia’s informal coalition is playful, a simple beverage enjoyed in all three places, leading protesters to dub their unlikely cross-border support the “Milk Tea Alliance”. Milk tea is drunk differently in each place, just as their individual battles vary. Cold with tapioca bubbles in Taiwan, hot and strong in Hong Kong, iced and sweetened with condensed milk in Thailand. But the basic ingredients are the same, just as the protesters’ basic aim – democracy – is shared. “When you have to go against a big power you have to be creative,” said Netiwit Chotiphatphaisal, a prominent student activist in Bangkok. “The name is very cute – it’s appealing and people [see] it’s not aggressive.” Protest art posted online shows three teas raised together in a toast. Other images depict the drinks as sweet cartoon figures holding hands in solidarity, with love hearts floating above. Alliance supporters are keen not to overstate what the different members can do for each other, or minimise the differences between their struggles. Thai students are battling a powerful monarchy, demanding greater democracy and accountability. In Hong Kong, protesters are fighting the Beijing-backed government for rights and freedoms they were promised during the handover from British colonial rule. They were abruptly curtailed this year by a draconian national security law imposed from the mainland. And in Taiwan politicians and activists are engaged in an existential struggle with China, which considers the self-ruled island part of its territory and has not ruled out using force to bring it under Beijing’s control. But supporters of the unlikely coalition say protesters and politicians across the disparate milk-tea territories share practical challenges, ideological values, and increasing concern about the power of China – a key ally of Bangkok’s military-backed government. Thai protesters inspired by the Hong Kong movement see direct parallels between their own political experiences and that of activists opposing China’s authoritarianism, said Janjira Sombatpoonsiri, assistant professor of political science at Thammasat University. “When you look at Hong Kong as a Thai citizen, what you see is a repetition of another autocratic rule – repression, doublespeak, lies and propaganda, disinformation and abuse of power,” said Janjira. More than 80 protesters in Thailand have now been arrested after taking part in protests, and key leaders remain in detention. Three were charged under an obscure law banning “violence against the queen” after her motorcade was heckled, and could face a death sentence if her life is thought to have been in danger. Some Thai protesters see not only a shared goal of democracy but a shared enemy in Beijing, including Thachaporn Supparatanapinyo, a Thai student activist living in Taiwan, who describes the alliance as a “perfect example” of a regional movement. “For the CCP [Chinese Communist party], there will always be the next and the next,” she said. “If not territorial expansion then they will seek to commodify our sovereignty by buying off (Thai) leaders like they have already done in Cambodia and Laos.” Jerry Liu, director of international affairs for Taiwan’s New Power party, which grew out of the student-led Sunflower protest movement of 2014, admits that for many in Taiwan the Milk Tea Alliance is just a “vague and fancy slogan”. But the island’s own relatively recent history of democratisation and its perpetual fight to preserve self-rule should make pro-democracy activists elsewhere natural allies, he says. “If we think about this issue from the perspective of human rights, liberty and democracy, then we should find many things in common,” he said at a press conference organised by the Taiwan Alliance for Thai Democracy – a practical incarnation of the alliance. The origin of this modern alliance of young pro-democracy activists is almost as unlikely as its symbol. It began in the spring after a Thai celebrity and his girlfriend shared pictures on their social media accounts that – apparently unintentionally – could be read as backing independence for Hong Kong and Taiwan. China’s army of hyper-vigilant nationalist trolls responded by attacking Thailand, trying to dent nationalist pride with slurs on the monarchy and economy, but they misjudged their target. Thai Twitter users are known for their outspoken criticism of their country’s establishment, and the attacks came after months of anti-government protests. Rather than being offended, many embraced the attacks, and deflected them back with sarcasm and dark humour in an escalating online battle that gradually drew in peers in Hong Kong and Taiwan. A volley of memes ricocheted around the internet, but an “alliance” that began as a joke also began to take real form on the ground. A protester facing charges in Hong Kong flashed a Thai protest symbol to a packed courtroom this summer. Thai students looked to the experienced, effective Hong Kong organisers for examples of how to more effectively defy and protest against their government, copying graphics and advice about staying safe at protests and keeping digital data private. “Online users in Asia are realising there is strength in numbers and in the shared experiences of resisting and fighting back against authoritarian governments,” said Tracy Beattie, a researcher at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, who has closely followed online political activism in Thailand. In Taiwan, the milk tea hashtag even popped up on the vice-president’s Twitter feed on National Day, 10 October, although a government spokesman had previously claimed Taipei took “no position” on the alliance. Over the past six months, online activists aligned with the group helped drive a boycott of Disney’s live-action remake of Mulan, drawing attention to human rights abuses by Chinese authorities in Xinjiang, where some filming took place, and to the lead actor’s controversial support for police in Hong Kong. It has also been used to share anything from reports of China’s exploitation of the Mekong, a river relied upon by tens of millions of people, to petitions calling for states to stand up to China over its persecution of Uighur Muslims. Sitthiphon Kruarattikan, director of the Institute of East Asian Studies, at Thammasat University, said that although there is no expectation of the alliance driving political change, it reflects and amplifies growing concern about Beijing’s political agenda and its regional projection of power. “China is still unsuccessful in cultivating soft power or winning hearts and minds of their ‘Taiwanese compatriots’ and people in neighbouring countries,” he added.
2||Covid cases and deaths today: coronavirus UK mapPlease note: 3 and 4 October totals include cases from previous days published late owing to a technical fault on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Cases from between 24 September and 1 October have been added to the totals for 3 and 4 October. Please note: these are government figures on numbers of confirmed cases – some people who report symptoms are not being tested, and are not included in these counts. Coronavirus has hit the UK hard, with the country recording hundreds of thousands of cases and over 40,000 deaths linked to the disease. England faced Europe’s highest excess death levels during the first wave of the pandemic. Where are the UK’s current coronavirus hotspots? At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact. Since then, however, the centre of the virus has shifted northwards and to areas in Northern Ireland. England now operates a three-tier system, with different areas facing different restrictions. Details of the English lockdowns are listed here, Scottish lockdowns here, Welsh here and Northern Irish here. How is the disease progressing in the UK? Cases in the UK first peaked in early April, before beginning to fall from May to early July. Since August, however, daily cases have once again and the UK is now in the grips of a second wave. Numbers passed the earlier peak in September and have continued to rise in October – although some of this can be attributed to increased testing and targeted testing in coronavirus outbreak areas. The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March, peaking in April. That figure has now been rising again in September and October. Deaths were at their highest during the first peak of cases, with over 1,000 daily deaths seen on some days in April. They started to once again increase in October, following the earlier rise in cases. How much of the second wave is due to more testing? Some of the sharp rise in cases in September and October can be attributed to increased testing. Many more tests were done in autumn than during the first wave in the spring. In March and April, there were relatively few tests available and these were given to people with severe symptoms – mainly in hospitals. Most people with milder symptoms were not tested, so these cases were not recorded, meaning the actual number is likely to have been much higher. Sir Patrick Vallance has said the daily case number may have been over 100,000 on some days in the first wave. During the start of the second wave in September, more tests were available and the majority of people took tests in the community. This means that people with milder symptoms were being tested and recorded in the official figures. The real number of cases will still be higher than the recorded count, but the testing will be picking up a greater proportion of the total. However, given Covid-19’s potential for exponential growth, the shape of the cases curve is critically important, and the effect of increased cases can be seen in the hospitalisation and mortality curves above. Find coronavirus cases near you The chart below shows the areas that have had the highest daily peaks of new Covid-19 cases. Many parts of the UK now have a number of cases that surpasses the first peak of the pandemic. Other areas have had less dramatic peaks of infection. Find the cases curve in your own area by typing into the search bar below. In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic. About this data This data comes from a variety of sources: the headline figures come from Public Health England, working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Local authority data for England and Wales also comes from Public Health England. Historic data for Scottish regions is only available by health board and comes from Public Health Scotland. We exclude 15 June for Scottish data owing to the fact that new historic data was added on that day. The most recent Northern Irish data used in the maps and table comes from the NI Department of Health, but for the line charts above it comes from Public Health England, which has historic data for Northern Ireland. There are differences in the data collection practices and publishing schedules of the sources that may lead to temporary inconsistencies. About Covid-19 Since first being identified as a new coronavirus strain in Wuhan, China, late last year, Covid-19 has spread around the globe. The virus can cause pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. You can find out more about the symptoms here. There are things you can do, such as wearing a face mask, to protect yourself and slow the spread of the virus. Chief among them are regularly washing your hands for at least 20 seconds with soap and water, and catching coughs and sneezes in tissues. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
17||Priti Patel kept up anti-lawyer rhetoric after Met warning on terrorThe UK home secretary, Priti Patel, is under fresh pressure after it emerged that she appeared to have dismissed intelligence briefings from counter- terrorism police to the Home Office over an alleged far-right terror attack. Officers from S015, the Metropolitan police counter terrorism command (CTC), notified the Home Office in mid-September that it was suspected that a far-right extremist had attempted to carry out a terror attack at a solicitors’ firm in London. Weeks later, on 4 October at the Conservative party conference, the home secretary intensified her criticism of “do gooders” and “lefty lawyers.” On Saturday night, Nick Thomas-Symonds MP, the shadow home secretary, said: “The home secretary has fallen short of the high standards that the role demands. The use of such reprehensible and inflammatory language undermines the most important part of her job, which is to keep people safe.” Officers from SO15 were drafted in to investigate the attack on law firm Duncan Lewis, which occurred on 7 September after it became evident that extremism might be involved. Accounts from the firm, including eyewitness statements, formed part of the investigation. On Friday, alleged far-right extremist Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow in north-west London, was charged with attempting to launch a terror attack at the law firm last month. The Old Bailey heard that Medlock arrived at Duncan Lewis’s offices armed with a knife, handcuffs, a Nazi flag and a US Confederate flag with prosecutors saying he appeared to target the firm because of its involvement with immigration cases. Previously, the Observer has revealed that Patel ignored warnings from senior colleagues including the lord chancellor and attorney general as well as officials from the Bar Council and Law Society to stop targeting immigration lawyers following the incident. Sources say the Met notified MI5 and the Home Office last month of the incident and its far-right links. Separately, senior Home Office officials involved in its counter-extremism portfolio have said they were made aware of a suspected far-right attack before Patel resumed her attacks on immigration lawyers at the Tory party conference. A spokesperson for the Met confirmed that it was protocol to share intelligence and details following a suspected terrorist incident with the Home Office: “Counter terrorism policing works closely with colleagues from MI5 and the Home Office in the course of our investigative activity. This includes sharing, as and where appropriate, certain information and intelligence relating to our work with these partners.”They added: “There are well established protocols in place to brief government on the police response following major incidents, including terrorist attacks.” The chronology of events raises questions as to why Patel chose to keep attacking the legal profession. According to government documents, her remit is being “responsible for making sure our communities, in all [police] force areas, are kept safe and secure”. An online Home Office fact sheet on rightwing terrorism pledges that the department is committed to tackling far-right attacks, stating: “The threat from rightwing terrorism has evolved in recent years and is growing. That is why this government is taking urgent action to tackle it.” In addition, Patel has oversight of the security service MI5, which last year was given responsibility to take the lead in tackling rightwing terrorism, officially designated as a major threat to national security. This month, the new head of MI5 warned of its growing threat. Out of 27 terrorist plots disrupted in the past four years, eight have involved rightwing extremists. In addition, Patel’s department presides over the government’s counter extremism strategy, Prevent, which aims to help vulnerable individuals people from being radicalised to supporting terrorism. “With any case of domestic terrorism you need to look at the reasons behind it, its inspiration. This is why this is so serious,” said a source with knowledge of the case. They added: “If you had a dubious politician abroad inciting hatred and then a UK terror incident was traced back to what this politician had said then you can only imagine the measures that would be taken.”
18||His House review – palpable terrorBritish writer-director Remi Weekes’s arresting first feature smartly utilises the horror genre to explore the hostile environment experienced by Sudanese refugees Bol (Sope Dirisu) and Rial (Wunmi Mosaku). Case worker Mark (Matt Smith) places the married couple in a grotty house with peeling wallpaper (“a palace”), urging them to “get along”, “fit in” and “make it easy for people”. Outside, an unfriendly neighbour observes Bol from her window, while three schoolboys taunt a disoriented Rial, telling her to “go back to Africa”. At home, Bol is haunted by voices in his head and noises from within the walls, echoes of grief, guilt and shame that assume bodily forms. Genuine jump scares are bolstered by the film’s spooky sound design, as well as terrific performances from Dirisu and Mosaku, whose terror is palpable.
2||How CBBC's 'Dr Xand' learned surviving Covid isn't child's playBest known as half of the twin-presenter duo of CBBC’s Operation Ouch!, Dr Xand van Tulleken’s impeccable credentials – a medical degree and qualifications in public health and tropical medicine – have also seen him front documentaries on everything from male suicide to the science of dating. But earlier this year he found the tables turned when he caught Covid while he and his brother Chris were making a programme on the pandemic. Being a doctor didn’t stop him panicking. “I was properly anxious, and frightened at the prospect of spending two weeks completely on my own when I was ill,” he told me. “I was quite tearful speaking to my twin about it all.” By the end of week one, he thought he was out of the woods. Then, on day 12, he woke with his heart racing: a condition called “atrial fibrillation”. He went into hospital, where doctors stopped and started his heart to regularise its rhythm. He has had this done three times since, once while cameras were rolling as his brother looked on during filming for their BBC documentary Surviving the Virus. How did it feel to go so publicly from presenter to patient? “I had all the anxieties you’d expect – I didn’t want to look frail or vulnerable on the telly,” he admits. But he’s glad he did it, and not just because it might reduce the stigma around illness: “My favourite thing was seeing people replying to things on social media about Covid being made up with ‘why don’t you ask Dr Xand?’ Because even as someone quite young, I had a relatively severe experience of it.” The producer sent over a rough cut, warning it was tough viewing. “We didn’t believe him, we thought we’re both doctors, we’ve seen this stuff before, so we had Mum and Dad over and put it on, and everyone was in tears. I found it hard to watch, mainly because I didn’t like seeing Chris upset.” It also can’t have been easy doing lockdown while living alone and recovering from Covid, with a tough work schedule thrown into the mix: he filmed a whole series of Operation Ouch from his kitchen, and co-presented BBC1’s Health Check Live. He survived it by getting to know his neighbours better – including the squirrels in his garden, whose appearance during our interview prompts him to jump up and feed them (“I can’t have a cat or a dog, so they’re my pets!”). But the hardest thing was not seeing his 11-year-old son, Julian, who lives in Canada, as much as usual. “At this point we’d normally be talking about Christmas but it’s possible this year I won’t get to spend it with him.” His own experience of Covid has reminded him how vulnerable adults can be to new viruses. Children’s immune systems are designed to respond vigorously to viruses, but by the time we reach adulthood most of us have been exposed to the common ones so there’s less need for an all-out response; it’s why adults get chickenpox so much worse. “Some long-Covid symptoms will be specific to coronavirus but it is possible that some of what we’re talking about is the effect of new virus exposure in adults, something we’ve been aware of for a long time but which has been neglected by medicine,” he explains. He stresses the need for greater investment in rehab services where people might spend weeks recovering after leaving intensive care. What aspects of the pandemic response does he think have gone well? “The British public have done an extraordinary job in doing their best to slow the spread of the virus,” he says. Less so the government. “My work in overseas aid taught me that so much of public health is good information, but the government has got it so wrong,” he says. Blaming the public for rising infection rates after encouraging everyone to go into the office “felt like gaslighting”, and he says the hypocrisy of government adviser Dominic Cummings in failing to apologise when caught breaking the rules undermined the sense we were all in it together. He rails against the government’s dogmatic approach to science, for example the early insistence that hand-shaking was safe. When he was on Question Time in early March, he was taken aback when fellow panellist Matt Hancock reached out his hand. “I said ‘I’m not really shaking hands at the moment.’” He says Hancock was adamant it didn’t spread through handshakes. “I know how these sorts of viruses spread, but I don’t like social awkwardness so ended up shaking his hand!” He finds ministers’ claims they are “following the science” deeply problematic: “No scientist in the world can tell you whether it’s worth closing down parts of the entertainment industry; that’s an inherently political decision.” He is also scathing about the three scientists who penned the “Great Barrington declaration”, which argued we should shield the vulnerable but that life for everyone else should go back to normal. “I’m genuinely interested in the question of at what point we’ve gone too far with social restrictions; whether it’s isolation or poverty, there are terrible trade-offs. But I felt so frustrated that those scientists turned the most important question of a generation – how we respond to respiratory virus pandemics – into the most poorly thought through, unkind document, launched by a thinktank funded by the Koch brothers.” If a Covid vaccine comes, it will be important to encourage uptake; how can scientists address fake news from anti-vaxxers? Xand says that after he and Dr Chris noticed one or two people occasionally getting up and leaving the Operation Ouch! live show during their segment about vaccines, they changed their approach. “The thing society normally does is say ‘you’re so stupid’ to parents who believe the conspiracy theories. But, actually, large pharmaceutical companies, western governments and the medical profession have all given some communities in particular reasons not to trust them over the years.” He believes medics need to communicate better with sceptical parents. “If you are in the situation where the only way of saving children was compulsory vaccination, then I guess I’d be in favour of it. But to get to that point, you’ve screwed up so badly.” There’ll be no shortage of opportunities for Xand to talk directly to the public: he’s the resident doctor on BBC1’s new show Morning Live, which starts tomorrow. “I want the medical bits to feel reassuring and optimistic rather than gloomy,” he says. A tough ask during a pandemic perhaps, but having just spent an hour in Xand’s bubbly company, I reckon we’re in safe hands.
13||Instagram row over plus-size model forces change to nudity policyAs campaigning victories go, forcing Mark Zuckerberg’s social media empire to admit a discriminatory flaw in its policy is no small feat. But following a campaign launched in this paper, the Observer can exclusively reveal that Instagram and its parent company Facebook will be updating its policy on nudity in order to help end discrimination of plus-size black women on its platforms and ensure all body types are treated fairly. In August, Instagram was accused of censoring and silencing the plus-size model Nyome Nicholas-Williams. A wave of content creators then confirmed the platform was repeatedly discriminating against black people, plus-size users and other marginalised communities, by deleting their photos or failing to promote them in the same way it did for its white users. Speaking to the Observer over the summer, Nicholas-Williams and photographer Alexandra Cameron told of how photos from their “confidence shoot” were repeatedly deleted and taken down, with warnings that their accounts – which have more than 115,000 followers between them – could be closed down. The controversy caused fans to protest and post pictures of the model en masse under the hashtag #IWantToSeeNyome. The photo-sharing app owned by Facebook was accused of hypocrisy and racism in allowing an abundance of photos of semi-naked skinny white women on its feeds but deleting those posted by black women in similar poses. Nicholas-Williams said she was shocked that “a fat black woman celebrating her body is banned … I want to promote self-love and inclusivity because that’s how I feel and how I want other women like me to feel”. The photos in question showed Nicholas-Williams with her eyes closed and wrapping an arm around her breasts. While the pose is a common trope across social media, in this instance it was deemed to violate Instagram’s guidance on pornography. As well as sophisticated artificial intelligence, Facebook and Instagram employ 15,000 content reviewers across the world. These workers individually sift through thousands of photos that are reported as offensive by users to the app everyday. Human bias – unconscious or otherwise – might be expected to occur in content deletion and account bans but Facebook and Instagram have exhaustive rules that must be applied to allow either to happen. The company denied Nicholas-Williams had been racially discriminated against, but confirmed that its former policy on “boob squeezing” had caused her photos to be removed. Campaigner Gina Martin, who had also lobbied Instagram and who previously got the law changed to criminalise “upskirting” in 2018,said: “This policy change is an example of what happens when you recognise an issue, get organised, form a relationship with big platforms and make yourself difficult to ignore.” Nicholas-Williams said she was delighted with the outcome. “This is a huge step and I am glad a dialogue has now been opened,” she said. “I want to ensure that I am respected and allowed to use spaces like Instagram, as many other creators do, without the worry of being censored and silenced.” Instagram’s influence on trends and popular culture cannot be underestimated. The social media site has over a billion users worldwide and millions of pictures are uploaded online everyday by individuals, small businesses, major brands and politicians keen to be part of the conversation. A spokesperson from Instagram confirmed that pictures of Nicholas-Williams were originally taken down as “we do not allow breast squeezing because it can be most commonly associated with pornography”. Cameron, the photographer, said: “There is more flesh to hold or place your arm around if you have bigger boobs. There was no suggestion of pornographic squeezing – my photos are explicitly about the female gaze and about empowering women.” Instagram acknowledged that the shoot showed the model “holding her breasts … [in] images intended to demonstrate self-love and body acceptance.” A spokesperson for Instagram said: “As we looked into this more closely, we realised it was an instance where our policy on breast squeezing wasn’t being correctly applied. Hearing Nyome’s feedback helped us understand where this policy was falling short, and how we could refine it.” The new policy on nudity will apply across Instagram and Facebook and come into effect this week.
17||PM on the ropes as London Tories rail against extension of congestion chargeBoris Johnson is facing mounting pressure from Tory MPs in London to comprehensively rule out a massive extension of the congestion charge in the capital, amid emergency talks over a new bailout for its struggling transport system. Conservative figures warned there would be “blood on the walls” if the government allowed the extension of the charge, which would hit a series of so-called “London doughnut” Tory seats on the outskirts of the city. They are also demanding there must be no threat to subsidised travel for the young or older people, also proposed as an option by the government as a condition of a further bailout. The idea of extending the congestion charge was among a series of measures suggested in a leaked letter from the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, earlier this month. It would apparently see the £15 charge extend to the North and South Circular roads by October 2021 – an 18-fold increase in the size of the area covered. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, is demanding £4.9bn for the next 18 months to rescue Transport for London (TfL), which has been severely hit by the Covid-19 crisis. However, even raising the idea has outraged Tory MPs. London Tories have held two emergency meetings with Shapps in the last fortnight, warning him an extension of the charge will “not be tolerated”. Shapps has attempted to calm concerns but Tories remain uneasy after Johnson failed to rule out a congestion charge extension when confronted with the issue at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. “Extending the congestion charge, taking away concessionary fares to the elderly and young, are completely unacceptable to us – we were not going to accept it,” said one figure involved. “If this was even suggested then there’d be real complaints and blood on the walls.” There is deep frustration among Tories in the capital, who believe the government has allowed itself to be outflanked by Khan. They warn that ministers have allowed him to blame them for imposing cuts without having to draw any up himself. Another Conservative MP said: “Khan has now been allowed to basically hide problems of his own making behind Covid. We’re letting him get away with blaming everything on the government. There’s a real frustration that [Johnson] hasn’t been as adept as he might have been with how to deal with this man.” The latest row comes as Khan and Greater Manchester mayor Andy Burnham accuse the government of treating local leaders “as the enemy” during the pandemic. Writing jointly in the Observer, they state that “rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation from ministers”. Ministers want us to bite our tongues and bend the knee. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London.” They are now calling for a meeting with the prime minister to improve relations. The dispute is the latest to highlight the growing question of No 10’s influence over London and claims that Khan’s powers have been diminished across the board. There is now just a week to go until the deadline by which the government must agree a financial support package for TfL. Khan’s team has made clear it cannot accept a deal that would force through higher fares, higher council tax, a hugely increased congestion charge zone and concessions for children and over-60s being scrapped in return for the financial support. Khan’s team has warned the government of the potentially “catastrophic” effect of forcing TfL into issuing a “section 114” notice if it cannot balance its books. In theory, that could see the winding down of all services apart from the Woolwich ferry and some school bus services – the only services TfL is legally obliged to provide. On Friday, Khan wrote to Shapps demanding a meeting to sort out the deal. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “We have agreed an extension to the support period and to roll over unspent funding from the TfL extraordinary funding agreement, allowing further time for negotiations for a new settlement. These discussions will ensure London has a safe, reliable network. It would be inappropriate to disclose further details at this stage.”
16||Don’t worry about Latin names or Victorian rulesTo the uninitiated, the world of horticulture can seem like a daunting place, full of unpronounceable Latin names, unfathomably complex pruning rules and the constant fear of killing everything in your care if you deviate even slightly from them. These doubts can serve as a really effective barrier to would-be newbies from experiencing one of the most rewarding, uplifting and therapeutic of arts. But trust me as a botanist when I tell you it simply doesn’t have to be this way. First things first – what about all those strict Victorian rules? Well, here’s a simple truth. When actually tested scientifically, many of the most long-held gardening “rules” are either based on limited evidence that is not applicable to modern, domestic gardens or, frankly, may even give you worse results. For example, religiously adding a layer of crocks to the bottom of pots actually impedes drainage. Laboriously “double digging” your flower beds each autumn has been shown to degrade soil structure, and following meticulous Victorian rose-pruning rules gives you fewer flowers the next year than simply whacking new growth back with electric hedge clippers. Now, I am absolutely not saying that all gardening advice should be disregarded – far from it. But it should be reframed as “tips and tricks”, which could potentially give you better results, not hard and fast “rules” that must be followed to the letter or risk catastrophe. Secondly: Latin is a dead language. There are no ancient Romans around to correct you and, even if there were, the empire was so enormous, encompassing such a vast diversity of cultures, the chances are that however you pronounce them, there would have been a Roman who would have said them just like you. I mean, frankly, botanical Latin isn’t even really “true” Latin, but a random hodgepodge of ancient Greek and Latin, plus a hefty dose of a myriad of other languages from Russian and German to Chinese and Indonesian. So I promise you there is categorically no “correct” way to pronounce these “Latin” names. However, using the accurate scientific name, however you say it, is often the only way to get the correct ID on the plant you are looking for, so giving it a go can save you a lot of time, money and confusion. Nursery growers will thank you. Finally, and this is probably the most important one: do not be afraid of killing plants! Over millions of years plants have evolved all sorts of ingenious strategies to overcome even the harshest environmental conditions, with zero help from horticulturists. In most cases, given light and water levels even very roughly similar to their native habitat, they will be perfectly happy to get on with it. If they do die, then just try something else. I’d go further, in fact. I’d say killing plants is the only way you’ll really learn what works and what doesn’t. I’ve killed hundreds, perhaps thousands in my time. The only secret of a green thumb is to dust yourself off and try again. In gardening there are no mistakes, only experiments. So go out there and start experimenting. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek
5||A Joe Biden White House will have little time and less love for ‘Britain’s Trump’When the long race for the White House ends, another begins: the sprint to be the first European leader to be granted an audience by the new US president. In 2016, Theresa May was distraught to have got a wooden spoon in the competition to put in an early congratulatory telephone call to Trump Tower. That made her even more neuralgic about beating a path to Washington ahead of her European rivals. Mrs May had to throw in the promise of a Trump state visit to the UK – I rather rudely called it “pimping out the Queen” – to ensure that she got to the White House first. This desperation can make British prime ministers look pathetically needy, but there is a reason why they set so much store by displays of proximity with the Oval Office. How important a prime minister is to the United States, the planet’s largest economy and most potent military force, sends a message about how much influence the UK wields in the world. So it is telling that Number 10 is resigned to the prospect that Boris Johnson will not be the first name on Joe Biden’s call sheet if he becomes the 46th president. Nor is there any expectation that Mr Johnson will be first in line when they hand out invitations to the White House. He has already quit a race UK prime ministers are usually pretty good at winning. “There is an intrinsic problem for Boris,” observes Sir Christopher Meyer, the UK’s ambassador in Washington during the presidencies of Bill Clinton and George W Bush. “The Democrats think Boris is a pea from the same pod as Trump.” Being “Britain’s Trump” goes down almost as poisonously as being Trump himself among many in Team Biden. They are bracketed together in the minds of Democrats not just because both are rule-breaking populists who have polarised their countries and trashed historic alliances. Likely members of a Biden administration remember examples of the Tory leader’s insultingly Trumpian behaviour. Ben Rhodes, who was deputy national security adviser when Mr Biden was vice-president to Barack Obama, has remarked: “I’m old enough to remember when Boris Johnson said Obama opposed Brexit because he was Kenyan.” A more recent inflammatory episode exposed a complete absence of thought in Number 10 about the man whom the polls suggest will be the next US president. One of the most essential things to know about Mr Biden – it would be on the first page if anyone wrote a book called Biden for Beginners – is that he is a Catholic who is extremely proud of his Irish ancestry. Mr Johnson was either blithe or ignorant about that when he declared that he was ready to break international law by dishonouring clauses concerning Ireland in the withdrawal agreement with the EU. Mr Biden was one of the voices in the chorus of American condemnation that the Johnson government was jeopardising the Good Friday agreement. “That was profoundly clumsy and stupid,” says Sir Chris. “It immediately ignited the Irish-American lobby in Washington, which is second in power only to the pro-Israeli lobby.” Mr Johnson can be quite adept at shape-shifting when he thinks it suits his interests. He was a liberal mayor of London before he became the face of the anti-immigrant Brexit campaign. Confronted with a Democrat in the White House, he may try to slough off his Trumpian skin and offer himself as a useful partner for an internationalist president. For his part, Mr Biden will say that America’s ties with the UK are important to him, if only because that is what all American presidents say. It is nevertheless set to start out as one of the frostiest relationships between Number 10 and the White House since Harold Wilson and Lyndon Johnson in the 1960s. Though Mr Biden has been a large figure in US politics for decades, one well-placed observer says that Number 10 is “absolutely clueless” about him and his key people. In the past, it has been usual for the Washington embassy to attach a diplomat to the campaigns of presidential candidates, the better to get to know their teams and likely priorities in office. Wary of any suggestion of outside interference in the US election, the Biden team banned meetings with foreign diplomats. Downing Street has found it hard to find other ways to establish connections. Previous Tory governments had good lines of communication to both parties in the US. This Brexiter-dominated cabinet has cultivated ties solely with Republicans. It was only very recently and very belatedly that Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, managed to get some time with Biden allies on Capitol Hill. If they were smarter, the Johnson government would also have paid a lot of attention to Mr Biden’s running mate, Kamala Harris, because she will be a 77-year-old’s heartbeat away from the presidency. Even if a Biden administration decides to let bygones be bygones, the Johnson government will still struggle to make itself relevant in Washington. After a Trump presidency that has massively strained America’s historic alliances while often fawning to authoritarians, a Biden presidency will try to reassert US leadership of the world’s democracies. A critical feature of that will be detraumatising the transatlantic relationship. At a recent Ditchley conference of foreign policy experts from America, Britain and elsewhere, one question that preoccupied the gathering was who would become Mr Biden’s “special friend” in Europe. Emmanuel Macron is very eager to secure that status, though others familiar with thinking among the Biden team believe that their highest priority will be re-establishing strong relations with Germany. Almost no one expects the UK to have preferred partnership status. After the huge distress to European leaders of enduring a US president who willed the breakup of the European Union, a Biden administration will revert to something much closer to America’s traditional post-1945 policy. Namely that US interests are best served by Europe being stable and cohesive. Having severed its central bond with its neighbours, the UK can no longer hope to offer itself to Washington as America’s bridge across the Atlantic. Searching for areas where the relationship could still be close, some emphasise “the hard security issues” – military co-operation, counter-terrorism and intelligence – where there are mutual interests that have historically transcended the personalities of leaders. “When the Americans are looking for military help, they ask who are our allies and what have they got?” says one senior Tory who thinks this still matters. But Johnson government officials sound rather desperate when they try to talk up the importance of the UK’s much-reduced military heft. Mr Biden is not planning any wars and, even if he were, the United States can act without the help of Britain. The biggest foreign policy challenge of the Biden presidency will be managing his country’s tense strategic competition with China while avoiding a deterioration into armed confrontation. Britain’s ability to be of use to Washington in that sphere is limited because our capacity to apply meaningful pressure on China is not high. The UK government has protested in vain about China’s treatment of Hong Kong. Downing Street also sounds as if it is clutching at very feeble straws when it suggests that there will be an opportunity to win favour next year when Britain hosts the UN climate change conference. Mr Biden is not exactly a summit novice and his team have clocked that Britain was mealymouthed when Mr Trump ripped up American commitments to tackling the climate crisis. There are compelling reasons why a change at the White House ought to unnerve Mr Johnson. The Trump presidency emboldens populist nationalists around the world by encouraging them to believe that they are part of an irresistibly triumphant global trend. Defeat for him will give his one term in office more the character of a freakish spasm and leave imitators looking like purveyors of an ideological style that is going out of fashion. During the Trump period, Mr Johnson has tried to lever influence with other leaders by presenting himself as the man who has the ear of, and can help to interpret, the White House wild man. “Boris Johnson sold himself as the Trump whisperer,” says Jonathan Powell, a diplomat in Washington before he became Tony Blair’s chief of staff. “Without Trump, what is the point of Johnson?” More existentially, the British may ask themselves where his policies have left this country other than looking alone in a dangerous world. Brexit has fractured the relationship with Europe, one pillar of the postwar foreign policy. Now it looks highly likely that the other pillar, a close relationship with the US, will be shuddering. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the Observer
16||What happened when me and Kim Kardashian both turned 40?My bottom is as flat as Norfolk. It’s basically a back, slightly folded. As a seat it’s acceptable, though after 45 minutes I am grateful for a padded chair. In a tight dress in dim light the effect is MC Escher-like – a leering eye is unfortunately drawn down and around a virtual staircase somehow ending up back at the shoulders again without a hint of arousal, which is sad. And yet despite my gluteous failings, Kim Kardashian and I have much in common. Both she and I turn 40 this month, and nobody can believe it of either of us. Forty! I know! A bizarre age to turn when all your parents are still basically 40; a crazy age to be presented with when you’re still not quite sure about historical wars or the spelling of, say, “embarrass”, nor can you confidently work the second TV remote. A mad age to be when, if asked how old you were, quickly and after a bracing swim, would reply, “19” without a quiver. But here it is, in black and white and shades of sparkling bronze; she and I enter the autumn of our youths and, well, also autumn, as middle-aged suburban mums. Yes, her and Kanye’s house is significantly cleaner than mine, and her arse potentially more influential. Sure, I am not yet responsible for the felling of an entire forest’s worth of paper to host debates on whether I am the overlooked face of feminism, and sure, too, she is unlikely to be found in her Twitter DMs debating taste and class consciousness vis-à-vis the return of Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen’s Changing Rooms, but this month Kim and I share an important thing: both of us have been robbed of a party. Instead of her planned celebration, a “Wild, Wild Miss West”-themed ball, for which she’d commissioned Thierry Mugler to make her a “metal cowgirl costume”, she is marking her birthday with the launch of a new makeup palette. I had also looked into launching a new makeup palette for my 40th. Well, less a palette, more a plate with a face painted wetly on to it that one can keep beside the bed and flatten upon themselves every morning to save time, but the red tape was a nightmare so, instead, I spent the day eating well and complaining loudly. Never have I needed a party more. The month-long lead-up, the quiet texts from friends asking politely if I’ve invited their exes, the gorgeous anxiety of worrying absolutely nobody will come. And then the day, with its perfunctory hoovering and rearranging of shelves – the walking into an empty room again and again attempting to see it as others might, the ceremonial bowling up of crisps. Evening, the noisy hairdryer over the noisy record player, the lover-like laying of dress on bed. Lamplighting, a candle that threatens to burn down the bunting, and just when doubt kicks in about the very fine threads of friendship you have sewn across years and postcodes, the best music in the world – a doorbell, right on time. It gets dark and someone’s smoking inside. You lose control of the music around the time the hummus runs out, and soon a girl will be shouting in your ear about love or buses. Because age is real, someone will mournfully leave then to pay a babysitter, and their face will disappear ghostlike in an Uber window. At some point there are no more photos taken, and two people are slow dancing in the kitchen to Kermit’s Rainbow Connection, and the hem of your dress is wet so you tuck it into your tights. It’s no surprise who’s still there at dawn, or who is part-dead on the sofa when you’re quietly decanting old drinks in the morning, or who texts for your sister’s number the following day, or who orders a pizza with you when evening rudely returns. Ah, to know again the sweet ignorance of eating cake someone has blown on. The carefree joy of trying a stranger’s cocktail, the casual hello hug of some you barely care for. Never have I needed a party more. It’s comforting to know that right now at least one person is feeling exactly the same. Perhaps, when “all this” is “over”, Kim and I could sort out a joint party. I’m up for it if she is. I could supply the Ikea fairy lights, she could be in charge of going-home bags containing £30,000-worth of spangly iPhones and a voucher for a knee-lift. She could call in a queen-sized chocolate sculpture of our auras, I could make sure everyone knew how to do the tricky lock on the loo. She could ask Disney to create a Frozen-themed sleepover for the children, I could see if my mum could sort out some pasta for them around six. She could get her husband to whip up the dancefloor, I could get my husband to mop it up later. A piñata in the shape of Kim’s body, a truncheon to hit it with in the shape of mine. The more I think about it the more I know it could work. It is becoming clear that the real tragedy of Covid is the fact that Kim and I have been unable to properly celebrate our ascent into middle age. Which means, of course, that all important birthdays must regretfully be postponed. I will not turn 40 until the vaccine is ready, and only then, when I finally receive the kall. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWiseman
15||Simone Lia: Scary films – cartoon
0||'What we do isn't rocket science': how Midtjylland started football's data revolutionThink of it as the Moneyball derby. Not so long ago, the idea a club could gain a vital edge using mathematical models – let alone employ a theoretical physicist or track key performance indicators (KPI) – would have left real football men choking on their meat pies and Bovril. But when Liverpool host Midtjylland in the Champions League on Tuesday, it will not only be a meeting between the champions of England and Denmark, but one between the twin vanguards of the sport’s analytics revolution. Midtjylland became the movement’s poster child in 2014 when they started using deeper metrics – such as expected goals and pre-assists to an assist – to better evaluate player performances, find undervalued bargains and to shatter myths and easy narratives. Many sneered when the unfashionable club from the centre of the Danish mainland – literally the middle of Jutland – also hired dedicated ball-striking and throw-in coaches and when their chairman, Rasmus Ankersen, promised to exploit inefficiencies in football. Winning three Danish Superliga titles in six years and qualifying for the Champions League for the first time this autumn have proved an effective riposte. More recently, Liverpool have become Midtjylland’s big-budget half-brother. Their highly regarded research department, which includes an analyst with a doctorate in high-energy physics from Harvard, has earned significant credit for its recruitment of a string of top-quality players. The bonds between the teams go further still, however. Two years ago, Jürgen Klopp headhunted Midtjylland’s throwing coach, Thomas Grønnemark. Since then, Liverpool’s statistics for retaining possession from throw-ins under pressure has shot up from 45.4% to 68.4% – taking them from one of the worst in the Premier League to the second-best in Europe. The team ahead of them? Midtjylland. “We also scored a lot of goals on long throws, then he went to Liverpool,” says Ankersen. Midtjylland were thrashed 4-0 at home to Atalanta in their opening Champions League game and the bookies make them huge underdogs against Liverpool. But if they have a chance of making their hosts uncomfortable, it will probably come at set pieces, where they consistently ranked among the most successful teams in Europe. It is the result – the club’s amiable captain, Erik Sviatchenko, explains – of analysts scrutinising thousands of free-kicks and corners and distilling them into an American football-style set-piece playbook of 20-25 routines. “Other clubs do this,” he says. “But when you see the data, 49% of all our goals last season were scored on set pieces. They are something our club and our owner, Matthew Benham, sees as a clear point for winning or changing games.” Benham is the key figure in the Midtjylland story. Since taking a controlling stake in 2014 – two years after he did so in England at Brentford – he has used similar methods and models to those that helped him win millions as a professional gambler. His company, Smartodds, which analyses matches and players in dozens of leagues around the world, is also used by the club. It all amounts, says Ankersen, to a different way of thinking. “A professional gambler seeks an edge over the market. He is not getting it right all the time. He’s looking for value. However, in football there are a lot of emotional mechanics that lead to people not making rational decisions – that sets them back.” Ankersen says data is key because it helps Midtjylland get closer to the truth. “In football the stories we tell ourselves are often wrong,” he says. “Look what happens when a team goes through a bad set of results. The fans and the media search for a narrative to explain it. It’s the same when a team does well. “Last season, for instance, we won the league by 14 points. People were saying we were doing fantastically well. But when you looked at the underlying data, we didn’t actually improve. Our closest competitors got worse. And once you’ve seen regression to the mean, again and again, you build up a big belief that this is the right way of doing things.” The club even have a league table that shows where each team would be in the standings based on its underlying numbers, calculated by Benham’s team at Smartodds. “Even if I were allowed, I couldn’t tell you the precise algorithm involved,” says the head performance analyst, Søren Bjerg. “But expected goals is in there, as well as how opponents have been doing and whether a team has changed its coach and so on. There are a lot of variables.” These days almost every club has an analytics department. So how does a club stay ahead in a world where expected goals is now on Match of the Day and the easiest analytical advantages have already been exploited? Ankersen, understandably, does not want to give every secret away. But he says there are still inefficiencies – if a club knows where to find them. “The Brazilian transfer market is really chaotic, for instance,” he says. “The value of a player can change by a few hundred percent over a couple of months. It’s a highly irrational and emotional market. If you can pick up players when they are on a low, there’s a lot of value.” The signings of Paulinho, “an outstanding left back”, as well as Evander, who “on his day is the best player in the Danish league” after he lost his way at Vasco De Gama, shows Midtjylland practice what they preach. Ankersen also believes that some clubs are still doing “simple things” wrong, like taking too many shots from locations where the probability of scoring is too low - and points to the growth of three-point shooting in basketball as an example of a sport that’s become more efficient. Meanwhile Sviatchenko says another edge comes through using sports psychologist BS Christiansen, a former elite soldier from the Danish Huntsmen Corps, who is “especially good when we need to get together and talk through things”. “I don’t think a lot of what we do is rocket science,” says Ankersen. “But where we may be ahead still is that this is driven from the top. It’s not two interns in the basement working with data. The belief system comes from Matthew, from me and it filters down.” Ankersen says one KPI coaches have been given this season is to increase the team’s Smartodds rating up by 0.5 goals. “So between us we are asking: ‘Where’s that improvement going to come from? Is it going to come from set pieces? Where are the low-hanging fruits defensively and offensively? In which phases of the game?’” A knock-on effect is that Midtjylland keep chasing a second and third goal when they are 1-0 up, says Bjerg. Is that because your experts have worked out it is better not to sit on a lead? “Exactly,” he says. “But it also suits our style of play. Our mindset isn’t to sit back. The whole club DNA is about achieving things rather than protecting the stuff you have already got.” Those watching on Tuesday will see Midtjylland play a 4-2-3-1 formation and like to press – much like Liverpool. “We also have a little bit of X-Factor on our day, especially with Pione Sisto and Evander,” says Ankersen. Four years ago, Sisto was also a scorer when Midtjylland stunned Manchester United in the first leg of a Europa League last-32 tie. Toppling Liverpool, Ankersen says, would be another level again, but he is not entirely ruling it out. “It’s going to be very difficult,” he says. “We will need to play to our best, and have a bit of luck. But bigger miracles have happened in football.”
12||John Gray: 'What can we learn from cats? Don't live in an imagined future'What’s it like to be a cat? John Gray has spent a lifetime half-wondering. The philosopher – to his many fans the intellectual cat’s pyjamas, to his critics the least palatable of furballs – has had feline companions at home since he was a boy in South Shields. In adult life – he now lives in Bath with his wife Mieko, a dealer in Japanese antiquities – this has principally been two pairs of cats: “Two Burmese sisters, Sophie and Sarah, and two Birman brothers, Jamie and Julian.” The last of them, Julian, died earlier this year, aged 23. Gray, currently catless, is by no means a sentimental writer, but his new book, Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life, is written in memory of their shared wisdom. Other philosophers have been enthralled by cats over the years. There was Schrödinger and his box, of course. And Michel de Montaigne, who famously asked: “When I am playing with my cat, how do I know she is not playing with me?” The rationalist René Descartes, Gray notes, once “hurled a cat out of the window in order to demonstrate the absence of conscious awareness in non-human animals; its terrified screams were mechanical reactions, he concluded.” One impulse for this book was a conversation with a fellow philosopher, who assured Gray that he “had taught his cat to be vegan”. (Gray had only one question: “Did the cat ever go out?” It did.) When he informed another philosopher that he was writing about what we can learn from cats, that man replied: “But cats have no history.” “And,” Gray wondered, “is that necessarily a disadvantage?” Elsewhere, Gray has written how Ludwig Wittgenstein once observed “if lions could talk we would not understand”, to which the zookeeper John Aspinall responded: “He hasn’t spent long enough with lions.” If cats could talk, I ask Gray, do you think we would understand? “Well, the book is in some ways an experiment in that respect,” he says. “Of course, it’s not a scientific inquiry. But if you live with a cat very closely for a long time – and it takes a long time, because they’re slow to trust, slow to really enter into communication with you – then you can probably imagine how they might philosophise.” Gray believes that humans turned to philosophy principally out of anxiety, looking for some tranquillity in a chaotic and frightening world, telling themselves stories that might provide the illusion of calm. Cats, he suggests, wouldn’t recognise that need because they naturally revert to equilibrium whenever they’re not hungry or threatened. If cats were to give advice, it would be for their own amusement. Readers of Gray will recognise this book as a postscript or coda to Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Other Animals, the 2002 bestseller in which he elegantly dismantled the history of western philosophy – with its illusory faith in our species living somehow “above” evolving life and outside the constraints of nature. That book aimed its fire particularly at the prevailing belief of our time: that of the inevitably steady forward progress of humankind brought about by liberal democracy. When the book came out, as George W Bush was demanding “regime change” in Iraq, it struck a particular nerve. In the two decades since, its argument that the advance of rational enlightened thought might not offer any kind of lasting protection against baser tribal instincts or environmental destruction or human folly has felt like prophecy. Gray never bought the idea that his book was a handbook for despair. His subject was humility; his target any ideology that believed it possessed anything more than doubtful and piecemeal answers to vast and changing questions. The cat book is written in that spirit. If like me you read with a pencil to hand, you will be underlining constantly with a mix of purring enjoyment and frequent exclamation marks. “Consciousness has been overrated,” Gray will write, coolly. Or “the flaw in rationalism is the belief that human beings can live by applying a theory”. Or “human beings quickly lose their humanity but cats never stop being cats”. He concludes with a 10-point list of how cats might give their anxious, unhappy, self-conscious human companions hints “to live less awkwardly”. These range from “never try to persuade human beings to be reasonable”, to “do not look for meaning in your suffering” to “sleep for the joy of sleeping”. Does he see that 10-point plan, offered half in earnest (“as a cat would offer it”) as an answer to those people who criticised Straw Dogs for offering little in place of what it debunked? “Yes, yes,” Gray says, in his engaged and friendly voice, that still carries a north-east inflection (he chose the theme of When the Boat Comes In as one of his desert island discs). “Many people didn’t like Straw Dogs. The criticism was that I swept the board of philosophy and left nothing standing. I should say that I got some wonderful responses from people who weren’t philosophers. For example, three over the years, from war correspondents who said that adapting to what they’d witnessed, the trauma, had been one of the great struggles of their lives. And somehow my book helped them.” It helped them because it removed the pressure to make terrible and tragic things meaningful? “Exactly. I would say that a lot of torment in our lives comes from that pressure for finding meaning. Unless you adopt a transcendental faith which imagines a wholly other world where meaning is secure from any accident, most of the things that happen to us are pure chance. We struggle with the idea that there is no hidden meaning to find. We can’t become cats in that sense – we probably will need to always have the disposition to tell ourselves stories about our lives – but I would suggest a library of short stories is better than a novel.” In these three-tiered times our original plan for this interview was to meet and sit outside a cafe in Bath – Gray, 72, is wary of inside – but the forecast suggested we’d have got soaked, so we have retreated, catlike, indoors, and to Zoom. In some ways, I suggest, Gray’s is the perfect book for the estranging oddness of the pandemic. How has he coped? “I’ve tried to emulate what I recall of my wonderful cat Julian,” he says. “Which is, not to live in an imagined future. We simply don’t know how this is going to develop. And of course, the political response in most places, and certainly here, has been shambolic. But that inability to come up with a clear response reflects, I think, something deep: that even the most well-developed systems of knowledge always leave an enormous amount of uncertainty.” Alarm bells must have gone off for Gray when Dominic Cummings started promoting the powers of “super-forecasting”, while the government appeared unable to predict what was likely to happen the following day? “Yes, they did. I think “super-forecasting” is possible only in a very few limited fields. Hardly anyone has forecasted the biggest events in my lifetime. And, more importantly, most of the really big events were not considered even to be within the range of reasonable possibilities. I remember back in the early 2000s, asking various economists and bigwigs if there could be a global banking crisis and the idea was universally dismissed. Only one even said: ‘I don’t think so, but you never know.’” If we are hopeless at imagining the future, we are, I suggest, brilliant at recasting the suddenly weird present to make it seem normal? “That has happened, although I think it’s partly on the assumption that many people still have that there will be a ‘normal’ to go back to. I don’t think that’s at all plausible. I think some of the changes that have occurred in the course of this six months might usually take six years or 60 years. Some of these may prove benign in a rich country, which Britain still is, but not so much for the more marginal populations in Brazil or India, say.” Take HS2, Gray suggests. “Always a mistake for cost and environmental reasons, but now it’s surreal, because huge numbers are never going to travel for work again, not in the way that they did. There is kind of a lag built into politics – in which adapting to a radically changed circumstance is easier to do in practice for individuals than for governments.” Cats, he says, returning to our theme, don’t have stories to which they get deeply attached. “Of course, you may say that’s because they haven’t got the intellectual capacity, but I think it’s just as likely they’re not interested.” That lack of interest in holding on to particular stories has led Gray over the years to some curious places politically. He grew up in a strong old Labour house on Tyneside, where his father worked on the docks as a carpenter and his mother kept the home. Witnessing that close community being broken up in the 1960s – Victorian streets bulldozed, and residents moved into brutal “utopian” housing schemes built under the criminal Labour council leader T Dan Smith – gave Gray a lasting distrust of all grandiose projects selling the idea of progress. He has formed the belief since then that “politics is a succession of temporary and partial remedies for permanent and recurring human evil”. His two central intellectual friendships were with the Oxford philosopher Isaiah Berlin, whose family had fled Soviet Russia, and with the novelist JG Ballard, who spent his childhood in a Japanese prison facility. Both helped to convince Gray that any political movement that believed it possessed a monopoly of wisdom, had gulags or concentration camps priced in. (In his most famous provocation, aping Jonathan Swift, Gray wrote a satirical “modest proposal” that called for the urgent reintroduction of torture to protect human rights in western democracies; Abu Ghraib and extraordinary rendition quickly followed.) Gray has consistently voted flexibly, for what he sees as the lesser of two political evils at any political moment. “Had I been around, I would have strongly supported the Attlee government in 1945,” he says, but by the 1970s, he believed that postwar Labour settlement had become unwieldy and corrupt. Setting himself against most of the university academy, he supported Thatcher as a necessary corrective in British political history. “But then it turned into another ‘universal project’, certainly by 1989. And I would say I started jumping off in about 1987.” He was in favour of New Labour for a while, before abandoning the idea of that project for the same reasons. In the last election he voted Conservative, persuaded in part, he says, by that need to get Brexit done, and laughing now at the delusional hypocrisy of “democrats”, who wanted a second referendum “without the option that people had voted for the first time even on the paper!” That was never going to end well, in his eyes – and neither too was the European Union itself, with its grand schemes and projects. “I was interviewed in the early 90s, by a Polish newspaper,” Gray says. “They asked, ‘What do you think will come after the new [Thatcherite] right that had emerged after the fall of communism in eastern Europe?’ And I said, ‘Probably the old right’. The idea of a Europe-wide economic space was from day one a very capitalist project. And given that communism had imploded, where was the backlash against the European Union going to come from? It would have to come from the right – and that is what has happened.” Gray predicted the election victory of Trump in 2016 for something like the same reasons – “the feeling of abandonment, and disrespect in large parts of the working population” had to go somewhere – and suggests that even in the event of a Biden victory next month, those forces will not be silenced. Human beings, particularly in extremis, should never be expected to make rational choices. “As Bertrand Russell pointed out, the first world war, when it started, was welcomed largely as an interruption of boredom.” Cats don’t appear to get bored, because in Gray’s terms it would never occur to them to struggle to be happy. Humans, on the other hand, “are self-divided creatures whose lives are mostly spent on displacement activity”. Much of this displacement activity is a product of that other disabling difference to their feline companions, the certain knowledge of death. Gray is, typically, both irreligious and anti-atheist, reserving genial contempt for the likes of Richard Dawkins, and their censorious belief “that religion can be simply erased”. Gray believes that our innate need to explain mortality and suffering with imagination and myth is far too fundamental. “I don’t have an idea of God or anything but I find the idea that you could wipe the slate clean of that impulse to be ridiculous. I once met in America a Christian fundamentalist, who told me in all seriousness that if young people were brought up in a completely chaste environment, they wouldn’t experience sexual urges until they got married.” He laughs loudly. “That’s exactly what Dawkins thinks about religion. Myth-making has been a part of every single human culture in history, why would we imagine that it is disappearing from our own?” Gray writes with great amusement in this book and elsewhere of the stubborn gap between philosophers’ higher ideals and the more animal instincts of their lives, but he genially resists any autobiographical reading of his own life or thinking. He has a few catch-all defences to more personal questions – “I tend to think my life is not that interesting,” and so on. (To which one’s cynical instinct is to think: “The philosopher does not reflect much on his own life? Yeah, right.”) I ask him at one point if he thinks that being childless has had any bearing on his thinking, but he shuts down that line of inquiry, with his only vaguely curt reply in two hours of wide-ranging cat chat: “I tend not to talk about that aspect of my life.” I wonder if he chose to live in Bath for the same reasons he suggests Schopenhauer chose to live in Frankfurt for the last decades of his life: “no floods, better cafes and good dentists”? He laughs. “Well the dentists seem pretty good.” He came to Bath after leaving academic life – having been a professor of politics at Oxford, he was for a decade professor of European thought at the London School of Economics – to become “a freelance writer”. “I was looking for a walking city,” he says. “And I like the fact here that if you look up you can see trees.” The liberation from academia has given him more liberty, he suggests, to write exactly as he pleases, cat-like. “If you’re an academic, before you say anything at all, you have to give about 20 caveats,” he says. “And when I was a professional academic, I used to do that. But now I take a different view. I just say I’m just putting this out for you to consider. Don’t throw it away – or if you do at least give it to Oxfam.” He loves the lightness of those writers who construct fabulous thought-experiments, Montaigne, Borges. “The English-speaking world associates aphorism with arrogance,” he says. “But I’m not sure other ways of writing are more likely to change minds. I don’t want followers. I don’t even expect many people to understand what I say. The whole point of the voice I have in the books is to trigger a process of thought in some readers whose outcome is uncertain.” And what does he say to those critics who argue that his writing dwells on the reductive, brutish side of humanity, as opposed to its great collective achievements? “If you think, as I do, that civilised life is like a spider’s web, easy to destroy, but hard to construct, then what I write is perhaps a caution, a warning. I’m anti-hubris.” In the last sentence of Straw Dogs, Gray asked a question, almost plaintively: “Can we not think of the aim of life as being simply to see?” Has writing the current book helped him to understand what such a life of experience might look like? “Cats live for the sensation of life, not for something they might achieve or not achieve,” he says. “If we attach ourselves too heavily to some overarching purpose we’re losing the joy of life. Leave all those ideologies and religions to one side and what’s left? What’s left is a sensation of life – which is a wonderful thing.” Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life is published by Allen Lane on 29 October (£20). To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
17||Chilling find shows how Henry VIII planned every detail of Boleyn beheadingIt is a Tudor warrant book, one of many in the National Archives, filled with bureaucratic minutiae relating to 16th-century crimes. But this one has an extraordinary passage, overlooked until now, which bears instructions from Henry VIII explaining precisely how he wanted his second wife, Anne Boleyn, to be executed. In this document, the king stipulated that, although his queen had been “adjudged to death… by burning of fire… or decapitation”, he had been “moved by pity” to spare her the more painful death of being “burned by fire”. But he continued: “We, however, command that… the head of the same Anne shall be… cut off.” Tracy Borman, a leading Tudor historian, described the warrant book as an astonishing discovery, reinforcing the image of Henry VIII as a “pathological monster”. She told the Observer: “As a previously unknown document about one of the most famous events in history, it really is golddust, one of the most exciting finds in recent years. What it shows is Henry’s premeditated, calculating manner. He knows exactly how and where he wants it to happen.” The instructions laid out by Henry are for Sir William Kingston, constable of the Tower, detailing how the king would rid himself of the “late queen of England, lately our wife, lately attainted and convicted of high treason”. Boleyn was incarcerated in the Tower of London on 2 May 1536 for adultery. At her trial, she was depicted as unable to control her “carnal lusts”. She refuted the charges but was found guilty of treason and condemned to be burned or beheaded at “the King’s pleasure”. Most historians agree the charges were bogus – her only crime had been her failure to give Henry a son. The most famous king in English history married six times in his relentless quest for a male heir. He divorced his first wife, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Boleyn – the marriage led him to break with the Catholic church and brought about the English Reformation. Boleyn did bear him a daughter, who became Elizabeth I. In recent years, the story of Boleyn’s life and death have reached a new audience thanks to Hilary Mantel’s bestselling saga tracing the life of Thomas Cromwell, a blacksmith’s son who became one of Henry VIII’s most trusted advisers. In the Booker-prize-winning Bring Up the Bodies, she explored the destruction of Boleyn, writing of her execution: “Three years ago when she went to be crowned, she walked on a blue cloth that stretched the length of the abbey… Now she must shift over the rough ground… with her body hollow and light and just as many hands around her, ready to retrieve her from any stumble and deliver her safely to death.” The warrant book reveals that Henry worked out details such as the exact spot for the execution (“upon the Green within our Tower of London”), making clear Kingston should “omit nothing” from his orders. Borman is joint chief curator for Historic Royal Palaces, the charity that manages the Tower of London, among other sites. She will include the discovery in her forthcoming Channel 5 series, The Fall of Anne Boleyn, which begins in December. She had visited the National Archives to study the Anne Boleyn trial papers when archivist Sean Cunningham, a Tudor expert, drew her attention to a passage he had discovered in a warrant book. Most of these warrants are “just the minutiae of Tudor government”, she said. “They’re pretty dull. The Tudors were great bureaucrats, and there are an awful lot of these warrant books and account books within the National Archives… It’s thanks to Sean’s eye for detail that it was uncovered.” Borman argues that, despite the coldness of the instructions, the fact Henry spared Boleyn from being burned – a slow, agonising death – was a real kindness by the standards of the day. A beheading with an axe could also involve several blows, and Henry had specified that Boleyn’s head should be “cut off’, which meant by sword, a more reliable form of execution, but not used in England, which is why he had Cromwell send to Calais for a swordsman. Henry’s instructions were not followed to the letter, though, partly due to a series of blunders, Borman said. “The execution didn’t take place on Tower Green, which is actually where we still mark it at the Tower today. More recent research has proved that… it was moved to opposite what is today the Waterloo Block, home of the crown jewels.” She added: “Because we know the story so well, we forget how deeply shocking it was to execute a queen. They could well have got the collywobbles and thought we’re not going to do this. So this is Henry making really sure of it. For years, his trusty adviser Thomas Cromwell has got the blame. But this shows, actually, it’s Henry pulling the strings.”
18||Summer of 85 review – François Ozon's bittersweet teen romanceThis latest from François Ozon, director of such wildly diverse offerings as Sitcom, Under the Sand, 8 Women and The New Girlfriend is a bittersweet saga of love and death, a coming-of-age tale based on Aidan Chambers’s 1982 novel Dance on My Grave. Shifting the setting from Southend-on-Sea to Le Tréport in 1985, it centres on Alex (Félix Lefebvre), a death-obsessed teen in the throes of doomed first love, whose morbidly romantic story plays out with the sensual artfulness of classic Ozon, combined with the accessible vigour of an 80s American teen pic. We first meet David (Benjamin Voisin) at sea, a beautiful vision riding the waves to rescue the hapless Alex after his little boat capsizes. David takes Alex home to his widowed mum, played with nervy energy by Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, who undresses and bathes the new arrival (“All David’s capsized friends go in the tub!”) and tells Alex that “my David needs a real friend”. Yet with his flick-knife comb and razor-cut smile, David is clearly much more than a friend, taking Alex’s breath away as he weaves through oncoming traffic on his motorbike, chasing an elusive moment of speeding ecstasy that is always just out of reach, like the green light in The Great Gatsby. All this thrilling young love unfolds in flashback, intercut with later scenes in which an apparently traumatised Alex faces questions about a terrible event for which he is being held accountable. Is Alex somehow responsible for the dreadful fate awaiting David? The only person able to reach Alex is Mr Lefèvre (Melvil Poupaud), the caring but slightly creepy teacher who tells him to try to write about what happened, seemingly prompting the self-questioning memoir narrative. Ozon first read Chambers’s novel as a teenager and his adaptation blends the prickly joy of that first encounter with the stylistic confidence of a film-maker revisiting an old flame. Gorgeously shot on super-16 by cinematographer Hichame Alaouie, this has the tangible texture of its retro setting, filtered through a nostalgic lens that seems to supersaturate the image, amplifying emotions. Pop music plays a key role, with the Cure’s In Between Days bookending jukebox selections that trip from the melancholia of Bananarama’s Cruel Summer to the jump-around sounds of Movie Music’s Stars De La Pub. In one key scene, recalling a memorable moment from the 1980 film La boum, Alex finds himself in a nightclub, swaying slowly to the headphone sounds of Rod Stewart’s Sailing while those around him (including David) cavort to more frenetic disco beats. But whereas in La boum, Richard Sanderson’s Reality created a momentary bubble of intimacy for Sophie Marceau and Alexandre Sterling’s characters, here Alex is alone is his reverie, highlighting not only the differing paths that he and David are on, but also the sense that this “friend of my dreams” may be just that – an invention, a projection, reminding us that we do indeed live as we dream, alone. Well-observed background details add weight to the story, from David’s Jewish heritage and suppressed bereavement about his father to the subtly sympathetic figures of Alex’s parents, who seem to understand more than he imagines. There’s also a strong thread of black comedy, not least in a cross-dressing sequence that somehow manages to intertwine agonising anguish with near-slapstick absurdity – just one example of the tonal balancing act that Ozon so deftly maintains.
3||Whether Trump or Biden wins, US-China relations look set to worsenTies between China and the US have reached their lowest point in decades ahead of the election in November, signalling what experts in both countries believe is the clear direction for one of the most important bilateral relationships in the world. Under the Trump administration, the US has put sanctions on Chinese officials over human rights issues in Xinjiang and Hong Kong while also increasing engagement with Taiwan, including arms sales. A trade deal to end a protracted tariff war has stalled and the US has placed more restrictions on Chinese state media. Biden, who in a presidential debate referred to the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, as one of several “thugs” Trump has cosied up to, has also promised to take a strong stance against China. “The China-US relationship will not go back to where it was before,” said Cheng Xiaohe, an associate professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing. “The relationship is so bad.” It is a view shared in the US. “Regardless of who wins the US presidential election, we should expect to see increasing US-China tensions across a broad range of economic, political, geo-strategic, human rights and people-to people issues for the years to come,” said Wendy Cutler, former acting deputy at the Office of the US Trade Representative, focusing on Asia. Hong Kong and Taiwan are particular flash points. In response to Beijing imposing a controversial national security law in Hong Kong, the Trump administration placed sanctions on officials connected to the crackdown, downgraded the city’s special customs status and warned financial institutions against conducting “significant” transactions with anyone deemed to have undermined Hong Kong’s autonomy. In Taiwan the US has sent high-level government visitors, drawing recrimination from Beijing, increased military exercises in the region and launched a new economic dialogue with Taipei. There have been calls for the US to end its policy of “strategic ambiguity”, a way of discouraging both Beijing and Taipei from making a military move by refusing to say if the US would come to Taiwan’s aid. “The mutual distrust has never been higher,” said Bonnie Glaser, director of the China Power Project at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies. “I think many in China think the US has basically abandoned its one-China policy,” she said, referring to Beijing’s view that Taiwan is part of China. While tensions will persist under a Biden administration, the key difference, observers expect, will be in approach. Biden has pledged to work with allies to pressure China through the multilateral organisations that Trump has eschewed. Analysts expect the Democratic candidate, if elected, to work with China on issues such as climate change and response to the pandemic. “We need to be having the rest of our friends with us, saying to China: ‘We play by the rules. You play by them or you are going to pay the price for not playing by them, economically’,” Biden said in Thursday’s debate against Trump. In contrast, Trump is expected to continue a more confrontational, unilateral strategy that is likely to raise tensions. While Trump’s approach is likely to place more immediate pressure on China, Biden’s is seen by others as more predictable and comprehensive. A second term for Trump heralds unpredictability in a number of ways. During the initial years of his presidency, Trump spoke admiringly of Xi and was seen by experts in China as “a businessman ready to make deals and not focused on human rights,” according to Jacques deLisle, director of the Center for the Study of Contemporary China at the University of Pennsylvania. A trade deal, previously seen as his top priority in relation to China, could take precedent over human rights. Last year Trump described pro-democracy protests as “riots”. According to his former national security adviser John Bolton, Trump told Xi to “go ahead building the camps” in Xinjiang, describing the mass internment campaign as “exactly the right thing to do”. Some optimists in China believe another four years of Trump would give both countries time to negotiate a trade deal. Still, others believe there is potential for ties to dramatically worsen. “The current situation couldn’t be any worse. If it does get worse, military conflict is near,” said Cheng. Beijing has so far responded to the Trump administration’s various moves with reciprocal measures that limit escalating tensions. Four more years of Trump coinciding with an increasingly aggressive Chinese leadership could end that restraint. “It is possible that China has been gritting its teeth and not reacting to Trump provocations during what may be the final months of the administration. With a reelection, all bets would be off on that front,” said deLisle. For hawks in China another term for Trump is ideal. In China, state media have portrayed the pandemic in the US, Black Lives Matter protests and the chaos of the first presidential debate as yet more examples of the failing American democratic experiment. “While China is worried about Trump’s aggressiveness over the short-term, it also believes that over the long-term he is accelerating American decline,” said Rush Doshi, director of the Brookings China Strategy Initiative. Few in China however saw much difference between the two candidates as they met for their final debate. Under a clip posted on Weibo, one commentator observed: “These two should be enjoying their twilight years, not exposing their flaws in public.” Another wrote: “US comedians have taken the stage.” As that debate got underway, Xi gave a lengthy speech to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the war to “resist US aggression and aid Korea” between 1950 and 1953. Speaking in the Great Hall of the People, Xi said Chinese people had learned to “speak to invaders in a language they understand.” He declared: “The Chinese people will not create trouble but nor are we afraid of them, and no matter the difficulties or challenges we face, our legs will not shake and our backs will not bend.” Additional reporting by Helen Davidson and Lillian Yang.
2||Who in Europe is getting it right on Covid?A second coronavirus wave is sweeping continental Europe, with new infection records broken daily in many countries. There are wide variations, but almost no country has been left untouched – even those that fared well in the first wave. Across the 31 countries from which the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control collects national data, the average 14-day case incidence rate per 100,000 inhabitants has multiplied from just 13 in mid-July to almost 250 last week. While hospitalisations, ICU admissions and deaths are not so far following the same steep upward curve and generally remain far below levels this spring, they are rising steadily – and already causing severe problems for health services in some countries. France reported more than 40,000 new cases on two days this week, bringing its 14-day incidence rate to 521. Strict measures including a 9pm-6am curfew now cover two-thirds of the population. Germany, whose infection rate was far lower than most EU countries this spring, is also seeing new daily cases surge alarmingly: from 5,250 a day to 13,500 this week for an incidence rate of 319 – a “very serious” rise, a senior official warned. Spain, one of the worst affected during the first wave, is again facing crisis, becoming the first western European country to pass 1 million cases this week after recording 20,000 new infections on two consecutive days. Italy, another country hit hard this spring, hit a new case record on Friday with 19,000 infections amid fears the pandemic is again spiralling out of control. With a 14-day incidence rate of 240 per 100,000, the situation is “dramatic”. The epidemic in Belgium, which suffered one of Europe’s highest per-capita death tolls this spring, is “out of control” and “the most dangerous in Europe”, the health minister has said, with a 14-day incidence rate of a startling 1,115. The Czech Republic, lauded as a first wave success with infection rates among the lowest on the continent, is now among the highest with an even higher incidence rate of 1,210. Like Belgium, it seems headed for a new lockdown. Sweden, an international outlier with its anti-lockdown strategy, has introduced mandatory regional measures to combat a sudden surge that last week saw the number of new daily infections exceed 1,000 from barely 150 in early September. Finland, with one of Europe’s lowest infection and death rates first time round, is one of few EU countries to be fighting this second wave effectively. Tough regional measures have reversed a surge in new cases over the past week, leaving the country’s 14-day incidence rate at 52 per 100,000 inhabitants.
5||The north-south divide is as old as England itself. Unity is only ever fleetingDivide England? Who could seriously propose that? With all that mighty history behind us? Well, it didn’t seem crazy to Winston Churchill in 1912. He said that if we wanted to preserve the UK we “would have to face the task of dividing England into several great self-governing areas”. Southern England was just too Tory – and too big. Churchill saw that in the democratic era an England dominated by this Tory south could not coexist with the Celts. If anyone thinks he was wrong, just look at what has happened over the past year. By the autumn of 2019, clear majorities of Conservative voters were ready to jettison the UK, and even the Conservative party itself, in pursuit of Brexit. Our very modern, music-hall merry monarch, Boris Johnson, and his tacticians saw the way the wind was blowing. A purged Conservative and Unionist party became the English National party in all but name. Nationalism did what nationalism does, persuading people whose lives are very different that they have mysterious interests in common and many northerners were persuaded to vote, often for the first time, the same way as southerners. It looked like an epochal triumph, but the Tories were forgetting the monster from the English id. Scarcely 10 months after Johnson was enshrined, scientific discussions about how best to fight a pandemic somehow mutated into a political north-south battle. It is as if English history is on autopilot. For this cry has assailed southern leaders from the death of Athelstan (the first Englishman to rule all of England) in 939AD. The struggle adopted many ethnic/religious/political masks, starting with part-Scandinavian northerners v would-be southern rulers. It was this split that in 1066 doomed England to conquest. For three centuries, a French-speaking elite gave England a faux unity, but as they anglicised, the old divide reopened, climaxing in the apocalyptic north v south bloodshed of Towton in 1461. The north became the fortress of Catholicism in the Pilgrimage of Grace (1536) and the Northern Rebellion (1569). Even the civil war had a north-south element. So is geography fate? It looks like it, in England. Or, more accurately, a unique conspiracy of geography and geology. We are divided by the faultline between the rich lands of the south and the rugged, igneous uplands beyond the Trent. By coincidence, the naturally better farmland also has a kinder climate for agriculture and is closer to the great markets and new ideas of the continent: the entire set-up of England conspires in favour of the south. The Venerable Bede, himself a northerner, thought it worthwhile mentioning nine times in his History that the English are divided into northerners and southerners. By high medieval times, the Trent had become thoroughly fixed as the border. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the chivalric heralds of England and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge both used it as an official demarcation. When Daniel Defoe wrote the first guidebook to the brand-new Great Britain in 1727, he compared crossing the Trent to crossing the Rubicon and simply lumped everything “North by Trent” together. This, not the old border between England and Scotland, was what mattered in the new state. The Industrial Revolution could have changed everything: for once, geology, principally, King Coal, was on the side of the north. By 1848, its latest cultural-political expression, the Chartist movement, was ready to mount a challenge to the south and (with the delighted support of Karl Marx) even to try setting up an alternative parliament in Manchester, in 1854. The southern English elite responded with their signature masterstroke: new blood was allowed in on strictly controlled terms through a great new wave of Anglican public schools. Northern thinkers were soon complaining that, as one MP put it in 1897, English manufacturers should “do as the Germans do and bring their sons up to be better manufacturers than themselves, instead of bringing them up to be gentlemen who do nothing but hunt and shoot”. But the cultural pull of the south was too strong and, by 1900, the industrial north was falling off the international pace while the gentleman capitalists of the south played development bankers to the world. How could something so deep and powerful have gone unnoticed by so many English people today, if asked, would probably say that the north-south divide started in the 1980s? Well, that is what happens when something is right in front of our noses, be it in politics or relationships: we can focus it out precisely because it is so close, until, one day, something changes and there it is, waiting where it has always been. It’s back in focus now and it’s not going away. We are all essentially “valence voters”, who will generally go for politicians who, in some nebulous way, we feel to be like us. When George Orwell went north researching The Road to Wigan Pier, he found that the yawning class divide between him (Eton and Oxford) and a sharp-nosed, dark-haired little cockney melted away in face of the cultural otherness of the northerners: “He suddenly divined that I was a fellow-southerner. ‘The filthy bloody bastards!’ he said, feelingly.” That was why Peter Mandelson, in 1994, confident that he could rely on a desperate north to back almost anyone, saw that Tony Blair’s vague “southern appeal” was so vital. Keir Starmer (southern accent, Knight of the Bath, QC) is well placed to repeat that trick, but can anyone ever really appeal for long to both north and south in England? (Blair himself, lest we forget, was under heavy fire from the north by 1999.) Johnson thought he had cracked it, but that now seems risible. It may be time to recognise what voting maps show quite clearly: the English have always voted as much on tribal lines as any of the Celts. “We” are not a single people at all and never really have been. Or we can insist, against all the historical evidence, that we are one nation, a nation that, as Churchill saw in 1912, will almost always be ruled by the party of the south. •James Hawes’ latest book is The Shortest History of England. His novels include Speak For England
18||Dorset's art deco cinema jewel returns to its 1930s splendourIt was the year of the abdication crisis, the Jarrow marches, the Battle of Cable Street and the launch of the BBC’s television service. Beyond Britain’s shores, the world was edging closer to war. In Christchurch, then in Hampshire but now in Dorset, people were flocking to the Regent Centre in 1936 to watch movies such as Charlie Chaplin’s Modern Times and Mr Deeds Goes to Town, starring Gary Cooper. The Regent had been built five years earlier by a local entrepreneur at a cost of £25,000. In the middle of the decade, new owners gave it a plush makeover, featuring a deep rose, gold and silver colour scheme and art deco signage. The cinema thrived. But in 1973 the march of the Rank Organisation reached the south coast town, and the movie theatre became a Mecca bingo hall. Thankfully not for long: Christchurch council bought the property in 1983, and leased it to a charitable trust to run it as an independent. Now, as cinemas across the country are shutting their doors or curtailing their opening hours as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Regent is bucking the trend. Next month it will reopen after the completion of a £350,000 restoration project funded by the local community. “It is a bit of a gamble, to be honest,” Gary Trinder, chair of the trust and a cinema historian, told the Observer. “None of us knows quite what’s coming next. But people were desperate for us to reopen.” Trinder, who oversaw the 2009 restoration of the Grade II*-listed Plaza cinema in Stockport, had a clear vision for the Regent. “We wanted to recreate the way the cinema looked in the mid-1930s. Converting an idea into reality is always a bit worrying, but we’re extremely pleased with the result.” Fourteen different paint colours on the cinema’s walls – “a bit too vibrant, left over from the bingo days,” said Trinder – were replaced with a classic palette of deep rose with features picked out in gold, silver, black and dark brown. A bespoke carpet was ordered from a specialist firm, which consulted its historical files to create a pattern of silver leaves on a mulberry background. New seating, made to a traditional design and upholstered in deep red moquette, was supplied by another specialist company. “They look like period cinema seats, but they’re vastly more comfortable,” said Trinder. The restoration was planned long before Covid-19 disrupted the world. Funds had been raised by a £1 levy on ticket sales, donations and the sale of seat plaques. By the time the cinema closed at the start of lockdown, contractors had been appointed and orders placed with specialist suppliers. “We were committed by then,” said general manager Matthew Vass-White. “We’d planned for a five-week refurbishment. If there was a very slight silver lining to lockdown it was that it gave us more time to do the job.” The Regent had been riding the crest of a wave, with record-breaking years in 2018 and 2019. “Last year, we had 155,000 admissions and were named top independent cinema. We went into lockdown from a better position than some independents, but we can’t sustain zero income forever,” Vass-White said. When the cinema reopens on 12 November, with a screening of a Michael Ball and Alfie Boe performance that was cancelled during lockdown, a maximum of 170 seats out of 509 will be occupied because of Covid-19 restrictions. The cinema’s cafe – usually run by the trust’s 200 volunteers – will remain closed but people will be able to buy a drink from the bar. The pandemic means the cinema will be operating at a loss for the foreseeable future. “Reopening is a way of reducing our losses, rather than making money,” said Trinder. “Every person who comes through our doors helps. If we ever get back to break-even point, I’ll be absolutely delighted. “This is a critical moment for cinemas. Forty per cent of cinemas in this country are run by independent operators. Those with small reserves will be pushed under, but the big multiplexes will rebound.” He reserved particular fury for the distributors of the new James Bond film, No Time to Die, who pulled its release for the second time this month. “We were just about to show the Bond film when we closed in March. We were going to reopen with it in November. It would have been a shot in the arm for struggling cinemas.” As well as reducing its capacity by two-thirds, the Regent has invested £10,000 in Covid-19 compliance equipment and has doubled its cleaning operation. But Vass-White said he was constantly – and anxiously – awaiting further changes to Covid-19 regulations. “The future is unknown for all independent cinema operators. We have fantastic community support, so we’re hopeful. And at the moment, we’re all good to go.”
5||Carry On Coronavirus: why a vaccine trial has saucy potentialLove in a cold climate The news that the government is to fund “human challenge studies” into Covid-19, in which young, healthy volunteers will be infected with the safest possible dose and paid to be quarantined to test the efficacy of vaccines, was a reminder that this country has a unique history in such trials. The Common Cold Unit in Salisbury was set up just after the war at a former Red Cross hospital. By the time it closed in 1990, 20,000 people had taken up its offer to be dosed with cold and flu viruses and monitored for reactions. The camps were advertised as vacations: “How would you like a cheap and comfortable holiday, everything free and no expense, and even 35p a day pocket money?” one typical advert ran in 1974. “It’s true there’s a risk of catching a cold – but in a very good cause!” Much of what is known of the way coronaviruses are transmitted is a direct result of the unit’s scientific work. David Tyrrell, who ran it for 30 years, identified more than 100 strains of the common cold virus, which had been thought to be a single type of infection. Though a cure was never found, there were occasional beneficial side effects for those involved. Information given to new arrivals seemed keen to play up the Carry On potential, advising that “chatting up other volunteers in a different flat can only be by telephone or at a very long range outside”. Despite these restrictions, romances apparently blossomed; at least one viral couple returned to the cold clinic for their honeymoon. Roll of honour In the new British Library exhibition devoted to feminist protest, even the three-foot-long, sequin-encrusted tampon created by the artist Sam Dawood for the charity Bloody Good Period is upstaged by the prison poems of Sylvia Pankhurst. For nearly a century, it has remained a mystery how the suffragette managed to write a volume of poems and a five-act play in solitary confinement in Holloway with only a single slate and a piece of chalk. That mystery has been solved by her biographer, Rachel Holmes, who has catalogued and collated hundreds of perforated sheets of lavatory paper on which Pankhurst wrote with a blunted pencil. The sheets were hidden in the underwear of her prison uniform and passed to other prisoners on release. Subsequently, the papers, bundled in envelopes, travelled with Pankhurst to her final home in Ethiopia, before being archived by the British Library among a cache of her correspondence. Their preserved presence in the exhibition, Unfinished Business: The Fight for Women’s Rights, is not only testament to the extraordinary spirit and fortitude of the suffragette, but also to the disturbing resilience of rough, beige, HM prison-issue loo roll. Bard of Salford It may have been watching the political stand-off in Manchester, or the fact that I’d just booked optimistic tickets for the London leg of his tour next spring, but over the past week I’ve had some lines from John Cooper Clarke knocking around persistently in my head. It’s the refrain from his epic meditation on mortality that goes: “Things are going to get worse, nurse, things are going to get rotten…” Delivered with full Manc relish, I’ve found that the lines seem cheerfully suited to almost any current situation. Every cloud Overheard in a pub garden on Tuesday with Storm Barbara gathering: “In the circumstances, you’d think Rishi Sunak could stump up for some fookin’ gazebos…”
5||We French love our history teachers – Samuel Paty made us remember whySince that fateful morning of 7 January 2015, and the Charlie Hebdo massacre, it sometimes feels as if we French are living our lives between terrorist assaults, each as vile as the previous but each more poignant in its viciousness and symbolism. When we think this can’t get any worse, a new attack proves us wrong. In the past five years, Islamists in France have targeted and murdered journalists, cartoonists, policemen and women, soldiers, Jews, young people at a concert, football fans, families at a Bastille Day fireworks show, an 86-year-old priest celebrating mass in his little Normandy church, tourists at a Christmas market... the list goes on. Last week, a history teacher was beheaded while walking back home from his school, in the quiet town of Conflans-Sainte-Honorine, halfway between Paris and Giverny. The speed with which we learned the facts sharpened the blow, deepened our emotions and focused our minds. The teacher called Samuel Paty was murdered by an 18-year-old refugee of Chechen origin for having shown satirical cartoons, some of them caricatures of the prophet Muhammad, during a history lesson about freedom of speech and freedom of conscience. We tried to process the facts we were given. We had to read and hear the words several times; they just did not add up. In 2020, a history teacher had just been beheaded in France for teaching his pupils tolerance and the use of a critical mind? Worse was to come: his murder was the result of a campaign of hatred and misinformation led by a few bigoted parents and relayed on social networks by a well-known Salafist imam. Children could see the shock on adults’ faces, they could feel their seething anger. They asked what had happened, but how to tell them? We gritted our teeth, swallowed hard and gave them the news. And a country went to bed thinking about its history and its teachers. There are very few countries where the figure of the history teacher is more symbolic and powerful than in France. Since the Third Republic firmly took education from the hands of the church in the early 1880s and made it free, mandatory and secular, its peaceful infantry of teachers has been the bedrock of the French republic. Their task was clear: to spread the values of the Enlightenment to the remotest parts of France – in other words, to open young minds to the world around them in all its complexity. Young, devoted teachers were thus trained by the state not only to educate children but to root out superstition from the classroom. State schools became the places where the French entered as infants and left as citizens. The church was still free to teach children in its schools but those were closely monitored by the state and had to scrupulously follow the national curriculum. These first generations of teachers were nicknamed the “Black Hussars of the Republic” because they wore a black uniform during their training years and looked decidedly solemn in pictures. They had to. After all, everywhere they were posted, they had to gain ground opposite the local priest who continued to exert a powerful influence. Wholly dedicated to their civilising mission, those Black Hussars and their heirs, such as Samuel Paty, succeeded in emancipating minds. They did it with a heightened sense of duty and sacrifice. Thanks to them, religion was eventually relegated to the spiritual realm. They had successfully destroyed the church’s aspirations to weigh in on France’s political life and choices. Like many of my compatriots this past week, I have thought about what I owe my teachers and my history teachers in particular. I looked back with tenderness at their many quirks. One was always dressed in red or green, from head to toe. We thought he was either a communist or a green, only that he couldn’t quite make up his mind. There was another, called Pierre de Panafieu. I was 13 and, just as for Paty’s pupils, this was the year I learned about Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot and the French Revolution. Of all disciplines, history is the one telling us that the people of France have the power to change our destiny, whether we’re sons of peasants or daughters of the bourgeoisie. Powerful stuff for young minds. It was like being struck by lightning. I would go to his class with the elation of an explorer about to discover a continent. I remember where I sat, the colour of my fountain pen and the south-eastern light from the window. I remember every detail vividly, as you do when something momentous is taking place in your life. He was softly spoken, with a kind smile, a man of quiet passion and quick wit. And all the while he was, effortlessly, making us free thinkers and citizens. We just didn’t know it yet. A century after they helped tame religion’s interference in our public life, France’s teachers find themselves again at the vanguard of a new fight against obscurantism. They will need energy, courage and determination, just like the Black Hussars before them. They will also need the whole country behind them. That’s the least we can do, for we now know what we owe them: free thinking. •Agnès Poirier is a Paris-based political commentator, writer and critic
13||How TikTok is proving beauty is more than skin deepHe grew up on a cattle ranch in Arizona before moving to New York to work on a department store makeup counter. Now at just 24, despite having no formal dermatology qualifications, Hyram Yarbro is a skincare guru to millions worldwide. Yarbro is one of a new breed of superstar social media “skinfluencers” who have gained popularity during lockdown – especially on TikTok – and are changing what we buy and why. Lockdown affected grooming routines, with a shift to skincare from make-up and perfume. It will come as no surprise to anyone who’s tried to book a salon appointment since March that home-treatment sales are up, with teeth-whitening products up 180% and hair-dye sales six times higher than last year. But it also affected how we discover new products. “There was an uptick in people accessing social media,” says Samantha Dover, senior beauty and personal-care analyst at Mintel, “but the real impact was among existing social-media users, who spent more time on these platforms and visited them more frequently. This meant they were exposed to more grooming content.” Social media already has an established effect on product sales. “Half of beauty consumers look for reviews online, before making a purchase,” says lifestyle and skincare blogger Lesley Buckle, aka @freshlengths. “There’s also a lot of satisfying videos out there. Dramatic before-and-after visuals go viral.” But in 2020, one platform emerged as the winner: TikTok. “Facebook and YouTube are important for beauty brands, but TikTok users are the most likely to get grooming advice from social media,” says Dover. Influencer marketing firm Traackr found that TikTok users’ engagement with skincare videos has increased by more than 1,000% since last year. In March, Skincare by Hyram had 100,000 followers on TikTok. During lockdown that surpassed six million. “I feel gratitude for the connection I have with my followers on TikTok – I’m not able to replicate that on any other platform. Personally, however, the growth has felt surprisingly normal,” he says. Yarbro’s knowledge about skincare ingredients, and funny, honest reviews have impressed beauty brands and followers alike. In January 2019 he made $50 from affiliate sales. By July 2020, he’d made $265,000 from online ads, brand partnerships and affiliate links. What many of these biggest new names in skincare lack in formal qualifications, they make up for in enthusiasm and humour – and vast audiences across YouTube, Instagram and TikTok. Many skinfluencers are just about the fun of skincare such as Young-Seok Yuh – whose @yayayayoung TikTok account has gathered 1.2m followers since launching in March, and Vi Lai, who often talks about using skincare as a coping mechanism to deal with anxiety and depression. There are also qualified dermatologists such as Dr Dustin Portela, whose @208skindoc has just under 1m followers and aesthetic therapists such as Nayamka Roberts-Smith. Popularity on TikTok does seem to affect sales. CeraVe is a high street skincare brand for dry and problem skin that launched in the UK in 2018. But a 67% increase in influencer posts about CeraVe in 2020, according to influencer marketing firm Traackr, coincides with a run on sales. UK chemist Superdrug reported a 65% week on week increase in sales this summer and CeraVe sold out in the US. The Ordinary was a hit skincare brand long before TikTok, but skinfluencers have affected sales, says Nicola Kilne, co-founder and CEO of Deciem, The Ordinary’s parent company. “The TikTok audience is truly global in a way that we haven’t seen before,” she says. The brand is a skinfluencer favourite, and only started its own TikTok account in February. “Our first video had almost one million views – #TheOrdinary alone has 229.1 million views.” The Ordinary sold a bottle of its Niacinamide 10% + Zinc 1% – a serum for acne – every three seconds at the start of lockdown. Kilne thinks that time at home gave people more time to experiment. “I believe honesty has built our fan base,” says Kilne. “Word of mouth is important for us, but this wouldn’t work if we didn’t produce quality products.” Buckle agrees that quality is the key to the hit products of TikTok. “CeraVe’s mentioned by lots of influencers, but it’s successful because it’s affordable and the formulas are gentle. It’s exactly the sort of brand I reach for if my skin’s had a reaction.” The skinfluencers of TikTok are also hits because of their honesty. “Traditional marketing fails to establish trust,” says Yarbro, who now lives in Honolulu. “People gravitate towards online creators who have real, honest opinions. When a creator establishes trust with their audience, its reach exceeds any marketing budget or exposure strategy. People are drawn to people.”
4||NRLW grand final 2020: Brisbane Broncos beat Sydney Roosters – as it happenedHere is a match report if you’d like an easily digestible recount: And that concludes our live coverage this afternoon. We’ll be back (at another link) to take you through the men’s grand final. Broncos captain Ali Brigginshaw pays tribute to the Roosters, who she says set the standard in rounds one and two. She also thanks the referees, especially grand final referee Belinda Sharpe. McGregor, as the losing captain, makes an eloquent speech, beginning by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land and going on to congratulate Brisbane for “setting the standard for the last three years”. “My Roosters girls,” she continues, “I’m really proud of you. We’re building towards better things.” Amber Hall, unsurprisingly, has won the Karyn Murphy Medal as recognition of her outstanding, ubiquitous display. She does the obligatory thanks to the NRL , sponsors, her team and fans, and family in New Zealand. Brigginshaw (see below) is praising her side for reigning in what she described as “by far the toughest” of the Broncos’ three grand final wins. “The Roosters showed great character out there. The weather didn’t suit both of us but we dug deep.” Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: The three-peat is complete! Brisbane have gone back to back to back, continuing to write themselves into history as the only team to have won the NRLW. The Broncos were tremendous defensively throughout a first half during which the Roosters had their fair share of possession and territory but became somewhat wasteful with the ball. Second half (1 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Everyone is coughing up the ball now. Nobody wants it. The Broncos need merely complete their sets and should have this one wrapped up. Mel Howard is the latest to depart with what looks like an arm injury. Second half (4 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Now Ward is down injured and leaves the field for a concussion assessment having lost the ball in a tackle. Roosters get the scrum 20m from the try line but the Broncos have forced a knock-on. Second half (7 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Shenae Ciesiolka is quick to take care of business when Temara kicks behind the Broncos’ defensive line. The Roosters have possession and, then another set, as they chase this game. They have had plenty of chances in this half but have lacked the composure of their opponents. The crowd is a tick over 9000 for this decider, with another 30,000 or so expected to come through the turnstiles in time for the NRL finale between the Penrith Panthers and Melbourne Storm. Second half (13 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: A hair pull! Vette-Welsh gets a tug on the ponytail as she looks for a breakthrough down the right side. It’s a penalty, but the Roosters are struggling to get organised enough to make good of field position and McGregor knocks on at dummy half. Second half (16 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! The Broncos have made this look oh so straightforward, again capitalising on a Roosters error after they missed a repeat set. The Broncos have a seven-tackle set and Dally M medallist Brigginshaw plays a short ball to Tallisha Harden and the latter beats two and scores her first NRLW try untouched from five metres out. Special mention to Hall, who has been superb. Could this be the game? The Roosters have to score soon because this is quickly running away from them. Meanwhile, Brown has left the field. Second half (19 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: Millie Boyle makes an error as she carries with one arm straight into Hannah Southwell. Never a good idea. She loses the ball and the Roosters get the scrum 40 metres from their own line. Second half (21 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: The game has been halted for an injury concern after Lauren Brown came out worse for wear in a head clash with Temara. But she is back up, passes a head injury assessment and ready to play again. Have a look for yourself ... Second half (25 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! Brown darts from dummy half, dummies, goes inside to Lenarduzzi and she scores her second. The Australian shot put champion came off the bench for her first, and Meakes tries to stop her second with the low tackle around the legs from the line. But her effort is in vain. No conversion but the Broncos have a nice little buffer again. Quick word on Roosters forward Vanessa Foliaki, who is 10kg lighter than this time last year and says she feels in the best shape of her career. The former Jillaroo was not confident she would keep a spot under new coach Jamie Feeney, but has proven herself and been a regular on the edge. The Broncos thus far have completed all their sets for a near-perfect first half. Here’s Amber Hall’s try ... And Yasmin Meakes’s effort ... Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters: Well the Broncos piled on two early tries to race to a 12-0 lead, but the Roosters kept their cool under pressure, matched the double defending champions and raised them one with two of their own. Big second half coming. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters (3 minutes): Fullback Botille Vette-Welsh, on her return to the field, dummies and makes her dash. through Raecene McGregor and Jayme Fressard for a much-needed break. Melanie Howard kicks into space another repeat set. And here’s another try! Quincy Dodd charges over the line after help from the forwards. Dodd, played the ball on the tryline, literally barges through the Broncos defence. Temara converts and the Roosters are right back in this coming into the breakAnd just like that, it’s 12-10 and the Roosters are right back in it. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (7 minutes): McGregor has challenged another knock-on as Togatuki tries to play through again, but she’s incorrect this time. The final minutes of this half are turning into an arm wrestle. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (9 minutes): The rain is starting to come down now as the Broncos pass their fifth tackle and Ali Brigginshaw kicks on the outside of her boot. It’s an awkward landing but the Roosters have it under control. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (13 minutes): Temara cannot make her conversion but the Roosters are on the board. Meakes did very well to hold off opposing centre Julia Robinson. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (14 minutes): The Roosters, to their credit, have stayed composed and have a repeat set. And here’s the first captain’s challenge of the match, as Roosters skipper Corban McGregor appeals against a knock-on. Sarah Togatuki was adamant she hadn’t despite Ali Brigginshaw’s appeals and is vindicated. The Roosters use the momentum superbly and go over for their first try. Pass, pass, pass and Yasmin Meakes backs herself to skip over the line. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-0 Sydney Roosters (21 minutes): Amber Hall the Wrecking Ball has practically fallen over the try line after sending Tricolours counterparts this way and that with her pace and power. Yasmin Meakes makes a last-ditch effort to take her out from behind. Hall converts and this is already looking a little worrying for the Roosters, who will have to start putting pressure on the Broncos’ line instead of inviting them in. First half - Brisbane Broncos 6-0 Sydney Roosters (25 minutes): Peep! And we’re off. The Broncos have possession and the Roosters are hitting them hard, making an early statement. The underdogs are winning the early field position. The two wingers, Brydie and Shanice Parker are heavily involved. The Broncos’ strength is taking advantage of mistakes and it is a simple error that gifts Tarryn Aiken a break. She beats two defenders then passes to Tamika Upton for her sixth try in seven games. Pre-game interview with Broncos coach Kelvin Wright. After last round’s defeat of the Roosters he felt his side had “played inside themselves”. Here he says there were a “couple of areas we really need to tidy up, especially around the ruck”. On the Roosters: “The way they’ve been playing, they look like they’re playing for each other and really enjoying themselves.” Here are the teams ... Good afternoon and welcome to our live coverage of the NRLW grand final. And what a splendid day for it. Mother Nature has put on a wet, windy one. Which way will she blow at ANZ Stadium? Is this a Brisbane three-peat in the making, or will the Roosters exact 2018 grand final revenge over the competition’s dominant force. As the only team to have lifted the NRLW trophy, the Broncos have lost one of 11 games to date and won their two previous deciders against the Roosters and Dragons by a combined margin of 64-18. Kelvin Wright’s team saw off Jamie Feeney’s Roosters 24-16 in round three last week, though star Tricolours forwards Hannah Southwell and Simaima Taufa were rested and there were some positive signs. The Roosters have never beaten the Broncos, and are seeking to remedy this short historical shortcoming without star rugby sevens recruit Charlotte Caslick, who sustained two fractures in her spine during their second match against the Warriors. Kick-off is at 4.05pm AEDT, stay tuned.
13||The US has a good record on fighting monopolies. Now it's Google's turnSundar Pichai, chief executive of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, is a mild-mannered software engineer who is not good at games of verbal fisticuffs with US politicians. He received a drubbing last month during the “big tech” congressional hearing. Pichai can, however, summon lawyers and lobbyists galore as soon as the game gets more serious, which it definitely has. The US Department of Justice (DoJ) last week launched a huge and historic antitrust case against Google, accusing the tech company of abusing its position to maintain an illegal monopoly over internet searches and search advertising. In response, Kent Walker, Google’s chief lawyer, published an indignant blogpost that signalled how the firm will fight this. Google will claim it – and not the DoJ – is on the side of the American people and, by extension, people across the world. “People use Google because they choose to, not because they’re forced to, or because they can’t find alternatives,” wrote Walker. “This lawsuit would do nothing to help consumers. To the contrary, it would artificially prop up lower-quality search alternatives, raise phone prices, and make it harder for people to get the search services they want to use”. This argument has superficial appeal. Google doesn’t charge users and can’t stop them using rivals’ products. In a neat touch, Walker included instructions on how to load Microsoft’s Bing search engine on an Android phone. As for those multibillion payments to Apple to get Google pre-loaded on iPhones and iPads – one of the DoJ’s main complaints – Walker said they are like the promotional fees a cereal brand might pay a supermarket to stock its products at eye level. Other search engines are free to negotiate space on the digital shelf or home screen, he argued, and this is how software has always been distributed. Convinced? You shouldn’t be. There are four reasons, at least, why the DoJ is right to fight this case. First, a product that is free (or free at the point of use) can still cause harm to consumers. The process is just indirect. An overly dominant search engine can, for example, raise its prices to advertisers, who then recoup the extra expense by charging more for hotels, flights, electronic gadgets, books, insurance, and so on. Second, Google’s cereal comparison doesn’t work. A key point about a dominant search engine is that it can gather more data to enhance the offer and thereby achieve greater competitive clout. It has a self-reinforcing aspect that doesn’t apply in the non-data world of cornflakes and Coco Pops. Third, most users don’t change their default settings. Yes, it’s technically simple to do, but most people don’t. That is why Google is happy to pay Apple a fortune every year for default status – it can be extremely confident of a return on that investment, knowing no rival can match its spending power. Fourth, there is the deep problem of Google’s sheer size and effective control of 80% of the search market. How could new ideas and approaches ever get a look-in? “If we let Google continue its anti-competitive ways, we will lose the next wave of innovators and Americans may never get to benefit from the ‘next Google’,” said William Barr, the US attorney-general. In that final respect, this case is similar to celebrated antitrust challenges of the past – Standard Oil, AT&amp;T and Microsoft. It’s about confronting corporate power when it becomes the gatekeeper to an industry, the lawsuit’s description of Google’s position in search. Pichai’s usual plea on that point is that “Google’s continued success is not guaranteed”. And that can be rubbished for a simple reason: it is easy to see how the gates would clang shut on any competitor that became truly threatening. Good luck to the DoJ – this is an important 21st-century case. Johnson’s plans for British industry are full of wind Next week, Boris Johnson is expected to deliver a 10-point plan outlining the government’s green industrial strategy before it publishes a long-delayed energy white paper, possibly in November. A fresh strategy paper is a chance for the PM to persuade the electorate that while his character may not be well suited to fighting a pandemic, he knows how to strike an upbeat note when the subject turns to major building projects. It might have taken him six years as London mayor before he could see cycle superhighways being built across London, but they did happen, and they played a part in transforming the infrastructure of the capital. When he wanted a cable car across the Thames, it arrived and worked, to many people’s amazement. Unfortunately what you cannot say is that any of the prime minister’s achievements so far are glued together as part of a strategy. They can at best be described as ad hoc, and sit alongside schemes that detract from the central message, if that message is about the climate emergency and carbon emissions. At this year’s Conservative party conference, Johnson said a green industrial revolution would repair the economy following the pandemic. This month, he repeated a pledge that every home in the UK would be powered by wind energy within 10 years, at a cost of £160bn. These are laudable aims and show Johnson has been gathering his thoughts. But the manufacturing industry that might have played a big part in building wind turbines was destroyed by previous Tory governments. Now Johnson wants to add a no-deal or limited-deal Brexit that will undermine the rest of the UK’s industrial base. Britain needs a strategy in many areas. Let’s hope the PM has coordinated a plan across all departments that can rightfully be called a green industrial strategy. The ticket king’s bid for Viagogo could be about to stall The $4bn (£3bn) takeover of ticket resale website StubHub by its rival Viagogo had already been dubbed the “worst deal in history”, having been finalised weeks before the pandemic shut down live events indefinitely. Viagogo boss Eric Baker founded both firms and his dream is to preside as ticket king over a reunited empire. Perhaps blinded by that ambition, he dismissed Covid-19 as a flash in the pan and pressed on with the deal, spending some of his own considerable resources – together with those of financial backers including the mega-rich Waltons, the family behind Walmart. As ill-timed as the takeover looked a few weeks ago, it looks even worse now that the UK competition watchdog has signalled its intention to block it. The CMA understandably balked at the idea of a tie-up that would give the combined company 90% of the UK ticket resale market. What now for Viagogo? It’s main target in buying StubHub is the US market, where its rival dominates. Yet the British regulator threatens to scupper everything. If Baker offers to shut down StubHub UK, Viagogo would hoover up its rival’s business anyway, creating a monopoly via a different route. The CMA surely could not allow that. A partial sale of StubHub, a web-based company whose strength is its platform, is impractical to the point of impossibility. The CMA may ultimately force Viagogo to sell StubHub, appointing a divestiture trustee to seek a buyer. That trustee would have no obligation to recoup Baker’s $4bn. That’s not the most remarkable thing, though. Part of the CMA’s remit will be, unwittingly, to look out for the interests of professional resellers, the touts who dominate resale listings. As the Observer has shown, many “resellers” use the same methods that saw super-touts Peter Hunter and David Smith jailed last year for fraud. So the CMA may find itself accidentally defending the interests of fraudsters who make a living scamming the public. It seems anything is possible in 2020.
5||Money fosters the cosmopolitan joy of our football but also its soullessnessIf you want to see the dilemmas of globalisation playing out, forget Brexit or the US elections. Watch a game of football (though in Britain, of course, you can’t actually watch a game in a stadium these days). For it’s in the beautiful game that the many faces of globalisation reveal themselves. Last week, news broke of talks between top European clubs about creating a breakaway lucrative European Premier League. A week earlier, two of the teams reportedly involved in these talks, Liverpool and Manchester United, had attempted a power grab in the English game, offering more money to the sides in the lower leagues in return for a handful of top clubs having control. Liverpool and Man United had to retreat in the face of fierce criticism. It’s unlikely, though, that either plan has been buried. What they reveal is the tension between the needs of commerce and those of supporters, between the demands of elite sides and the burdens on those at bottom of football’s pyramid. Over the past 30 years, football has metamorphosed from being what the Sunday Times called, in the wake of the 1985 Heysel tragedy, “a slum game played by slum people in slum stadiums” into “an optimistic, upwardly mobile, aspirational business”, in the words of Richard Scudamore, former CEO of the Premier League, speaking to MPs in 2011. From unrestrained contempt for the “working-class game” to adoration in management-speak in the space of three decades. When the Premier League launched in 1992, revenue in its first season was £170m; last year, it was €5.16bn. The new wealth has allowed the league to attract some of the world’s best players and managers. On the opening day of that first season, 13 foreign players graced the Premier League. This year, 244 have already stepped on to the pitch. And all this has made it attractive for everyone from Russian oligarchs to Middle Eastern autocrats to buy English clubs. In football, as in politics, globalisation has created a tension between the benefits of a more cosmopolitan game and the erosion of local attachments and the creation of huge inequalities. Football is not just about watching 22 people kick the ball around for an hour and a half. What gives football its heart, its soul and its drama, is that every game, every fan, is part of a wider story. Part of a collective memory, an identity, an imagined community. In many small towns, football clubs are among the most important social institutions, providing both a sense of civic pride and a form of collective hope and aspiration. All this, however, slams against the imperatives of football as a business. That’s why we need to be clear about what exactly is wrong with the globalisation of football. It’s not the creation of a more cosmopolitan game. Few would moan about being able to watch some of the world’s great players (Mohamed Salah, Kevin de Bruyne, James Rodriguez). Or the fact that such players are coached by some of the best managers in the world (Jürgen Klopp, Pep Guardiola, Carlo Ancelotti). Some worry that the influx of foreign players has squeezed out English players. Yet one could argue that it’s improved them, that they have benefited from both playing with and being coached by the world’s best. And foreign players and coaches can have as great an attachment to their clubs as British-born ones. German Klopp is as much part of Liverpool folklore as Bill Shankly. Arsenal fans worship French former forward Thierry Henry as “one of ours” as much as they do Londoner Ian Wright. What grates is the other side of the equation: the commercialisation, the creation of monstrous inequalities. The plans for a European Premier League envisage games between the European top teams as a money-spinning exercise detached from any organic connection to a history of competition or rivalry. It also evinces a desire to corner the market, as if Liverpool and Leeds were like Amazon and Google. The question facing football is about how to foster the one without encouraging the other, how to nurture the openness and cosmopolitanism without cultivating also the soullessness and the inequalities. It’s the question confronting us in politics, too. We can only begin to answer it if we stop thinking about globalisation as a single phenomenon, about which we have to be for or against, but start unpicking its different threads, good and bad. “There is more politics in football,” the former England manager, the Swede Sven-Göran Eriksson, once quipped, “than in politics.” He spoke more truth than he probably realised. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
9||Freshwater Five: radar casts doubt on guilty verdict for £53m cocaine haulIt began like most other fishing trips for the crew of the Galwad. The sea was choppier than they’d have liked but the four men on board were hopeful of rich pickings in the spring tides off the Isle of Wight. They had no idea that the same stretch of the English Channel was that night the focus of a sophisticated policing operation centred on a container ship from Brazil. Around midnight on 30 May 2010 the Galwad came to the attention of the police surveillance teams. When its crew arrived on shore hours later, lugging baskets of lobster, they were arrested. The following day a fisherman found 250kg of cocaine worth £53m floating in holdalls in the island’s Freshwater Bay. Jamie Green and his Galwad crew – Scott Birtwistle, Daniel Payne and Zoran Dresic, along with local scaffolder Jonathan Beere – were jailed in June 2011 for up to 24 years each for conspiracy to import cocaine. All five were far from the image of multimillion pound drug kingpins, described by friends and family as hard-working with modest lifestyles. None had previous convictions relating to drugs. Known as the Freshwater Five, all maintain their innocence. Now compelling new evidence from the radar of a UK Border Agency surveillance vessel casts doubt over the safety of their convictions. Not disclosed during the original trial, the nautical navigation data from the vessel’s Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) appears to show that information presented to the jury was incorrect. Detailed in a fresh submission on the case to the court of appeal and seen by the Observer, lawyers believe the failure to submit the ECDIS evidence at the original trial “was a significant failure that has yet to be properly explored and explained away”. The 22-page submission says that the inexplicable disappearance of the radar data was a serious shortcoming by the since disbanded Serious Organised Crime Agency (Soca), which coordinated the drugs operation that led to the jailing of the Freshwater Five. “The absence of key material was a significant failing on the part of Soca and/or the experts deployed by the prosecution at trial,” the document adds. Dated 2 October, the submission follows a six-year battle to obtain the radar evidence by lawyer Emily Bolton. Bolton, director of Appeal, a charity law practice that fights miscarriages of justice, said: “This is a case where the investigating authorities developed chronic tunnel vision early on and ignored evidence that suggested they were pursuing the wrong suspects. And of course it snowballed from there.” The prosecution case claimed the Freshwater Five were involved in a plot that entailed sailing behind a container ship, the Oriane, to recover 11 holdalls of cocaine tossed from its stern in the dark, in high seas. Yet the new evidence reveals that the path of the fishing boat never crossed that of the container ship, making a transfer of drugs impossible. In fact the ECDIS radar course suggests the Galwad never got sufficiently close to the Oriane to pick up the drugs. The nautical data reveals that a UK Border Agency aircraft and cutter were closely monitoring the Oriane and subsequently tracked the container boat for over an hour after the Galwad left the area. Such monitoring led the UKBA to “specifically discount the Galwad as the drugs-receiving vessel”, says the submission. The radar data also provides striking new details that Bolton feels would have influenced the jury very differently. Another small vessel, recorded as “A50” by the ECDIS, was tracked that night travelling “towards the position in which the drugs were found” nearly an hour after the Galwad had left the Freshwater Bay area. The mystery potential “suspect” boat was not disclosed at trial. Expert analysis of the new data indicates the A50 is “likely to be a RHIB [rigid hulled inflatable boat] or fast power cruiser moving at 46 knots”. The document for the court of appeal states: “It is submitted that A50 was either another suspect vessel or a vessel deployed by a law enforcement agency. “If it was the latter, it would profoundly undermine any suggestion that the Galwad deposited the drugs, as the Soca officers were manifestly unaware where the drugs were to be found until the next day after their discovery by a fisherman.” It adds: “The failure by the prosecution to examine and disclose the ECDIS product at trial deprived the defence of substantial arguments that might have led to different verdicts.” Another central plank of the prosecution case is also challenged by the radar findings. Film from a plane flying over Freshwater Bay the day after the Galwad returned to shore was shown at trial. Clearly visible are the holdalls of cocaine that had been discovered by then. However, the new data shows that a surveillance aircraft flew over Freshwater Bay just after the Galwad passed through. Yet the hi-tech plane noted nothing out of the ordinary and did not report any unusual objects in the water. “Had there been anything suspicious left in the water, the aircraft would have spotted it,” states Bolton. Finally, the ECDIS data shows the crew of a UKBA cutter monitoring the Oriane “had visuals” on its rear deck at the time the drugs were said to have been thrown off. However, there is no entry in the ship’s log indicating this took place. “The jury would then have had evidence that the Galwad was observed and disregarded on account of there being no activity on the stern of the Oriane at the relevant time,” states the submission. Despite extensive searches, no traces of cocaine were found on either the Galwad or Oriane. The families of the Freshwater Five hope the case will be heard in the court of appeal early next year. • The subheading of this article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct a misspelling of Isle of Wight.
5||Farewell James Randi, prince of reason. Now who’ll mock the quacks and anti-vaxxers?A mong many tributes to the great James Randi, who died last week aged 92, one stands out. Hours after the death was announced, cutlery expert Uri Geller reacted with a tweet he piously expanded on Facebook. “How sad that Randi died with hatred in his soul. Love to you all.” One thing that the most professional paranormalist may find it hard to conceal, you gather, is indecent glee. Geller’s public gloat has, however, ensured that many people who might never otherwise have viewed his televised humbling in 1973, at the height of media credulity about his claimed paranormal talent, will now have witnessed the spectacle of his inexplicably interrupted powers. Randi had advised the producers to supply their own props. Even supreme rationalists, it turns out, can exact vengeance after death. Spoon-benders are unlikely to be the only profession toasting the disappearance – supposing we rule out further hauntings – of Randi, who, being himself a brilliant magician as “The Amazing Randi: The Man No Jail Can Hold” (previously “The Great Randall: Telepath”) was repeatedly more effective than scientists at examining paranormalist claims, sometimes by simply performing their stunts himself. Mediums, dowsers, astrologers, homeopaths, clairvoyants, faith-healers, mind-readers, spirit guides and anti-vaxxers also featured among Randi’s targets after he moved on from surpassing Houdini’s escapology to exposing all forms of pseudoscience, on principle but with a showmanship that made him reliably more compelling than his subjects. This made him immeasurably valuable to sceptics. Addressing homeopathy, for instance, he appreciated that argument alone would have less impact in demonstrating the staggering uselessness of these royal-endorsed products than his filmed consumption of a homeopathic overdose. Before Randi’s retirement in 2015, his eponymous educational foundation’s “paranormal challenge”, offering $1m to anyone who could demonstrate supernatural ability in scientific conditions, provided sceptics with a perfect response to ambitious phonies: supposing they didn’t want the money, how about the glory? The cash went unclaimed. Now, with Randi gone, life just got much more comfortable for purveyors of pseudoscience and, it follows, less so for their prey, the public. If, say, the prognostication industry, which proved either unable or unwilling to alert Earthlings to the horrors coming in 2020, does nothing worse than make fools of consumers, Randi showed that more ambitious charlatans, such as the British manufacturer of a fake bomb detector, which he exposed in 2008, could kill them. Now, with lizard-believers hosting UK anti-mask/anti-5G/anti-Covid-19/anti-vaxx/reportedly antisemitic rallies in Trafalgar Square, and with quack remedies and conspiracy theories disseminated by the White House as well as by social media, his death only underlines the absence of comparably effective sceptics to counter lies more baleful than Doris Stokes’s “I’m getting an Eileen”. Long before Covid-19 elicited interventions from influencers including the anti-vaxxer Novak Djokovic and that oracle Eamonn Holmes, Randi had warned against celebrity contributions to vaccination panic. “We have a Dark Age of sorts facing us,” he wrote in 2010, a time when Andrew Wakefield seemed to have done his worst, “one in which a generation of children may be decimated through the ignorance of the public, fuelled by irresponsible public figures who assume expertise they do not possess”. Since then, irresponsible minor figures have learned, in good time to do extensive damage, to transform themselves into major public nuisances. How much did we hear from Piers Corbyn before Twitter plus the virus turned him from weird sibling into a free-speech martyr, currently telling his followers: “Modern Vax is utterly evil. It’s purpose is to maim kill control and depopulate.” If there’s anything to the theory, one that informs Kate Summerscale’s new novel inspired by 1930s poltergeist reports, that superstition thrives in periods of uncertainty and disruption, the appetite for Corbyn, Wakefield, David Icke and their various scare tactics, directed at an already fearful public, could probably have been anticipated, at least by anyone except a professional astrologer. After the First World War and the 1918 flu pandemic, Summerscale has pointed out, “many of the bereaved found consolation in seances. In an era of widespread technological change, it seemed plausible that the living could forge channels of communication with the dead.” Likewise, earlier, Daniel Defoe: “These terrors and apprehensions of the people led them into a thousand weak, foolish and wicked things, which there wanted not a sort of people, really wicked, to encourage them to; and this was a running about to fortune tellers, cunning men and astrologers, to know their fortune…” Updated, amid reports of a renewed appetite for forecasts, we find the Daily Mail keen to gratify the excellent foppery of the world, as someone once called it, with insights from the astrologer Jessica Adams. One statement in a 2019-dated forecast for March 2020, “we’re going to see computer and human viruses”, is widely taken (unlike Bill Gates’s 2015 prediction) to compensate for the failure of apparently all her rivals to spot what frustrated stars/spirits/entrails have been trying to tell humanity about a virus that, according to other paranormalists, does not exist (Icke), is no worse than flu (Trump), was made by Bill Gates (44% of Republicans) or alternatively in China (also Trump), then accidentally transmitted to a human “while delivering the virus to Iran for bacteriological warfare reasons” (Geller). Luckily for us, Adams is also a medium. “I’ve always been able to see the spirit world and I know about things before they happen,” she told the Mail. I know this is a busy time, especially for the world’s only reliable astrologer, but is there any chance she could make contact with The Amazing Randi – shortish guy, big beard – and ask where we can find his successor? • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist
3||'Power grab': how Republican hardball gave us Amy Coney BarrettThe almost certain confirmation of Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court on Monday represents a “power grab” by Republicans facing possible wipeout at the ballot box, activists and analysts say. Republicans on the Senate judiciary committee shrugged off a Democratic boycott on Thursday to advance Barrett’s nomination to the full Senate, which will vote little more than a week before the presidential election. If confirmed, Barrett could be sworn in as a justice almost immediately. To critics, the rushed process represents one of the most naked power plays yet by a party which, confronting dismal opinion polls, is weaponizing unelected judges to compensate for setbacks in elections. Even as they contemplate the loss of political power, Republicans are poised to cement judicial power for generations. “This is like the last gasp by the Republican party to try to lock in their minority rule,” said Christopher Kang, co-founder and chief counsel of the progressive group Demand Justice. “They’re potentially just days away from not only losing the White House but also the Senate, maybe even resoundingly, and so they’re trying to do everything they can to consolidate on the supreme court a Trump supermajority for decades to come.” Under Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, Republicans have built a reputation for ruthless bare knuckle tactics Democrats struggle to combat. They blocked swaths of Barack Obama’s legislative agenda and in 2016 refused to grant a hearing to his supreme court nominee Merrick Garland, arguing that it was an election year so the voters should decide. In 2018, when the conservative nominee Brett Kavanaugh faced credible allegations of sexual assault, Republicans ignored fierce protests and rammed his appointment through. And when liberal justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg died last month, Donald Trump moved like lightning to replace her with Barrett, 48, a lifetime appointment who would tilt America’s highest court to a 6-3 conservative majority. It was another example of Republican hardball – audacious, shameless and devastatingly effective. Comedian Bill Maher told viewers of his HBO show: “If you haven’t gotten it yet, this kind of completely bald-faced premeditated hypocrisy should make it clear. There’s no catching them in an inconsistency. They don’t care because it’s all and only about power. The only rule Republicans play by is: the people who win make the rules. Power talks, losers walk.” Democrats cried foul, pointing out that the Senate has never confirmed a supreme court nominee so close to a presidential election. They were whistling in the wind. During committee hearings Barrett swerved most of their questions, refusing to commit herself on abortion, the transfer or power or the climate crisis. Kang said: “The process was so rushed and she was far more evasive and refused to answer more questions than any other nominee. That was a little bit jarring, if not surprising, but it shows how little respect Republicans have not only for the Senate but the supreme court itself. The Republican party is very blatantly just treating the supreme court as another political branch of government.” Demand Justice has called for Democrats to fight back by expanding the court, noting that its size has been changed seven times before. Joe Biden, the Democratic presidential nominee, has said he will appoint a bipartisan commission to examine such proposals. Kang predicted: “Republicans’ attempt to assert their raw political partisan power grab to get a sixth seat on the court, when they already have five, could end up backfiring spectacularly on them and they could be on the losing side of a 7-6 supreme court before they know it.” All 12 Republicans on the judiciary committee voted in favour of Barrett. Ted Cruz of Texas hailed perhaps the “single most important accomplishment” of Trump’s presidency. Democrats displayed posters at their desks, of Americans who benefited from Obama’s Affordable Care Act which they warn Barrett could help strike down. Democrats have also warned that if Trump follows through on his threat to dispute the outcome of the 3 November election, it might go before Barrett and other members of the supreme court for a final ruling, just like the 2000 election between George W Bush and Al Gore. Laurence Tribe, a constitutional law professor at Harvard University, described Barrett’s probable confirmation as a “‘power grab’ in every relevant sense of the term, especially in light of President Trump’s open concession that he appointed judge Coney Barrett in part to ensure her ability to vote in his favour should his re-election as president end up turning on a case the supreme court would need to resolve in order to give him an electoral college victory in the face of a national popular defeat.” Trump has appointed more than 200 federal judges, likely to be his most lasting legacy whether he serves one term or two. Critics suggest the courts represent the last bulwark of Republican minority rule and the Barrett episode is starkly indicative of a party that has lost its ideological and ethical moorings and now treats power as an end in itself. Kurt Bardella, a senior adviser to the Lincoln Project, an anti-Trump group, said Republicans have betrayed their claims to be the party of fiscal responsibility, pro-life principles, small government and congressional oversight. “When a party diverges from itself on so many issues so many times,” he said, “it tells you they don’t actually have any moral convictions or principles that guide them. Only the pursuit of power.”
24||Twenty years of the International Space Station – but was it worth it?Space scientists are preparing to celebrate a remarkable astronautical achievement. In a few days, they will mark the 20th anniversary of humanity’s continuous presence in outer space. For two decades, teams of astronauts have made their homes 250 miles above our planet through their uninterrupted occupancy of the International Space Station (ISS). First inhabited by US astronaut Bill Shepherd and Russian cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Yuri Gidzenko on 2 November 2000, the ISS has since provided shelter for a steady rotation of crews that has ensured the station has never been left unoccupied. A total of 240 men and women have set up camp on the 420-tonne station as it has swept over Earth at 17,000 mph, making 16 orbits of our world every day. Accommodation on the 109-metre-long station includes six sleeping quarters, two toilets, a gym – and, most popular of all, a European-built set of bay windows, called the Cupola, which provides 360-degree views and allows astronauts to gaze as storms have gathered, and the Sun has risen, over Earth. Tim Peake, the only official British astronaut to make it to the ISS, was a particular fan of the Cupola, where, he says, he first looked at our planet and realised how fragile it is. “You can see the atmosphere, which is only 16km thick. It is not endless,” he recalled in a BBC interview. “All of the gas that keeps us alive on Earth is trapped in that tiny, tiny layer. You suddenly realise that what we put into that layer is really important.” More mundane aspects of station life have included guitar serenades by floating astronauts; a piece of culinary history made by Italian astronaut Samantha Cristoforetti, who drank the first espresso made in outer space out of a zero-gravity mug; and dealing with a series of broken toilets – “the part of the station which attracts most curiosity back on Earth, I discovered”, says Peake. And these domestic details are important, scientists insist. “Running the International Space Station has shown us that human beings can make their homes away from their own planet in outer space, which is a truly hostile environment,” said astrobiologist Professor Charles Cockell of Edinburgh University. “That has been a critically important lesson for us.” Plans to build a permanent orbiting space station were first drawn up in the 1980s by Nasa. However, forecasts of costs indicated these would be alarmingly high – until the collapse of the Soviet Union offered an opportunity to cooperate with Russia. Its space engineers had already gained considerable experience of long-term space missions with their own small orbiting Salyut stations and the much larger Mir station. “It was also a highly pragmatic move by the United States,” said Professor Anu Ojha, a director of the National Space Centre, Leicester. “America wanted to prevent Soviet space experts from getting snapped up by rogue states as the USSR disintegrated. So it sought to get them involved in a joint space programme so that it could keep them at home and give them some degree of input. The ISS was perfect for that.” In the end, the two nations agreed on a plan for the ISS’s construction, with Canadian and Japanese space agencies also agreeing to join the project, along with the European Space Agency, of which the UK is a key member. Assembly of the station began in 1998 and required more than 30 flights by US space shuttles and 40 by Russian rockets to take components and modules to the station before its completion in 2011. For years, astronauts were preoccupied with constructing the station, and only relatively recently have they been able to concentrate on doing serious science, including running more than 3,000 experiments in collaboration with thousands of scientists on Earth. The final bill for constructing the ISS came to more than $100bn. The station soaks up $4bn a year in maintenance costs and service flights. Most of this has been paid by the US. The question is: was this vast expenditure worth it? Planetary science expert Professor Ian Crawford of Birkbeck, University of London, believes it was. “The ISS is a fantastic example of high-profile international cooperation at a time when the world desperately needs examples of activities that can bring people and nations together. And learning how to live and work in space will stand us in good stead as we prepare to return to the Moon and possibly send people to Mars.” Other scientists take a different stance, however. “There is no way you could justify the vast sums the have been spent on building the ISS,” said the astronomer royal, Sir Martin Rees. “For a start, the scientific returns have been meagre. We have learned a bit about how the body reacts to spending long periods in space, and we have grown a few crystals in zero gravity, but that is in no way commensurate to the tens of billions of dollars that have spent on the ISS. Really, the station only makes news when its toilets get blocked or an astronaut sings while floating about with a guitar.” Nasa’s money would have been better spent on launching robot missions to other planets or constructing orbiting observatories, Rees added – a view that is backed by the physicist and Nobel laureate Steve Weinberg of the University of Texas at Austin. “The only interesting science done on the ISS has been the study of cosmic rays by the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, but astronauts played no role in its operation,” he told the Observer. “It could have been placed in orbit much more cheaply by an unmanned mission.” Ojha added that he was initially very doubtful about the scientific rationale for the ISS but was now convinced it was a major success. “What we have achieved in terms of human spaceflight experience, space engineering, and scientific yield has been immense. We have learned how to assemble huge structures in space and live for long periods up there while dealing with all sorts of incidents that have arisen. It is crucial we do not waste that experience.” A key lesson learned from studying ISS astronauts has been the impacts of prolonged periods of zero gravity on the human body. These include muscle loss, bone density reductions, and vision and taste impairment. Scientists have found it can take several years for an astronaut to recover their bone density after a four- or five-month space mission. On the other hand, by using treadmills and weight machines, astronauts can avoid the worst effects of muscle loss. Nasa is scheduled to continue funding the ISS for four or five years and has said it then hopes private companies will take over and run it commercially while the agency funds more cutting-edge missions to explore and settle on the Moon, and possibly one day take humans to Mars. These projects will involve building Gateway, a smaller version of the space station, in orbit round the Moon as a stopping off point to explore the lunar surface. But is private enterprise interested in taking over the ISS? Early interest has been expressed by a number of companies who say they want to work there. The Texas-based company Axiom Space has signed a deal with Nasa to build a module where research on novel materials would be carried out; actor Tom Cruise and director Doug Liman are scheduled to fly to the station next year on a SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule to shoot scenes for an action adventure film; and the forthcoming reality TV contest, Space Hero – scheduled for screening in 2023 – has announced plans to send a winner to the ISS. Whether ventures like these will be enough to provide the billions of dollars needed to run the station remains to be seen. The alternative would be to dismantle the ISS and send its components spiralling down to the Earth in the hope they would be destroyed as they burn up in the atmosphere. And that would be a terrible waste, says Cockell. “It was a hell of an effort to get everyone to agree to the station and then to build it. We would have little chance of building another one in the near future if we lose this one, so we need to encourage companies to keep the station going for at least another decade.”
12||Lost letters reveal JM Barrie and Robert Louis Stevenson's mutual affectionThey are two of the greatest writers in history and they were also the greatest of friends. But they never met, and the importance and intensity of their relationship has never before been fully understood. Now, the lost letters of JM Barrie to Robert Louis Stevenson – missing for over a century – have been found in a cardboard box in a library archive and will be published for the first time in a forthcoming book. The letters reveal how ardently the young Barrie both adored and admired Stevenson, who was an older and more established writer. A year into their friendship, which was initiated by Stevenson, Barrie wrote to him: “To be blunt I have discovered (have suspected it for some time) that I love you, and if you had been a woman...” He leaves the sentence unfinished. He also imagines in the letters that he and Stevenson are related and were descended from the same Scottish family, a fantasy that allows him to open up to the older man about the intimacies of his family life and his close relationship with his mother. Treasure Island had already been published when the two authors began corresponding in 1892; 12 years later, Barrie went on to write his own masterpiece, Peter Pan, about a dangerous amputated pirate, a young boy and a journey to a far-off fantasy island. He repeatedly fantasises in his letters about meeting Stevenson, who had left their native Scotland in 1879 and was living in Samoa to improve his health. In one letter, Barrie even writes a funny, self-deprecating playlet – never seen before – in which he imagines himself visiting Stevenson’s 314-acre estate, and Stevenson “glumly” saying to his wife about Barrie: “Perhaps he will improve after he has rested a bit.” In reality, Barrie was held back from ever making that thrilling journey to Stevenson’s Pacific island paradise by his desire to stay near his frail, elderly mother – feelings he later explores intensely in Peter Pan – and had to content himself with merely writing 3,000-word letters to his beloved friend. Later, he recounts Stevenson’s whimsical directions to the island of Samoa (“you take the boat at San Francisco, and then my place is second to the left”), which seem to echo Peter Pan’s famous directions for the island of Neverland: “Second to the right and straight on till morning.” While many of Stevenson’s letters to Barrie appeared in print soon after Stevenson’s death in 1894 and the rest were published over the course of the 20th century, Barrie’s side of the correspondence has, until now, remained a mystery. Dr Michael Shaw, a lecturer in Scottish literature at the University of Stirling, stumbled across the missing letters while looking through a neglected box of correspondence at Beinecke Library in Yale University. “When I first saw them, I didn’t realise that these were lost letters,” he told the Observer. “I just assumed that they had been published and I didn’t know about them. I was judging myself, thinking I really should have read these.” It was only when he tried to buy a book of the correspondence and researched why it was not available that he realised what he had unearthed. In Shaw’s forthcoming book, A Friendship in Letters, Barrie and Stevenson’s letters to each other are published together for the first time. “What’s revealed in these letters – and it took me a while to discover the full extent of this – is the influence that both Stevenson and the correspondence have on Barrie,” said Shaw. “In reading over Barrie’s works, I started to see allusions to the letters and to Stevenson that I hadn’t noticed before.” Barrie, he said, loves to play games with his writing and unsettle the line between art and reality. “And I could see how he was doing that with the correspondence. He’s incorporating aspects of the correspondence into his own works, into his poetry and novels, and their friendship is also inspiring his works.” He tries to keep his bond with Stevenson alive in other ways, too. Odd little phrases Stevenson used in his letters creep into Barrie’s stories, and Peter Pan was placed in the same imaginary world as Treasure Island. Long John Silver (who is known by his aliases of Barbecue and Sea-Cook in Neverland) is afraid of only one man, readers are told: Captain Hook. “As a literary critic, I’m trained to be sceptical of biography coming into literary text,” said Shaw, “but the more I re-read Peter Pan, the more potential references I found not just to Treasure Island but to Stevenson, Samoa and their life.” Barrie has a real desire to incorporate Stevenson and his affection for Stevenson in his works, he believes. “I think what Barrie is saying is: if I can never meet Stevenson, because he has unfortunately died, then I want to create the opportunity for our characters to meet. “I think he liked that idea that they could occupy the same world, and could potentially bump into each other.”
5||Why can't questions be asked of Facebook's ads?Facebook wants you to know that it’s being transparent about political ads, requiring advertisers to verify their identity and to show who paid for an ad. But it doesn’t want to be too transparent. It has sent cease and desist letters to two New York University researchers, Laura Edelson and Damon McCoy, part of the Online Political Transparency Project, who are investigating how people are targeted by ads. They helped develop a browser plug-in called Ad Observer, which allows people voluntarily to share data about political ads on Facebook. Edelson and McCoy are particularly interested in two aspects of political ads that Facebook won’t publicly discuss – how particular people are targeted and how campaigns craft messages based on criteria such as race or age. Facebook claims that Ad Observer compromises privacy. This, observes Alex Abdo, a lawyer representing Edelson and McCoy, is “ridiculous”, given that “the plug-in’s users voluntarily sign up to donate data” and it “does not share any personally identifying information”. Facebook also claims that Ad Observer violates its terms of service by automating the collection of data. There are good reasons for blocking data aggregators, but Facebook is trying to block not data aggregation but academic research. It’s not the first time it has tried to do so. Researchers have long called for the company to allow research in the public interest. It has so far refused. The issue here is not simply about political ads. It’s about who controls the narrative. At a time when Facebook, Twitter and other tech businesses are making huge decisions that affect public debate, from blocking tweets to taking down accounts, not only is transparency important, but it is important, too, that the tech giants themselves don’t get to define what it means. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
26||The big picture: magical realism in everyday DublinThe Irish writer Colm Tóibín was first introduced to the photographs of Tony O’Shea when he was an editor at a magazine called In Dublin back in the late 1970s. O’Shea was in the habit of coming to the magazine’s office every other Friday with a cardboard box containing a fortnight’s black-and-white prints, pictures he’d taken around the city’s streets. The photographs, Tóibín observed, in the introduction to their landmark collaborative book of 1990, Dubliners, “were like nothing I’d ever seen”. He looked forward to O’Shea’s arrival, and each time, though the magazine might be going to press, found himself “taking the cardboard box away with me, looking through the photos again and again on my own and wondering about them”. It was Tóibín who first sent O’Shea out on Dublin buses for a story to capture the life of the city from the upper deck. You would never say of O’Shea’s pictures that anything was typical of his work, but this photograph taken in 1989 of two boys and the kestrel is a memorable example of the magical realism that he so often seemed to locate in the everyday. Strange animal spirits are everywhere apparent in his pictures: raggedy boys stand on horseback on city streets, hounds are held at bay on misty bogland; in a famous series, Dublin housewives carry Christmas turkeys home from a side-street butcher, heads and necks and beaks dangling at their knees. O’Shea is 73 now. A retrospective book of his life’s work to date, The Light of Day, is full of natural wonders and human struggles that surface from the borderlands during the Troubles and in the rituals and recreation of his city. Each image wants to be a short story. And there is genius in revealing the teenage kestrel handlers’ eyes to be quite as bright and sharp as the bird he holds. The Light of Day is published next month by RRB Photobooks and the Gallery of Photography Ireland (£40) An exhibition of his work will be shown at the Gallery of Photography, Ireland, next year.
2||Frustration is rising as clampdowns spread across UK: are we in grip of Covid fatigue?As the people of Sheffield prepared to join Greater Manchester and the Liverpool city region in the premier league of Covid-19 restrictions – tier 3 – there were widely differing views on whether the tough new rules about to be imposed from London were welcome, or would even work. On the streets and in the city’s pubs last Thursday evening there was, however, one commonly held opinion – compliance would be some way short of total. “During the first part of lockdown I abided by the rules very strictly,” said Phillip, a 47-year-old gas engineer, as he waited for a pork wrap outside the Greedy Greek Deli. “We still are doing that, but it’s wearing thin. I think the economy and life still has to go on. But then it’s a balancing act with the NHS and the beds.” Back in March when Boris Johnson shut down most of the country including schools, most people understood and obeyed. “Proper lockdown was easy,” said Jason, 29, sitting on a wall on Sharrow Vale Road eating a butty. “You knew what you could and couldn’t do and you just did that.” Like many others he seemed less sure this time. Simon, 36, who works in hospitality and travels a lot with his work, said his attitudes had been influenced by seeing others breaking the rules and ignoring guidance, meeting people outside their households in places where doing so was banned. If they broke the rules, why shouldn’t he? He said: “We’re sat next to a couple in the pub whose opening gambit was ‘so, how’s things?’ They’ve clearly not seen each other for a while. When you look around and see other people who probably don’t even live in the same postcode, you kind of go: ‘fuck the rules.’” Yesterday some 1.2 million people in South Yorkshire joined around 2.8 million in Greater Manchester and 3.1 million in Lancashire and the Liverpool city region in tier 3. In these areas, social mixing is banned indoors and in private gardens while pubs and bars have to close unless they serve substantial meals. Stoke-on-Trent, Slough and Coventry have also joined London in tier 2. Scotland is to enter a new five-tier system of restrictions from 2 November; Northern Ireland has adopted much tougher restrictions; and a 17-day “fire break” is under way in Wales meaning most non-essential businesses are closed, with people only able to leave home for limited reasons. Supermarkets removed non-essential items from sale – including clothing, kitchen electricals and crockery – using barriers and plastic sheets to cover products. But seven months into the pandemic the views of people in places such as Sheffield raise a very serious question – aside from the intense scientific debates – about whether, whatever the new rules are here and there, the country has still got the stomach for the fight? Professor Susan Michie, director of the centre for behaviour change at University College London and a participant in the government’s scientific committee Sage, rejects the idea that “pandemic fatigue” has set in. But she believes there is a real compliance problem that is of the government’s own making. “There is no evidence to suggest people are getting tired. People are getting angry, frustrated and resentful – they’re not getting tired,” she told the Observer. “The collective solidarity of ‘we’re all in this together’ is a really important part of people following challenging restrictions, [but] adherence is being undermined by many kinds of perceived unfairness.” Michie believes the tolerance of Dominic Cummings’ trip to Durham in the spring, the perceived fuelling of a north-south divide which culminated in the rows over financial support involving Greater Manchester’s mayor, Andy Burnham, and “the ideology of privatisation, giving huge amounts of money seemingly to their contacts” for the test, trace and isolate programme have savaged public confidence and, in turn, compliance. She added that communities did not feel involved or consulted: “There isn’t a strategy that makes sense to an overwhelming majority of people. The restrictions haven’t worked, communities have not been engaged with and instead they have been blamed. The government blames health professionals for using too much PPE, it blames people for having tests, it blames young people – it does not celebrate good practice or make people feel good about themselves or pride in what they’ve achieved.” Michie was backed by social psychologist Professor Stephen Reicher, at the University of St Andrews, and Molly Byrne, director of the Health Behaviour Change Research Group and a public health adviser to the Irish government. Both said Westminster’s approach of imposing fines and encouraging neighbours to snitch on one another would backfire. “It’s a bad road to go down,” said Byrne. “The data shows that the vast majority of people want to adhere to the measures in their areas and it’s really important to boost those levels of solidarity and trust.” On Friday, a major report by the London School of Economics revealed that government policies had exacerbated the problem of non-compliance. Researchers advised that communities be put at the centre of pandemic policy if the rules were expected to be followed. Reicher said: “If people see restrictions which don’t seem to have achieved very much being imposed again, they will be sceptical. The British public have shown remarkable resilience and would get behind a national lockdown. The polling has consistently shown that by a ratio of three to one, people want the government to do more rather than less and do it sooner rather than later.” When Sage first recommended a short national circuit breaker or full lockdown on 21 September, as opposed to regional interventions, infection rates in England stood at 4,500 a day. A month on, the figure is four times that. The latest Opinium poll for the Observer this weekend suggests lack of faith in the government’s handling of the pandemic is indeed growing, hand in hand with public confusion and increasing lack of compliance. Approval of the government’s response to Covid is now at a record low of 29%, with 50% disapproving. Some 50% of people say the new three-tier system in England is clear but 44% say it is not, while 34% say they aren’t confident that they know what the rules are in their own area. And among young people aged 18 to 34 the proportion admitting to flouting the rules has risen in two weeks from 10% to 17%. Among those aged 35 to 44 it has risen from 10% to 18%. A sense that the spirit of national solidarity is crumbling is fuelled by parts of the media who believe the restrictions have gone way too far. Yesterday the Daily Mail splashed with “It’s Covid Hysteria”, adding a list of what it regarded as examples of interventionist madness saying “supermarkets ban sock sales, CCTV spies on social distancing, road checks on Welsh border, teacher threatens playdate pupils with police”. But as the Mail rails against diktats, many scientists take the opposite line – that the restrictions on our lives have gone nowhere near far enough. “At the end of March we went into a very severe lockdown. Students were not at university, children were not at school, and pubs and restaurants were all closed and even then we only managed to bring the virus reproduction value R down to just below one,” said mathematician Michael Tildesley, at Warwick University. In comparison, tier 3, the most severe set of new restrictions that can be imposed in England, still allows students to attend university, children to be at school and pubs and cafes to remain open to a limited extent. “My worry is that tier 3 won’t bring us close enough to the crucial ‘R equals one’ level that has to be reached to ensure that case numbers start to come down,” he added. “We could easily get a situation where cities like Manchester or Liverpool will never be able to come out of tier 3 because they cannot get ‘R below 1’. That is my real worry. All we are going to see is tighter and tighter restrictions being imposed and that will have long-term economic consequences and pose threats to people’s mental health.” Like other experts he backs a draconian national circuit breaker in which really severe lockdown measures are imposed for a fixed period. “People would know that it was only a fairly short period and would tolerate it,” said Tildesley. “Certainly, if we don’t do something now, we will soon be in real trouble.” In Westminster, any semblance of political consensus has disappeared, replaced by open division. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has argued for the same kind of circuit breaker over half-term, while accusing Johnson of having “lost control” of the virus. Worries that the government has not been tough enough were expressed also by Professor Neil Ferguson, of Imperial College London. He told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme on Saturday that the NHS would not be able to cope with the current rate of growth in numbers of Covid cases for much longer. New restrictions on households mixing should have a “significant effect”, he said, but these might not be enough and further action might be needed. “There is a limit to what we can do in terms of reducing contacts, short of starting to target, for instance, the older years in schools and sixth-form colleges where we know older teenagers are able to transmit as adults. Of course, nobody wants to start moving to virtual education and closing schools even partially. The challenge may be that we are not able to get on top of the transmission otherwise.” The government’s failure to provide consistent warnings of the disease’s danger to the public was another major factor in the current rise in numbers of cases, added Bharat Pankhania, of Exeter University Medical School. “They launched their ‘eat out to help out’ to encourage people to go to restaurants without giving any additional advice about the need to continue to be vigilant – and that was a real mistake,” he said. “We need to be giving much better advice to people on how deal with this virus.” Pankhania also urged that the government’s test-and-trace system be moved into local areas. “We need a much slicker operation and that sort of thing can be done much better at a local level. We are going to need our trace-and-track services for a long time, I suspect.” Michie adds that confusion is inevitable among the public as the arguments rage. “People are understandably confused. Over time they become disengaged and think: ‘you know what, I’ll try and extract my own principles and do my own risk assessment and management.’” Back in Sheffield some were indeed making their own assessments, bending the rules where they felt they could. A young resident called Rebecca said she had recently “intimately kissed” on a date, insisting it was not a moment of complete abandon but a measured decision. She said: “I judged it on if, you know [I believed] the other person was taking precautions”, rather than on what the strict letter of the latest government rules told her she was allowed to do.
12||Anatomy of a Killing by Ian Cobain review – a death that casts new light on the TroublesIn certain parts of Northern Ireland in the late 1970s, a stranger arriving at the door could provoke panic, even terror. The town of Lisburn, near Belfast, was not such a place. Predominantly Protestant and home to many members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), it had for the most part escaped the violence that had ravaged other parts of the province. Up until 1977, as Ian Cobain puts it, “not a single member of the security forces had lost their life in Lisburn”. All that would change on the morning of Saturday, 22 April 1978, when Millar McAllister, a police photographer, opened the back door of his home in Woodland Park, having glimpsed a figure moving in his back garden. He was shot three times at close range, twice in the chest and the third time, as he was lying on the ground, in the head. In the silence that followed, the killer noticed McAllister’s seven-year-old son, Alan, standing just inside the kitchen door, frozen to the spot. They stared at each other for a long moment until the boy started screaming. The stranger ran to a waiting car, the boy’s cries echoing in his head, In Lost Lives, the vast book of historical record that chronologically documents every death in the Troubles, Millar McAllister is listed as victim number 2,017. The bare facts of his life are outlined thus: RUC, Protestant, 36, married, two children. In Anatomy of a Killing, Ian Cobain rescues him from the abyss of history, tracing the arc of his short life and contrasting it with the still ongoing, altogether more tangled, life of Harry Murray, his killer. By reconstructing a single murder – its planning, its ruthless execution and its protracted aftermath – through in-depth interviews and the careful sifting of not always reliable evidence from official records, Cobain also casts new light on the culture of terrorist violence and state repression that defined Northern Ireland during 30 years of conflict. Cobain is a seasoned, award-winning investigative journalist (most recently for the Guardian), who also sketches the social and historical context that spawned the Troubles. Throughout, his style is brisk and his tone level-headed, the violence he chronicles often evoked through spartan, but chillingly descriptive, detail. Of the aftermath of the IRA bombing of the La Mon hotel restaurant, which happened on 17 February 1978, just a few months before the murder of Millar McAllister, he writes: “Twelve people, including three married couples, died in the blast. All were Protestant. The dead were so badly burned and shrivelled by the flames that firemen thought initially that some of them were children.” Hell is in the details. Amid such carnage, the death of an individual could pass all too swiftly into the anonymous realm of statistics, forgotten by all but family members and loved ones. Cobain’s book is, among other things, an act of reclamation. It is also, in its skilful telling, a tale of two ordinary lives converging with the inexorability of a Greek tragedy. Millar McAllister joined the RUC in 1961, when the Troubles, as Cobain puts it, “were barely visible on the horizon”. He had two hobbies: photography and racing pigeons. The former provided him with a well-paid job; the second unwittingly led to his death. McAllister wrote a monthly column for Pigeon Racing News and Gazette under the byline “The Copper”, which was accompanied by his photograph. When an IRA suspect, who was being held at the Castlereagh interrogation centre in east Belfast, recognised McAllister from the photo, the word went out to find him. Soon afterwards, Harry Murray was dispatched with another young volunteer to carry out his execution. In almost every way, Murray comes across as the polar opposite of the level-headed McAllister: impetuous, impressionable and instinctively rebellious. What they had in common is that they were both Protestants, Murray being one of the very few from his community to join the IRA. A few years before, he had been driven out of his home in loyalist Tiger’s Bay in Belfast by local paramilitaries. His transgression was to marry a Catholic. Having been resettled where his wife grew up in nationalist north Belfast, he grew increasingly sympathetic to the republican cause. Murray seems to have drifted into the ranks of the Provisionals much like, years before, he had enlisted on impulse with the Royal Air Force and served overseas. His military career ended abruptly after one too many breaches of discipline. “I just couldn’t take orders,” he tells Cobain without irony. Murray’s renegade life was not without principle, however. During his induction into the IRA, he claims to have told his recruiters there were two things he would not do: kneecappings and shooting Protestants “just because they were Protestant”. Like all IRA combatants, though, he regarded the RUC as the enemy in a just war, and, as Cobain discovers, remains remarkably free of remorse for the brutal taking of Millar McAllister’s life. In 1983, while serving time for the killing, Murray would take part in an audacious IRA jailbreak from Long Kesh prison, shooting a prison officer in the leg before being wounded himself. On his recapture, he was set upon by prison officers who berated him as “a turncoat bastard”. As with Patrick Radden Keefe’s recent book, Say Nothing, which uses the IRA’s “disappearance” of Jean McConville in 1972 as the starting point for an illuminating exploration of the conflict, Anatomy of a Killing deftly merges history, social context and anecdotal testimony. Cobain explores the psychology of political violence, citing a study from 1978 which found that, rather than being the psychopaths of tabloid headlines, the IRA’s “political killers tended to be normal in intelligence and mental stability”. He also suggests that vengeance may have been a crucial motivating factor for young men joining the Provisionals and, in Murray’s case, it is clear that he has never forgiven his own community for the humiliation of his expulsion. The immediate aftermath of the killing also makes for deeply unsettling reading. On information obtained from an IRA informer, Murray and his accomplices were arrested and taken to Castlereagh, where they were beaten and interrogated relentlessly by Special Branch men working in shifts. Anne, an IRA courier, confesses to her role and, Cobain writes, “appears to have suffered a fairly complete physical and psychological breakdown”. The man she gave the gun to after the killing, Brian Maguire, whom Cobain describes as “highly strung”, was not an IRA member. He was interrogated non-stop for 12 hours and, the next morning, was found hanged in his cell. His death remains disputed. Among the revelations in Cobain’s book is testimony given at the time by another suspect called Phelim, which provides what Cobain calls “an accurate description of the torture technique that became known as waterboarding when used by the CIA in the years after 9/11”. If there is much that is compelling in Anatomy of a Killing, what lingers longest is the awful mundanity of the events leading up to and after the killing. Cobain describes how, on that fateful morning, Anne calmly carried the gun from Belfast to Lisburn on a bus, and, having arrived early, went shopping for a birthday present for her brother. Just a few hours after he killed McAllister, Murray returned to Lisburn to play football on a pitch close to his victim’s home. As the Troubles begin to fade into history and forgetting, it is in these incidental actions that the deep moral fracture caused by the conflict comes sharply and chillingly into focus. We would do well to remember how quickly violence can become almost normalised in a culture riven by intractable differences of identity and belonging. • Anatomy of a Killing: Life and Death on a Divided Island by Ian Cobain is published by Granta (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
10||Into the night: why walking in the dark is good for the soulThe lights from the cottagewindows recede, all too rapidly, as we walk along an unlit country lane and take a footpath through a field into open countryside. Thick cloud cover prevents the moonlight from illuminating the way ahead. Yet, as my eyes begin to get used to the darkness, the landscape around me reveals itself in a new light – albeit a shady one. The contours of Mount Caburn, an iron-age hill fort, are like shadows against the sky. On the horizon, a tree bent by the wind is silhouetted, and the rocky outcrop at the top of the field turns out to be a flock of sleeping sheep. A fox cries, a pheasant crows and the air is full of a heady earthy scent. “For most of human history man lived in close contact with the land,” says Nigel Berman, my guide, whose company, School of the Wild, organises guided night walks on the South Downs. “Only in the past few hundred years have we shut ourselves off from our natural surroundings. Walking at night is a powerful way of reconnecting . When your vision is reduced, your other senses are sharpened.” Darkness is a thing we have come to fear and shy away from. It has become a metaphor for evil and depression, a place held at bay by our electric-lit world. But in the parts where darkness holds sway for much of the winter, inhabitants embrace it rather than yearning for longer days. In the Arctic Circle during the polar night, when the sun never rises and the Earth is swathed in darkness for several months, the Norwegians simply wrap up, strap on a head torch and head for the hills. As nights in the UK close in and a Covid-induced indoor isolation looms, it is a perfect opportunity to take note and go into the countryside, or walk across a deserted beach, to see starlit skies and moonlit rocks, spot owls, see bats swooping and breathe in the night air. Nigel and I walk from Glynde, a village near Glyndebourne opera house, across the South Downs towards the town of Lewes. It’s a walk I know well by day but at night everything is different, and a familiar stroll becomes a mini adventure. The lighter strip of sky above it highlights the ridge of the downs that we head towards to start. At the top, we edge along a wire fence looking for the gate that will take us along a path through the Mount Caburn nature reserve to Oxteddle Bottom. When Nigel told me not to bring a torch, I was alarmed. I can’t remember the last time I used my night vision and I’m not even aware of how it works. Nigel explains that in the dark our pupils not only expand to allow light in they also switch to use different light sensors. In bright light, cone-shaped sensors respond to different colours of light and allow us to see fine detail, but in the dark the eyes switch to rod-shaped sensors, far more sensitive to light but unable to sense colours. We descend past clumps of trees into the darker, hill-surrounded valley, aiming for the eerie shimmer of a dew pond where we pause to sit. I’m aware of the breeze caressing my face, the rustle of leaves and, as I watch the clouds swirling and slowly changing colour against the sky like a natural sound and light show, it feels mesmeric. Normally at this time of night I’d be having a glass of wine in front of the television, but being out in the countryside is a purer form of relaxation. I forget about work and family tensions and begin to blend into the surroundings. There is no one other than Nigel to see or hear me and, with little visual distraction, my mind calms. Walking at night is not without risk, but with knowledge and preparation it opens up a new side to walking. For example, it’s important to know your route by day so that you know what features to pick out by night; to have good navigational skills; take the right kit (hat, gloves, insulated layers and a daypack with a flask of hot drink); and pick favourable weather. A deep unfamiliar sound rouses me from my reverie and Nigel tells me it is the “cronk” call of the raven. We continue walking and, having got used to the dark, the chalk path that leads up the escarpment of Saxon Down now appears to almost shine in front of us. We climb carefully, feeling, rather than groping for, our way on the uneven ground. As we reach the top, Lewes appears below as a twinkly mass of lights, a sight I’d generally think of as inviting. But in just a few hours I have gone over to the dark side and find myself reluctant to walk back down. Walking at night is like discovering a new world on your doorstep, one that allows you to roam beyond the duration of winter’s short days and explore in the time of Covid. As Henry David Thoreau wrote in Night and Moonlight: “Night is certainly more novel and less profane than day.” • Guided mindful night walks are available from schoolofthewild.com, price information is available through the website More ways to explore by night National parks are some of the best places to see the star-studded autumn and winter skies, and there are a number of dark sky festivals that include organised stargazing walks. • darkskiesnationalparks.org.uk The Bat Conservation Trust has groups across the UK and most run local bat walks. • bats.org.uk Ramblers groups offer group night walks. • ramblers.org.uk Many charities now run organised night walks as a way of raising money. The original MoonWalk, organised by breast cancer charity Walk the Walk, now takes place all around the world. • walkthewalk.org
2||Rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccine, say scientistsScientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Finn said such confusion could cause setbacks in dealing with Covid, adding: “We should be preparing to meet this challenge and work out ways to compare the effectiveness of early vaccines – but at present we are not doing that well enough.” A total of 198 Covid vaccines are now under development across the globe with four key versions undergoing final phase 3 trials. These include Pfizer’s BNT162b2 and the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine. Results of those trials – in which each is compared with a placebo – are expected in weeks or months. Once the first vaccine that shows efficacy in countering Covid-19 is revealed, there will be enormous pressure to use it immediately. Key candidates would be healthcare workers who deal with Covid cases and others at high risk of becoming infected. But for groups such as the elderly, who tend to have weaker immune systems, caution will be required. “The problem is that early vaccine trials are not likely to show how well these products work in these populations,” said Kanta Subbarao, a World Health Organization director, in an editorial in Nature last week. “We know vaccines often work better in young, healthy adults, which is why they are enhanced with a higher dose or an adjuvant to boost immunity for diseases such as flu and shingles. It is also unclear how well clinical trials will assess effectiveness in those in minority ethnic communities.” In other words, by spring, several vaccines may have passed their trials without any mechanism being in place to select which is the most effective for different groups. Nor is the problem confined to the UK. “The complexity and chaos and confusion that will happen in a few short months has hardly dawned on anybody,” Dr Gregory Poland, director of the Vaccine Research Group at the Mayo Clinic, told the New York Times. It is expected that approval would be given to any vaccine that protects at least half of those injected with it. The problem will come when other vaccines appear and it is unclear whether or not they are better than the first licensed product. Bryan Deane, a director at the Association of British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI), said: “There was a lot of over-optimistic talk earlier this year about Britain having a vaccine before Christmas. However, that really looks unlikely now. Results of trials are not likely to arrive until next year, and when they do they are likely to come out sequentially. “The first one that shows any significant protection will be the one people will want to start using straightaway. The problem will be that when the others come through their trials, you won’t be able to say that one is better than another because we have not set up ways to compare them.” This concern was backed by Finn. “It is a paradox. If we get a vaccine that works, but not very well, it’s almost worse than not having one at all because it gets in the way of getting a better vaccine. We need to be thinking about it to avoid that situation urgently.”
16||For Halloween match dark lips with facial glowIn the run-up to Halloween, you’ll see a lot of impractical makeup options. While I accept pragmatism isn’t at the top of Halloween’s cosmetic agenda, if you’d rather something less terrifying, try Rodarte’s AW20 look. The trick is to juxtapose brooding lips with a glowy – not ghostly – face. Mimic skin by mixing in a bit of foundation with moisturiser. Apply subtle hints of highlighter to your cheekbones, add a dark eyeliner and finish off with a moody lip. 1. Dior Rouge Dior Ultra Rouge Lipstick £30, dior.com 2. Dolce &amp; Gabbana Passion Lips Lipstick £36, harrods.com 3. Laura Mercier Caviar Intense Ink Waterproof Liquid Eyeliner £22, feelunique.com 4. Westman Atelier Super Loaded Highlight £69, net-a-porter.com 5. Guerlain Rouge G de Guerlain Lipstick £26, guerlain.com I can’t do without… An excellent but simple cleanser that doesn’t break the bank Long before single-ingredient products became fashionable, Indeed Laboratories was there, quietly getting on with it producing clever formulations at great prices. As someone who grew up battling skin issues, I have always had a soft spot for efficacious, targeted skincare brands that are not financially prohibitive. The basis of good skincare is a decent cleanser, but even the very best shouldn’t cost you three figures – so if yours does, you are wasting your money. Especially when you have this. Now, a lot of cream cleansers irk me because I find they don’t clean well enough and they leave a residue on the skin. This one, however, has a myriad of characteristics I could champion all day long. The formula is made up of hyaluronic acid (hence the name) thereby enhancing moisture in the skin. It also includes a resurfacer and exfoliant that is gentle but powerful (clinically proven to brighten skin in 14 days) and grapeseed oil, which is a non-clogging source of antioxidants that also helps to reduce hyperpigmentation. The texture – a thick cream that lathers, but not too much – cleans like a gel counterpart. Like really cleans, but not in a way that leaves my skin feeling tight. Instead, my skin feels completely balanced. Which means on the days I am feeling particularly lazy I can skip my toner and go straight to moisturising. Always a winner in my book. Indeed Laboratories Hydraluron Cream Cleanser, £19.99, boots.com On my radar… A trio of body treats to sooth and smooth Salt of the earth Using avocado oil and sustainably sourced mineral salts from the Dead Sea and Kalahari desert, these bath salts create a relaxing soak, replenishing moisture and soothing aching muscles. Olverum Bath Salts, £37, spacenk.com Called to the bar I’m obsessed with this body-exfoliating bar. It has orange blossom and neroli, as well as bamboo powder for dead skin, and sunflower seed and aloe vera to lock in moisture. Glossier Body Hero Exfoliating Bar, £12, glossier.com Cream de la cream This thick luxe body cream – infused with soothing saffron flowers and moisturising shea butter and babassu – is excellent for dry skin. Feel the silkiness. Sisley Velvet Nourishing Body Cream, £102, sisley-paris.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto
19||Bail out our musicians or risk losing them for ever, say classical music starsLeading figures in classical music say many highly-trained orchestral musicians are giving up on music as they face homelessness and hunger this autumn. Speaking to the Observer this weekend, the internationally renowned conductor Sir Simon Rattle warned that an “exodus is happening right now”, while top English soloists the violinist Tasmin Little and the pianist Stephen Hough both spoke of despair and desperation among even successful performers. “Next month, we will all expect to hear the traditional sound of music as we commemorate Armistice Day,” said Little, an acclaimed virtuoso musician who trained as a child at the Yehudi Menuhin School. “But consider who is playing all this beautiful music for us and where it will come from in the future?” When the Last Post sounds, Little suggests, it will be heralding the end of Britain’s celebrated musical culture if there is no rescue for thousands of professional freelance musicians without work. She called on the government to support more distanced concerts to make them commercially viable for venues. Earlier this month, leading orchestras and music festivals received a first government bailout grant, including Rattle’s London Symphony Orchestra. But there is renewed concern that the majority of musicians who are freelancers have no safety net while only a few socially distanced concerts are staged. “While some of us working in established institutions have been fortunate to be given grants that help us to hang on, the vast majority of freelancers are in a desperate situation,” said Rattle. Institutions such as the LSO, BBC Radio 3, London’s Wigmore Hall or Snape Maltings Concert Hall in Suffolk, home of the Aldeburgh festival, have been creating as much paid work as possible since the lockdown eased, staging performances in front of reduced audiences and for live broadcast. But it is a tiny proportion of the scale of music once made. “My worry is that so many musicians will be forced to leave the profession that we will not be able to return to anything like the cultural life that we enjoyed previously. And that this exodus is happening right now, and that it will not be noticed until it is too late,” said Rattle. The controller of Radio 3, Alan Davey, said he hears worry and sometimes despair from musicians on a daily basis. “Everything that was certain for the next year has been thrown into complete uncertainty. “Music has got me through this so far, but musicians are particularly exhausted now because of the effort of finding new ways to reach audiences.” Radio 3 now stages concerts every week for live broadcasts that go out around the world, including a current residency at the Southbank Centre and upcoming events at the Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival. “What we are doing is a small thing, but if we can find ways to do it safely we will keep on, of course, because it matters.” Davey’s words were echoed by Cheshire-born concert pianist Stephen Hough: “It is strange, then distressing, to find oneself suddenly cut off from the joyful exhilaration of making music for an audience,” he said this weekend. “Musicians almost always chose this life not because of financial rewards but because of an inner necessity to communicate the beauty to others. And then … the concerts stop and the money stops too – voice silenced, and pockets emptied.” But Hough said he has found hope by playing at the Wigmore Hall and with the Liverpool Philharmonic, where he performs this week to a small crowd and an online ticketed audience. “It feels like a healing of the soul.” Petroc Trelawny, breakfast presenter on Radio 3, fears the new generation of young musicians will miss their moment to start a career while older audiences will lose the concert-going habit. “You have only a few years to sell yourself as a young performer,” he said. “You start out at the age of seven or eight, with the same commitment a doctor makes but with no guarantee at the end at the best of times,” he said. “There are wonderful things still happening, of course, but there is a danger in taking comfort from that. The vast majority of concerts are not happening. It is pretty grim for most musicians and they are very tired.” Trelawny added that he knows of one “really very famous name who his hit massive financial problems”. The difficulty for freelance musicians, he said, is that even those with viable careers rarely earn enough to save. “Many had just banked on being able to carry on.” For some performers the sudden drop in income has already forced them out of their homes or made the weekly shop unaffordable. He paid tribute to organisations, such as the Oxford Lieder festival, that are “still heroically staging distanced events and online concerts and paying musicians a normal wage” from any remaining funds. He also praised local musical groups, such as one in Kendal which has moved into the local church to allow smaller concert audiences to socially distance. “At the beginning of this, musicians tried to raise our spirits and now they need our help because there is no national organisation protecting them all,” he said. Little, who is playing out her last season as a violinist through the pandemic, having already decided last year to quit at the top of her career, urged music fans to support performers. “A huge percentage of us now have no work and yet we all expect music to be everywhere around us, on the radio, on television and in films. And musicians create great value for this country in terms of culture and the wider economy,” she said. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the spelling of Tasmin Little’s first name.
16||The Danish plot is all about trees, but it’s hard to resist flowers, tooIt took us years to add flowers at the Danish plot. An aesthetic thing to some extent. It is, after all, a simple piece of land by the sea, surrounding a black wooden beach hut, or summerhouse as they call them. There were already delicate wild hepatica, clumps of cowslip and campion, and carpets of celandine and cow parsley. We planted a crimson rugosa, an echo of the beach-side banks that colonise this coast. Next, a pale-blushed clambering rose, an old Danish variety. Here is where we mostly plant trees, replenishing the birch and beech, the larch and pine and fir that grow everywhere. Our first flower for its own sake: a shy naturalising species tulip that promptly disappeared for a few years. Next, Henri’s birthday lily of the valley, set in clumps by tree roots, quietly in keeping with a woodland feel to the plot. But then the species tulip showed and spread, and we were lost in admiration. Most years since, we have added to them, though always in small numbers. Sometimes we’re there when they’re at their best. Other times, we simply find the fallen petals. Our most recent tulip plantings: in late September, pale ‘Coerulea Oculata’ and a more exuberant T acuminata in the longer grass. We also added our first snake’s head fritillary (Fritillaria meleagris from Farmer Gracy) that we dotted though patches of the meadow. These all still in modest amounts. Then, as we were leaving, Henri’s missing parcel arrived with Sarah Raven border tulips and another tall French mix. I blame lockdown loneliness and the siren call of online shopping. I suspect we may stop. Though this year I’m trialling overwintering, calendula covered by clear storage boxes. For now, our thoughts turn to a Danish family Christmas and bright spring. A few more scattered flowers by a northern sea. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.com
3||From climate to China, how Joe Biden is plotting America’s restorationBy any measure, Joe Biden is old in the ways of the world. As Barack Obama’s vice-president, he met all the big international actors. As chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, he helped direct US foreign policy. After four years of Donald Trump’s manic leadership, the Democrat offers a steady, dependable hand on the tiller. Biden’s grand aim: a glorious American restoration, at home and abroad. But his long experience cuts both ways. For many on the left, Biden’s conventional global outlook represents not so much a new dawn as a return to the Washington establishment-led policies of the pre-Trump era. Those hoping for radical action on pressing issues such as the climate crisis, global inequality, or confronting authoritarian “strongman” leaders could be disappointed. If he wins, Biden’s supporters say, America will be back in charge at the global helm. Normal service will resume. Biden’s critics say he is but a pale shadow of his old boss – a cautious, centrist politician like Obama but lacking the latter’s vision. In either case, who Biden selects to be his secretary of state, national security adviser and defence secretary could be crucial. Pressure from Democratic party progressives such as Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren pushed Biden leftwards during the campaign. The twin health and economic crises caused by the coronavirus pandemic also shifted his thinking. He now talks about “reimagining” America’s relationship with the world. Whether his views have really changed remains to be seen. And for all his foreign policy expertise, it’s clear Biden’s primary focus, if elected, will be domestic. Writing in Foreign Affairs magazine earlier this year, he set out a “foreign policy for the middle class” whose top priority was “enabling Americans to succeed in the global economy”. Strengthening the US at home was a prerequisite for restoring global leadership, he said. His priorities were plain. The idea that America must and should lead internationally, and that Trump “abdicated” that duty, is nevertheless hard-wired into Biden, a child of the cold war. This assumption of supremacy is challenged nowadays by those who believe post-1989 and post-9/11 US leadership, and particularly its armed interventions abroad, have served neither the US nor the world. They point to Iraq – a war Biden supported. “If you liked US national security policy before Trump mucked things up, then Biden is probably your kind of guy,” wrote historian Andrew Bacevich, a former army colonel. “Install him in the Oval office and the mindless pursuit of ‘dominance in the name of internationalism’ will resume.” Bacevich argues foreign policy-making – for example, decisions about sanctions on Cuba or Iran – should be taken out of the hands of the foreign policy elite, publicly debated, and democratised. Biden’s is more a top-down approach. To be fair, he says he will rebuild alliances, nurture multilateralism, and always try diplomacy first. But the worry remains that his grand project could become a restoration tragedy, heralding a return to old-fashioned, high-handed American exceptionalism. Climate &amp; health Trump abandoned the Paris climate agreement last year; Biden has pledged to immediately rejoin it, committing the US to meeting international global warming targets by cutting national greenhouse gas emissions. In July he announced a $2tn, four-year plan to invest in a range of climate crisis solutions and a separate scheme to decarbonise the electricity sector by 2035. On the pandemic, Biden has said the US will rejoin the World Health Organization and restore funding. He has proposed a US-led coalition to coordinate the search for a Covid-19 vaccine and new treatments. Democracy &amp; values Biden says the world is caught in a battle between democracy and authoritarianism – and that the US must be at the forefront. “As a nation, we have to prove to the world that the US is prepared to lead again – not just with the example of our power but also with the power of our example,” he wrote in Foreign Affairs. He says he will convene a “global summit for democracy” within his first year in office “to renew the spirit and shared purpose of the nations of the free world”. He has vowed to ensure the US presidency is again seen as a principled defender of open and fair elections, judicial independence, human rights, and free speech. Britain &amp; Europe As a man proud of his Irish roots, Biden is strongly opposed to any Brexit outcome that jeopardises the Good Friday agreement or threatens peace in Ireland. Even if such concerns are allayed, a swift US-UK free trade deal, as promised by Trump, is likely to prove harder to achieve. Given Boris Johnson’s perceived Trump-style brand of rightwing populist politics, Biden is expected to call on Berlin and Paris, rather than London, as preferred partners on European issues. Like Obama, he favours a strong, united EU that makes common cause with the US. Biden may be the undertaker who finally buries the “special relationship”. China Despite Trump’s repeated claims to the contrary, Biden says he will be tough on China, citing its threats to Taiwan, its “unfair” trade practices, and its habit of “robbing” American companies of technology and intellectual property. To do so, he proposes “to build a united front of US allies and partners to confront China’s abusive behaviours and human rights violations – even as we seek to cooperate on issues where our interests converge, such as climate change, non-proliferation and global health security”. He has been notably critical of Beijing’s treatment of Uighur Muslims. Nuclear proliferation Biden plans to revive the system of nuclear arms control treaties with Russia degraded during the Trump years, starting with an extension of the 2010 New Start strategic arms treaty negotiated by Obama. He also says he will rehabilitate the 2015 Iran nuclear deal that Trump abandoned, if Tehran recommits to observing its terms. On North Korea’s nuclear weapons, he has little new to say. However, the modernisation of the US’s own nuclear arsenal, begun by Obama, looks set to continue. Conflicts Biden says he wants to reinvigorate Nato and strengthen alliances in Asia; will adopt a strong deterrent stance in the face of Russia’s anti-western machinations; will try to revive the Israel-Palestine peace process short-circuited by Trump; will end US support for the Saudi war in Yemen; halt family separations on the Mexican border and reform immigration; and support the UN and international law. Like Trump, he also vows to end what he calls “forever wars”. “We should bring the vast majority of our troops home from wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East and narrowly define our missions as defeating al-Qaida and Isis,” he states. Another Middle East war, in Syria, is rarely mentioned. Diplomacy first “Diplomacy requires credibility and Trump has shattered ours,” Biden says. “In the conduct of foreign policy, a nation’s word is its most valuable asset. As president, I will elevate diplomacy as the United States’ principal tool of foreign policy.”
5||The Observer view on Poland's draconian abortion banLast week’s flawed ruling by a constitutional tribunal in Warsaw drastically restricting the right to abortion is a grim reminder that women’s rights and, more broadly, the rule of law are under serious threat in Poland. This oppressive decision is part of a slide towards authoritarianism that began in earnest after the rightwing populist Law and Justice party (PiS) of Jarosław Kaczyński won an absolute majority in 2015. It must not be allowed to continue. Halting this deterioration is, first, a matter for the people of Poland. Although this predominantly Catholic, socially conservative country already has some of the strictest abortion prohibitions in Europe, surveys suggest that only a small minority supports additional curbs. Not for the first time, Kaczyński and PiS are deliberately ignoring the democratic consensus to advance a narrow ideological and religious agenda. Pro-choice supporters have reacted quickly. Angry crowds besieged streets around Kaczyński’s home in Warsaw waving signs that read “You are building women’s hell”. More demonstrations are planned this weekend in a nationwide upsurge of protest reminiscent of 2016, when tens of thousands of women dressed in black marched against earlier anti-abortion legislation. The new restrictions ban terminations in the case of severe foetal impairment, currently the reason given for most legal abortions. In future, abortion in Poland will be allowed only in cases of rape, incest or where there is a threat to the mother’s life. Such cases account for only 2% of legal terminations. Each year, thousands of Polish women seeking abortions are forced to travel abroad. The ruling is a direct assault on women’s rights and a moral obscenity. It is also legally flawed, in the sense that the PiS packed the tribunal with loyalists who delivered the result it wanted. Sadly, this is not unusual in Poland, whose government is locked in a long-running dispute with the EU commission over its repeated attacks on judicial independence, free media and LGBT rights. Past attempts by Brussels to impose penalties have been ineffective, owing to a lack of solidarity and, more recently, to Polish threats to block the new EU budget and pandemic recovery fund. Last month, the commission singled out Poland (and Hungary) for criticism in its first rule-of-law audit of EU states. Some MEPs and governments want to withhold EU financial aid, from which Poland benefits hugely, unless or until the PiS shifts ground. A poll last week showed overwhelming public support for linking EU funding to the rule of law. Those who doubt the Europe-wide relevance of Poland’s assault on women’s rights and the wider dispute with Warsaw should study Kaczyński’s recent remarks: they are the typical distortions of a populist-nationalist politician disdainful of democratic and legal norms. He vowed not to succumb to “threats and blackmail” from Brussels. “Those who want to take away our sovereignty based on their own whims are headed for a fall,” he said. “Today, the EU institutions, their officials, some politicians that the Polish people have never elected, demand that we verify our whole culture, reject everything that is very important for us, just because they like it,” Kaczyński told the Gazeta Polska Codziennie newspaper. His words could equally have been spoken by Italian, French or Brexit-touting British ultra-nationalists. For the sake of women’s rights and its own integrity, the EU must stop pulling its punches and crack down on governments that mock its core beliefs. And it should be clear eyed about the universality of this fight. Last week, the Trump administration promulgated a “global anti-abortion declaration” along with 31 like-minded illiberal or authoritarian regimes. Poland is a signatory. What do these governments have in common? They are run by men and they oppress women.
1||Refugee advocates concerned for detainee held in Brisbane hotel for 16 monthsRefugee advocates have raised concerns about the welfare of a 37-year-old man who is under suicide watch at the Brisbane Immigration Transit Accommodation after attempting self harm. The man, from Somalia, had been detained in a hotel at Kangaroo Point in Brisbane since being transferred to Australia from Nauru under now-defunct Medevac laws in June last year. He was approved for transfer under clauses allowing people to reunite with family members in Australia for medical treatment. His wife and infant son were transferred to Australia in 2017 because his son was having trouble breathing. They now live just 20 minutes from the motel where he has been detained for 16 months. But the family has not been reunited, and since coronavirus restrictions were introduced in March they have been unable to visit. “The only time he has seen his wife and son is when his wife brings his son to the fence,” Refugee Action Coalition spokesman Ian Rintoul said. “That’s the only time he has seen them since March.” In recent weeks they have been unable to visit because both have been unwell. “He is extremely distressed to be so close to them and not be able to provide any kind of support,” Rintoul said. The man attempted to self-harm about 3am on Saturday but guards at the Serco-run facility intervened. He was then kept at Kangaroo Point, without any medical support or assessment, for about 12 hours before being transferred to Brisbane Immigration Transit Accomodation and placed under watch as high risk. As of June there were more than 100 people held in detention at Kangaroo Point, which has been designated as an alternative place of detention. All were transferred to Australia from Nauru or Manus Island under medevac laws, which were repealed in December. Rintoul said detainees at Kangaroo Point, and the Mantra hotel in Melbourne, were now living in more restricted conditions than existed on Nauru. Because of the coronavirus lockdown, all in-person visits have been banned. Meanwhile prisoners in Queensland are now allowed to receive visitors, with Queensland Corrective Services allowing the resumption of in-person from 28 September. There have been suicide attempts among the immigration detainees at both hotels. “They thought when they were transferred here they were going to get medical help, including in some cases for mental health,” he said. “Many of them have not got that medical help that they were promised. There are people who have applied [for refugee status in] Canada, but that has been stalled because of the pandemic. “At least there is a balcony at Kangaroo Point. At Mantra they can’t open the windows.” Guardian Australia has sought a response from the Department of Home Affairs. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org
22||TV tonight: Hugh Laurie's Tory chancer flirts with misfortune in RoadkillRoadkill 9pm, BBC One “People like me because I break the rules. Voters think of me as a character.” While similarities to current politicians are no doubt entirely coincidental, it is impossible not to detect echoes of modern populism in David Hare’s drama as Hugh Laurie’s Tory chancer Peter Laurence continues to push the boundaries of probity. This week, Laurence isn’t the sole architect of his misfortune as his daughter attracts the attention of the tabloids. But her indiscretion comes at an unfortunate time in the light of other events. Phil Harrison Michael Palin: Travels of a Lifetime 8pm, BBC Two Of all the shows repurposed for pandemic viewing, these travelogues have been among the most likable. Partly, that’s down to Palin himself, but they have also tapped into our current longing for freedom. Tonight’s final episode sees Palin revisiting his journey across the Sahara. PH Enslaved With Samuel L Jackson 9pm, BBC Two The powerful series concludes with changing attitudes and the eventual abolition of slavery. Jackson, along with Afua Hirsch, looks at the activists, petitions and cultural changes that led to its demise, while Divers With Purpose examine the wreckage of slave ship the London. Hannah Verdier Piers Morgan’s Life Stories 9pm, ITV The older the guest, the better the chat; that’s a general rule of thumb and one that bodes well for this week’s interviewee. Sir Cliff Richard has just celebrated his 80th birthday and he’s here to discuss his poverty-stricken childhood, conversion to Christianity and an extraordinary life in British pop. Ellen E Jones The Bridge 9pm, Channel 4 There’s little bridge-building and lots of contrived machinations by the programme-makers as the reality show continues. The contestants, one of whom wins cash if they all complete their task, are going hungry, so food is offered – with a catch designed to manufacture division. Jack Seale The Olivier Awards 2020 10.20pm, ITV Originally scheduled for April and celebrating the best of 2019, the theatre awards finally get the go-ahead. Enjoy them while you can because it’s hard to imagine any similar ceremony next year. Nominees include Wendell Pierce and Phoebe Waller-Bridge and our master of ceremonies is Jason Manford. PH Film choice The Lighthouse, 12.50pm, 9.45pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Two salty seadogs question their sanity in a lighthouse: Robert Eggers’s follow-up to The Witch is a claustrophobic yarn of 19th-century mariners, superbly shot in shadowy monochrome by Jarin Blaschke, with haunting performances from Willem Dafoe and Robert Pattinson. Paul Howlett Live sport Scottish Premiership Football: Aberdeen v Celtic, 11am, Sky Sports Main Event Top-flight action from Pittodrie. F1: Portuguese Grand Prix, 1.05pm, Sky Sports F1 From Autódromo Internacional do Algarve. Premier League Football: Southampton v Everton, 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event With Wolves v Newcastle United to follow at 4pm.
23||The Loire’s chenin blanc is a master of disguiseBouvet Ladubay Saumur Brut, Loire, France NV (£13.99, or £9.99 as part of a mixed case of six, majestic.co.uk) If you’re a producer of chenin blanc in France’s Loire Valley, you get used to ceding the spotlight. You have to accept that the grape variety you’re working with is currently better known around the world for its contribution to the recent proliferation of superb dry white wines from South Africa. And you know very well that the white grape variety for which your home region is most famous has for some years now been sauvignon blanc, as found in the wines of Sancerre, Pouilly-Fumé and Touraine. But there are some compensations. Chenin blanc grown in the Loire Valley has a kind of super-power shared by very few other grape varieties (riesling is the only other one I can think of): you can use it to make any style of wine at the very highest quality level, from golden sweet dessert wines to crisply apple-scented, incisive champagne-alike sparkling wines such as Bouvet Ladubay’s reliably fresh and tangy fizz from Saumur. Domaine la Rouletière Patrimoine Vouvray Sec, Loire, France 2015 (from £17.49, allaboutwine.co.uk; greatwinesdirect.co.uk; corkingwines.co.uk) My current favourite Loire chenin fizz is a little more expensive than the Bouvet Ladubay. But at £21.95 (vincognito.co.uk) Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Triple Zéro is pretty competitive alongside the likes of champagne and English wine. It gets its name from the absence of sugar, which is commonly added in three stages in the production of sparkling wine, but not here: what you get is a tinglingly dry wine of luminous clarity and depth of ripe apple (a classic chenin character) and more exotic fruit. It’s made by one of the stars of Loire still wines, Jacky Blot, whose Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Remus 2017, a still dry chenin from vineyards around the village of Montouis-sur-Loire (£26.68, justerinis.com), has the same mix of fruit-depth and struck-bell resonance of flavour as the Triple Zéro, and which you can also find in the silkily elegant Patrimoine from Domaine la Rouletière in Vouvray. Domaine des Forges Coteaux du Layon Chaume 1er Cru, Loire, France 2016 (£18.56, gauntleys.com) The very best Loire chenin is certainly a match for the best chardonnay from Burgundy, and at a fraction of the price to boot. But the combination of grape and region is also responsible for some charming wines at more accessible prices: I’m thinking of reliable staples such as Waitrose’s Les Andides Saumur Blanc (currently on offer for £7.49) and Yapp Bros’ never-less-than-fun, tangy-racy and drinkable Saumur Blanc (£11.49). For sheer gastronomic pleasure from chenin, however, it’s hard to beat the dessert wines, which combine the lusciousness of honey, brown sugar and crystallized apple with that resounding, cleansing, Cox’s apple acidity you find in the dry and sparkling wines. A wine such as Domaine des Forges’ lingeringly lovely Chaume 1er Cru, for example, is the closest thing the wine world has to the experience of eating a perfectly made tarte tatin. Follow David Williams on Twitter @Daveydaibach
23||Land, Birmingham: ‘Vegan cookery to file under thrilling’ – restaurant reviewEditor’s note: we have decided that, while restaurants remain open, we will continue to review them Land, 26 Great Western Arcade, Colmore Row, Birmingham B2 5HU (0121 236 2313). Two courses £20, three courses £26, five-course tasting menu £35, wines from £29 In the beginning there was a wild mushroom risotto and the non-meat eaters looked upon it and saw that it was seriously lame. Really? Is that it? For many kitchens cooking in the European tradition, it was. Going back 20 years or so it often seemed that, without a lump of animal protein to put front and centre, many lazy cooks would fall back swiftly into the heavy embrace of the carbs. Those damn vegetarians and vegans might not get something imaginative, but at least they’d get fed. Bring on the rice and pasta. Or, if you’re really lucky, a vegetable gratin that could grout a bathroom. A lot has changed. A lot hasn’t. As recently as February this year, at the splashy new restaurant of a chef who not only should know better but generally does, the meat-free options were pasta to start and gnocchi for the main. The come-hither menu descriptions listed roasted pumpkin and amaretto biscuits, pickled Thai shallots and dukkah. But none of that disguised those dishes’ true nature: pasta and gnocchi. There has, of course, been innovation. All hail Ottolenghi. Likewise, new generations of cooks have arrived in waves, fully aware that the diverse traditions of the Indian subcontinent, of China and the Middle East and all points in between often get along just fine without reaching for an ingredient that once had a pulse. Give thanks, too, for the rich blessing that is miso; for the uncompromising heft of gochujang. And yet, what occurs to me early on in my terrific lunch at Land, a small restaurant tucked away in the sort of Victorian shopping arcade in Birmingham that Pevsner wrote about, is how many clichés are still present in non-meat cookery in so many British restaurants. And how many of them are completely absent here. In your service I have been living through the cauliflower years. I have survived the aubergine years. Fine, sturdy vegetables, both. Love a bit of roasted cauliflower, me. I haven’t met an aubergine that I couldn’t spank with miso, grill to a charred mess and call dinner. But these can become as deadening a trope as that damn wild mushroom risotto. At Land there is none of that. It’s why I would encourage as many cooks as possible to get to Birmingham right now to see what chef Adrian Luck is doing there. The rest of you should pop along, too. His menu of almost entirely vegan cookery is short – just three choices at each course – but it should be filed under thrilling. There’s enormous, nerdy attention to detail alongside a precise understanding of both acidity and spice that lifts the seemingly humble far beyond its origins. We sit in the small downstairs dining room, at the bare wooden tables overseen by just one masked and attentive waiter, peering at plates of edible wonder. There are crescents of roasted onion squash the colour of a setting sun, on a bed of still-nutty puy lentils, bound by a mustardy dressing tangled with roasted red onion. What makes it sing is the addition of crisp lentils, perhaps deep-fried, to give it texture. There are the sweetest of Indian spice-roasted carrots, perched on a brilliant and vivid sweet-sour carrot and ginger purée. I could do serious damage to a bowl of that alone. There is the crunch of roasted seeds across the top. There are dribbles of what’s described as yogurt. As it’s a vegan dish, let’s assume nuts have been press-ganged into service. A potato rösti isn’t really, but let’s not get too hung up on nomenclature: it’s a plank of multilayered sliced potatoes, deep fried to an encouraging golden. There’s a cloud-like smoked-potato purée draped across the top, dusted with cep powder and, next to it, a spoonful of a boisterously acidulated mushroom ketchup. Oh boy. And on it goes. For a main course, a chunk of sweet potato has been roasted and partnered with a deep and sultry mole, that classic Mexican exercise in controlled burning used to produce a sauce full of spice and toasty dark-chocolate notes. There are whorls of avocado purée, and petals of the sweet potato skin, deep-fried for crunch. In another dish, sautéed king oyster mushrooms come on a cassoulet of borlotti beans lubricated with a little cream, the only dairy in the whole meal. The plate is topped with lacy “carbon tuiles” looking encouragingly like something worn by the women painted by Jack Vettriano. Celeriac, as familiar a non-meat trope as cauliflower and aubergine, is given a new and complex seeing to here. Chunks arrive roasted, under snowy slices of more of the same. Underneath are pearls of barley in a dark, umami-rich yeast broth. There’s a dusting of yeast across the top as well as dollops of a black garlic purée. I have a credo: non-meat dishes should be good because of that fact, rather than in spite of it. But I can’t help describing this celeriac dish as deep, intense and, well, meaty. With all these descriptions I will have missed a detail. I will have missed an ingredient or a moment of wizardry, because so much is going on. Adrian Luck is in complete control of his ingredients. It’s why I wish I could be just as enthusiastic about the desserts, but I can’t. Non-dairy creams can all too often have a musty, cereal back note, especially when sweetened. That’s what happens here in a sweetcorn tart with blackberries. The shell is tough and over-engineered, and the sweetcorn “cream” betrays its origins. Coconut milk might have been Luck’s friend here. A rapeseed oil cake with stewed apple, dribbles of caramel and a scoop of brisk buttermilk sorbet is much better, but lacks a certain largesse. Which is my fancy way of saying it needs loads more caramel. But ignore all that because of the brilliance that has gone before. Land is designed to take you somewhere new. Even the wine list is calculated to encourage experimentation. “If you like pinot noir,” says one heading, for example, before suggesting a gamay. And so we toast Luck’s cooking with a couple of glasses of godello because we like pinot grigio. I am aware that describing a restaurant like this as a find, when it’s been there for three years and always knew exactly where it was, might be a little insulting. But I can say that I’m delighted I’ve now found it. You should find it, too. News bites A new take on the cook-at-home ingredient delivery model: outside caterer Rocket, has launched a programme of food boxes entitled “A cook’s tour”. Alongside those ingredients, available for delivery nationwide, you also get access to a video cook-along, complete with live chat. Upcoming boxes include Flavours of Istanbul, Temples of Balinese Cuisine and Korean Street Food. The boxes cost from £55 for two. For more info visit acookstour.co.uk The tier 2 and 3 Covid-19 rules, prohibiting people meeting up indoors with anybody other than members of their own household, have resulted in mass restaurant cancellations. The Corbin and King group, which runs the Wolseley and Brasserie Zedel among others, says it lost 2,000 covers across the group to the end of October. At the same time a number of restaurant managers have told me that they are not clear how they are meant to police it. ‘Am I supposed to ask the members of every table for a proof of address?’ one maître d’ said to me. Another said there was a concern that, even to enquire of a table, might breach discrimination and equality legislation. In other news, Harrods in London’s Knightsbridge has announced it will be opening a branch of Gordon Ramsay Burger. It follows the success of the first in Las Vegas where the chef’s take on the humble hamburger costs up to $25.99. So there’s that. No opening date has yet been announced (gordonramsayrestaurants.com). Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1
3||Biden gains as suburban women and elderly voters turn backs on TrumpJoe Biden’s hopes of reaching the White House could rest on two crucial demographic groups that appear to be deserting Donald Trump: elderly people and suburban women. They would join a broad coalition that includes strong support among African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans, the LGBTQ community and young people. With the gender gap potentially bigger than ever, the president appears more reliant than ever on white men. Little more than a week before election day, Biden enjoys a double-digit lead in almost every national poll and is ahead in the crucial battleground states. More than 52 million people have already voted, according to the US Elections Project. In the past four presidential elections, Republicans have led among the elderly by around 10 points. But about four in five Americans killed by the coronavirus were older than 65 and a majority of Americans say Trump has mishandled the pandemic. The president trails among elderly voters by more than 20 points, according to recent CNN and Wall Street Journal/NBC News polls. This swing could prove critical in states such as Arizona and Florida, which have a high number of retirees. “In terms of voting blocs, there are two that are absolutely dooming Donald Trump,” said Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota. “He won the senior vote by seven points in 2016; that was very important in Florida and a few other states. He’s now losing that bloc and the polls differ about how much, but the fact that he no longer has an advantage among seniors is really crippling for him. “And then he has so alienated suburban women that it’s put a whole number of states in play, including states you wouldn’t expect, like Georgia. This kind of macho presidency has gotten the ringing rejection by women, particularly educated women who are so tired of the 1950s.” The suburban revolt against Trump’s bigotry, hardline agenda and chaotic leadership was manifest in the 2018 midterm elections when Democrats gained 41 seats in the House of Representatives, the biggest such shift since the post-Watergate 1974 elections, and won the popular vote by 8.6%. Trump’s campaign to win back this constituency, variously known as “soccer moms”, “security moms” and “hockey moms”, has been anything but subtle. He has tried to tap racist fears of suburbs overrun by crime, violence and low-income housing. In one tweet, he promised to protect “the Suburban Housewives of America”. At a recent rally in Pennsylvania, he pleaded: “Suburban women, will you please like me? Remember? Hey, please, I saved your damn neighborhood, OK?” Polls suggest the plea is falling on deaf ears. Biden leads by 23 points among suburban women in swing states, according to the New York Times and Siena College, and by 19 points among suburban women overall, according to Pew Research. Pew also found that Hispanic women prefer Biden by 44 points and Black women go for the Democrat by a staggering 85 points. Andrea Moore, 45, a stay-at-home mom in suburban Wayne county, Michigan, voted for Trump in 2016 because she was tired of career politicians. “He was an unknown quantity, but now we know,” she told the Associated Press, explaining that she will not vote for the president again because of “a million little things” including his divisiveness, fearmongering and failed Covid-19 response. The trends were underlined this week by a national survey of 2,538 Americans by the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) that showed Trump haemorrhaging support among the elderly and suburban women as well as another, less expected group: white Catholics. Only 38% of people aged 65 or older approve of Trump’s handling of the pandemic while 61% say they disapprove, the PRRI found. Among white college-educated women, seven in 10 disapprove of Trump’s handling of the pandemic, seven in 10 disapprove of his response to racial justice protests and a similar share believe he has encouraged white supremacists. There are also signs of erosion among religious conservatives, a bulwark of Trump’s base. PRRI found that while three in four (76%) white evangelical Protestants still approve of the job Trump is doing, only 52% of white mainline Protestants and 49% of white Catholics agree. Biden would be only the second Catholic president. Robert P Jones, chief executive and founder of PRRI, said: “White Catholics are a group that particularly in those swing rust belt states – Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Ohio – are really on the president’s must-win list. They’re also important in a place like Arizona. They are as big or bigger than white evangelicals in those states, so in terms of religious groups they are quite an important constituency. “White Catholics in 2016 were basically evenly divided between Trump and Hillary Clinton at this stage in the race. We have them at 54% Biden, 41% Trump, so that’s a sea change. This group is going to play an outsized role in Trump’s path to the electoral college and he’s not doing well with them at all.” Clinton was beaten in the electoral college after suffering heavy losses among non-college-educated white voters – a majority of the population in battleground states such as Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin – and failing to turn out African Americans at levels Barack Obama achieved. Current polling suggests Biden will do better on both accounts. Whereas Clinton lost whites without a college degree by more than 20 points, Biden is trailing by just 12 in UCLA Nationscape’s polling, according to an analysis by the FiveThirtyEight website. This appears to vindicate strategists’ view that Biden, a 77-year-old white male from humble origins in Scranton, Pennsylvania, would resonate more with this demographic than the New York-based wife of a former president. But, FiveThirtyEight added, Trump is performing slightly better than four years ago among college-educated white voters, and has made modest gains among voters of colour. The president’s support among Black voters aged 18 to 44 rose from around 10% in 2016 to 21% in UCLA Nationscape polling. He is also at 35% among Hispanic voters under age 45, up from the 22% in 2016 – and potentially significant in Florida. Jason Miller, a senior adviser to the Trump campaign, told reporters on Friday: “We’re very proud of the president’s efforts to turn out Latino voters … There’s a lot of enthusiasm for the president, not just for everything that he’s done so far but also because people are really scared about Joe Biden’s appeasing the regimes from Cuba and Venezuela.” Older voters of colour remain overwhelmingly Democratic, however. Biden is also dominant among all people under 35 even in Republican strongholds, with leads in Texas (59% to 40%), Georgia (60% to 39%) and South Carolina (56% to 43%), according to Axios and SurveyMonkey.
3||Many midwest Democrats stayed home in 2016. Will they turn out for Biden?Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. “Trump’s presidency, the last four years, have been absolutely horrible. Trump blew life back into white supremacy. Him being so open and unapologetic about the stuff he says, and things that he’s done, really gave that power,” he said. “Plus coronavirus, because now we have tens of thousands of people, especially in the black community, really suffering from Covid-19. We have an economy decimated to almost the proportions of the depression. The loss of jobs and loss of wealth is worse than I’ve ever seen before.” Collins will be voting for Biden and encouraging anyone else he can to do the same because the election hangs in good part on the turnout in major midwestern cities. Trump decisively won Ohio four years ago after the state had voted twice for Obama. But with the president holding a lead of just 1% in the aggregate of recent polls, the result in Ohio may come down to just a few thousand votes in Cleveland. Four years ago, Clinton won nearly 50,000 fewer votes than Obama in Cuyahoga county, which includes Cleveland and its small satellite cities, in part because so many Democrats stayed home. In neighbouring Michigan, Democratic turnout in Detroit fell by about 60,000 votes in 2016. Trump took the state with a majority of just 10,704 votes. Similarly, the drop in turnout between presidential elections in the Democratic stronghold of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, was more than double the number of votes – just 23,000 – that Trump won the state by. Those victories were key to the president winning the electoral college and taking the White House. The Democrats have reason to hope Biden can turn that around on 3 November. More than 8m people have registered to vote in Ohio, the second highest on record after Obama’s 2008 race. The number registering as Democrats has surged 20% in the state this year while Republicans have fallen 6% although they still have a slight lead in total registrations. Little more than half of the electorate are independents. Two-thirds of the drop in Republican voters is in Cuyahoga county. Those retreating from Trump include blue collar workers and white women living in the Cleveland suburbs. “Voting for him was a big mistake,” said a shop assistant, Lynn, who is married to a factory worker, after a campaign worker knocked on her door. “We both didn’t like Hillary and thought Trump would be good for bringing jobs back. I lost it with him that first year. I realised he was completely unfit to be president. But my husband hung on, believing in him until Covid. We’re both voting Biden just to get him out. I don’t know what Biden will do but at this point I don’t care.” Like others who once backed Trump and have turned away she did not want to be identified because “we have some crazy neighbours around here”. Lynn is among about 2.5m Ohioans who applied for absentee ballots, double the number in 2016. Nearly one quarter of the electorate has already voted in Cuyahoga county, whether by post or in person. “What we’re seeing right now is astronomical volumes of people voting by mail,” said Erika Anthony of Cleveland Votes, a nonpartisan get out the vote group. “Weirdly, despite the fact that every sort of tactic that we normally would be deploying to get people to vote has been compromised because of the pandemic, I will say there’s been an increased excitement when we are engaging with residents, potential voters.” But for all that, less than half of the population of Cleveland registered to vote. Some in the city have never been to the polls. Others turned out for Obama but not since. “Voter apathy is a real thing,” said Anthony. “If I’m a black person particularly, I really am not seeing anything that’s demonstrating to me that democracy is working for me.” Cleveland is among the most racially segregated cities in the country and one in three residents lives below the poverty line. It struggled through the Obama years, never really recovering from the 2001 recession or the national economic collapse seven years later. Then came coronavirus. Amanda King, an African American volunteer working to register voters in Cleveland said some voters are more motivated to turn out this year. “I think that among young and educated voters, there’s a feeling that this is our duty to vote in this election because it’s consequential. It feels more pressing than the Trump-Hillary election,” she said. “I think for some people, their bubble has been burst. After the Obama presidency they were thinking we’re a progressive society, things are great. And then this four years of Trump has really made some people come to the realisation that our country is not the democracy that it could be or should be.” But King, who runs an art collective, Shooting Without Bullets and who helped curate City Champions, the Guardian’s week-long focus on the city last year, said she met far less enthusiasm in one of the city’s poorest neighbourhoods, Hough, where she visited barbershops, a popular gathering place for discussion among African American men. “When I do voter registration in Hough, which is a majority black neighbourhood that has been disinvested from, redlined, a lot of that population is functionally illiterate, it’s a very different response over there. There’s a lot of people who are not interested and who don’t believe in electoral politics,” she said. “Many of their arguments were that whether it’s Trump, whether it’s Obama, whether it’s Bush, whether it’s Clinton, they’ve never cared about me. Me choosing them as leadership has never changed the conditions in which I’m living. And you look at that neighbourhood, and you look at those statistics, and you say, you’re damn right. I understand that frustration.” King said dire predictions for four more years of Trump are doing little to galvanise people in neighbourhoods like Hough. “That might work for white women who voted for Trump last time but that’s not going to work necessarily for the people on the fence. You can’t say to someone who has nothing, to someone who is constantly in a state of struggle, well this guy is gonna make it worse. There’s no more fear to be had. They’re not selling greatness here, they’re selling well, it’s worse or worse,” she said. “I’m thinking that there’s a lot of barbershops around the midwest where this conversation is happening. It scares me because I know that we need to turn out for this election.” Detroit and Milwaukee also saw a drop in voting in African American neighbourhoods in 2016 that local activists in part attributed to a lack of interest because Obama was not on the ballot or disillusionment because he was able to achieve less than they had hoped, in part because of Republican obstruction. Collins grew up in overwhelmingly black East Cleveland where his father worked for General Electric and his mother was a bus driver. “People feel like their vote is not going to make a difference. And people may be too concerned with other stuff that’s going on right in front of their face versus getting into politics. They don’t trust politicians, never have,” he said. “Up until Obama, there were never a lot of people voting around here because I don’t think they really saw them making a change.” Collins, who teaches at a school and a community centre, said coronavirus forced his classes online but some of young people he teaches don’t have computers. Others lack decent internet connections. They might rely on their phones for social media but that doesn’t work for interactive lessons. “These are the kinds of problems a lot of their families are focused on, not voting,” he said. Democratic politicians remain confident but have a different concern. Kent Smith is running unopposed for re-election as a state representative in Euclid, a majority black small city within Cuyahoga county that is effectively a suburb of Cleveland. He is less worried about turnout than whether the votes get counted. “I really think that in 2020, because of the global pandemic and the change in how people are voting, it’s really going to be turnout versus the number of votes that are ruled ineligible,” he said. Smith said a combination of voters not being used to filling out postal ballots – a common error is to put the date instead of date of birth – and efforts by Ohio’s Republican secretary of state, Frank LaRose, to throw roadblocks in the way of voting by post which is more favoured by Democrats, has raised concerns of large numbers of ballots being discounted. “Projections of turnout are healthy for the Democrats. It’s a matter of how many of those votes will actually count,” said Smith.
5||Better late than never –  how Rishi Sunak ended up with a planThree mini-budgets from the chancellor in four weeks isn’t normal. But then nothing much is these days. This trilogy started at the end of September, with the winter economy plan. The name gives you a clue that this was meant to be the plan for the whole winter. Far from getting through to the spring, the plan’s flagship policy didn’t make it to the end of October before being totally reinvented by the Treasury last week in the third instalment of this economic policy saga. The policy in question is the job support scheme (JSS), the replacement for the furlough scheme that ends a week today. For those returning to work for a fraction of their previous hours, the scheme pays them two-thirds of their wages for the hours not worked. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said its goal was to give businesses “the option of keeping employees in a job on shorter hours rather than making them redundant”. That is the right aim, but the scheme didn’t give many firms that option. It was too expensive, asking firms being hammered by this pandemic to pay a third of wages for hours not worked. This design flaw was obvious a month ago. As we at the Resolution Foundation pointed out within minutes of the chancellor’s announcement, there’s a reason other short-hour work schemes, like that in Germany, do not ask employers to pay towards the costs during downturns. Government’s response was that our analysis might be right on a spreadsheet but didn’t reflect the real world. You didn’t need a spreadsheet to tell you that the scheme incentivised firms to keep one worker on full time rather than two on half-time, which is not how you reduce the coming rise in unemployment. On Thursday, the chancellor recognised this reality, slashing the employer contributions from 33% to 5%. What sounds like a tweak is a revamp of the JSS, turning it into a functioning short-time work scheme. The cost to an employer of keeping two staff earning £17,000 on for half their usual hours has fallen from £233 to just £35 a month – an 85% reduction. This will make a huge difference to take-up, incentivising firms to cut hours, not jobs. It won’t be cheap, increasing its cost many times over, but it will lead to lower unemployment and protect household incomes. So we’ve got to the right place, albeit too late, with the now heavily revised scheme set to go live in seven days’ time. It’s worth asking how this mess happened, because there are lessons for policymakers. Fundamentally, this is a classic case of optimism bias. The hope that the summer pause in the pandemic would last was understandable, but a terrible basis for policymaking. It, combined with talk of a V-shaped recovery, lies behind this painful display of economic policy slowly catching up with the return of the virus. High employer contributions might have made sense if we were phasing out lockdown restrictions, but make little sense when we are ramping them back up. Optimism bias is something almost all of us are guilty of. In our private lives we tell ourselves we’ll make it on time even when it’s clear we’re running late and it’s a common pandemic survival technique not to admit to ourselves quite how long this will go on. This same optimism bias explains why it took until Wednesday for the government to confirm that this autumn’s spending review, which was set to hand our departmental budgets for the coming three years, had been scrapped. It’s been clear for months that we’re in no position to plan public spending three years ahead right now, and only placing a lot of value on hope over evidence would make you think otherwise. We don’t know what we’ll be spending next month, let alone in 2024. Underpinning this optimism bias is a misdiagnosis of our pandemic-stricken labour market. We’re regularly told that, while it’s sad jobs are going in sectors such as hospitality and leisure, it’s best for those workers to enter unemployment because they’ll swiftly find jobs in less pandemic-hit parts of the economy. This works in textbooks but ignores the evidence. The UK is seeing the largest rise in unemployment in over a decade. That is driven more by huge falls in the chances of someone out of work finding a new job than by increased job losses themselves. Far from growing fast and hiring, even firms less affected by the pandemic have stopped investing, given the huge uncertainty. The real lesson here is that, while optimism bias may be a human flaw that we all live with in our private lives, it’s a dangerous force in politics. History shows us that previous pandemics lasted years not months, and that second and third waves were common. In a pandemic it’s fair enough to hope for the best, but policy needs to be set with a closer eye on the painful and messy reality. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation
27||Malcolm Turnbull signs Kevin Rudd's petition challenging News Corp media dominanceFormer Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has signed Kevin Rudd’s petition calling for a royal commission into News Corp’s dominance of the Australian media. Rudd, also a former Australian prime minister, launched the petition to the Australian parliament earlier this month, saying the media company employed tactics that “chill free speech and undermine public debate,” and calling for a royal commission to ensure a strong and diverse news media in the face of “new business models that encourage deliberately polarising and politically manipulated news”. Both Rudd and Turnbull faced negative campaigns from News Corp during their time in office. On Sunday, Turnbull shared that he had signed the petition. “Kevin has done well to get this petition going,” he said on Twitter. “I doubt it will result in a Royal Commission and Murdoch’s print monopoly (since 1987) is only part of the problem. But I have signed it and encourage others to do so.” Rudd said it was “good to have you on board”. “Supporting media diversity isn’t about left or right, Labor or Liberal, but preserving the lifeblood of our democracy,” he said on Twitter. In Australia, there is no requirement for the parliament to respond to a petition once it reaches a certain number of signatures. Rudd told Guardian Australia that he knew it was unlikely the current federal government would respond. “Obviously, the beneficiaries of the Murdoch protection racket, the Liberal National party, will not do that [act],” he said. “It will take some time to convince the Labor party that it’s in their interest as well. That will be influenced directly by the volume of public support.” The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has a distanced himself from the petition, saying Rudd was acting as a private citizen and it was not reflective of Labor policy. Rudd told the ABC on Tuesday that Turnbull had reached out to him to see how they could work together on curtailing Murdoch’s influence over Australian politics. “Malcom reached out to me a couple of days ago,” he said. “He wants to have a discussion about how we handle these matters in the future, so I’ll do that in due course.” He highlighted that NewsCorp campaigns against him and against Turnbull were a matter of documentary record. “That is all about the influence and the exercise of Murdoch’s media muscle and knocking over an Australian prime minister,” he said. “Now, I don’t support Mr Turnbull, as you know, for a whole range of policy reasons – although in some areas of policy we have a common view – but this petition of mine is not about partisan politics. “I’m no longer a player in national politics, I’m not seeking elected office but I am concerned about this cancer on our democracy and if Mr Turnbull wishes to join forces with me on this, well and good.” Rudd said News Corp’s owner, Rupert Murdoch, was a “virtual monopoly player” in Australia. In his home state of Queensland, which is currently in a state election campaign, every newspaper is owned by NewsCorp. “This is a one-newspaper state, not just a one-newspaper town,” he said “And anyone who thinks that’s fair in terms of every side of politics having a fair go has got rocks in their head.” The two former prime ministers have been strange bedfellows in the past 12 years of Australian public life. Turnbull was made opposition leader in 2008, after Rudd won the 2007 election, and then lost the leadership to Tony Abbott in 2009. In 2012 they appeared together on an episode of ABC’s Q&amp;A, when they were viewed as so similar – moderate, wealthy, and “not very popular in your own parties, but very popular among people” – that one audience member asked if they had considered joining together to form their own political party. Rudd quipped: “Malcolm and I could never agree on the leadership.”
16||We are railing: Britain embraces the joys of the humble train setIt started with a standard Scalextric set: two slot cars, some track, a 10-year-old boy and his enthusiastic father. Six months later, Ben Martin has a 75ft raceway in his loft and a growing collection of cars. “I went down a rabbit hole with my son,” Martin said. “There was a time when the postman was bringing track every day. He was laughing, ‘What’s all this about?’ But you can never have too many straights. It’s fulfilling a childhood dream. I played with Scalextric with my brother and I always wanted a track in the loft that lived there, that you could use whenever you wanted, not just taking over the living room for a few days before your parents made you pack it up and maybe get it out months later.” Martin is not alone. Slot cars, model railways and model-making have boomed during the pandemic. Hornby, that stalwart of the British hobbyist industry, said last month it had seen far higher sales between April and August than expected. Peco, which makes tracks and scenery, is struggling to keep up with demand. And hobby shops have seen a huge increase in customers. Hattons has supplied customers in Widnes and beyond for decades, and Richard Davies, the managing director, said sales had been “a blur”. “We’ve been inundated with orders,” he said. “Last year, people were buying three and a half items on average, but in March and April that went up to seven or eight. We were about 50% up. “The whole crisis has prompted people to take a look at how they use their time – people think they’ve been spending too much time at work, and now they want to make the model railway that’s been on their mind for the last 20 years.” Some are new model enthusiasts, like the Martin family. Others, such as Chris Chewter in Oxfordshire, are established hobbyists who have had more hours to invest in getting a little closer to perfection. For the last five years, Chewter and his daughter have been recreating Tetbury station in Gloucestershire, which was a victim of the Beeching railway closures. The layout is a “small piece of utopia where the sun is always shining and the world is Covid-free”, Chewter said. “I’ve always wanted to take a real location and model it as close to scale as I possibly could. There’s something about making a model when it looks like it’s been shot by a Bond villain’s shrink-ray that captures my imagination.” Steve Haynes, Peco’s sales and export manager, said: “It appeals to people who have artistic flair, to people who have a technical mind because they like the electronics, to people who have an interest in history. It stimulates the mind.” Peco had to shut its factory in Devon for five weeks at the start of the pandemic. “Now we’re trading at a much higher level this year than we were last year, even with that disruption,” Haynes said. “We’re recruiting more staff and we’re still behind the curve – the demand is relentless. Some of our retail customers have seen more business than at Christmas.” It helps that model railways now have a stamp of celebrity approval, and geek culture is not merely tolerated but feted. Rod Stewart was proud to show off his extraordinary reconstruction of an American city to Railway Modeller magazine last year. The sprawling layout of 1940s cars, trains and skyscrapers is 125ft by 23ft, and he is reportedly shipping it back to Essex from Beverly Hills. Musician Jools Holland, another enthusiast, has recreated the Channel tunnel and 1960s London. “There are plenty of people showing off their model railways on Instagram,” Davies said. “When I was 15, I was embarrassed by my model railway. I didn’t want anyone at school to know about it. It seems like we’ve moved forward.” Hornby, which owns many of the brands in British model shops, had been in the doldrums for some time, but its fortunes turned a corner after Lyndon Davies took over as chief executive three years ago. Stock market rules prevent him from revealing details before its interim results in November, but he is ebullient. “Whenever there’s a national crisis, people turn inwards and look for things of comfort,” he said. “And we’ve tried to give people more fun.” Hornby now makes Scalextric models of Batman and Joker cars, and Del Boy’s Reliant van from Only Fools and Horses. The track was more reliable now, Davies said, and customers also liked controlling their trains and cars with mobile phone apps. “I had a race with my grandson, he had Superman, I had the Reliant Robin,” Davies said. They have a range of Yellow Submarine buses and trains that has launched in time for Christmas.” “It’s so wholesome and innocent, and there’s absolutely nothing negative about it,” Ben Martin said. “It’s not like screen time. Everyone is interested. We’ve had load of visitors in the loft, from six-year-olds to my uncle in his 70s. “But I’m done now. I’ve got enough track. We’ve started collecting Star Wars figures.” • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to add a photographer credit to the main image.
14||Man in critical condition after shark attack on Great Barrier Reef north of TownsvilleA man is in a critical condition after being attacked by a shark at the Great Barrier Reef. He was airlifted to Townsville University hospital after being bitten at Britomart Reef around 12.20pm on Sunday, Queensland Ambulance says. The area, off the north Queensland coast about 150km north of Townsville, is a popular spear-fishing location. Seven Australians have died from shark bites in 2020 including six in unprovoked attacks – more than any year since 1934. While the total number of shark bites is in line with the annual average over the past decade, it has prompted experts to consider whether the La Niña weather event, associated with cooler sea surface temperatures in the central Pacific, may be affecting where sharks search for prey. According to the Australian Shark Attack File, it has been 86 years since six people last died from unprovoked shark bites in a single year. In 1929, nine people died from unprovoked shark bites in Australia – a record that preceded debate about introducing the first shark nets at Australian beaches several years later. There have been 18 unprovoked shark bites so far in 2020, one more than last year and the same as in 2018. In 2015, there were 22. In January, a 57-year-old experienced diver, Gary Johnson, was killed by a shark near Esperance in Western Australia, and in April, a 23-year-old wildlife ranger, Zachary Robba, was killed by a shark off the Great Barrier Reef. In June, Rob Pedretti, 60, died after he was bitten by a shark while surfing in northern New South Wales, and in July, a teenager died from a shark bite while surfing at another beach in the region. In September, 46-year-old Nick Slater died after being bitten while surfing near the Gold Coast. Authorities called off a search for the body of Andrew Sharpe earlier in October after friends saw the 52-year-old attacked while surfing near Esperance. While surfing is not considered provoking a shark, the death of a 36-year-old while spearfishing off Queensland’s Fraser Island in July is considered to be the result of a provoked bite, as the release of fish blood can attract sharks.
28||For the recordAn article said that Scotland “is due to conduct” a census in the spring. In fact, the impact of Covid-19 means its national survey has been postponed a year to March 2022 (“Census to ask about sexual orientation for the first time”, 18 October, page 12). The term of office served in the US House of Representatives is two years, not four, as we had it (“How the US Senate might change”, 18 October, page 39). Visiba, a company that undertook research into incidents involving people suffering from mental health crises in England, is a digital healthcare platform provider, not an online mental health care provider, as an article said (“Police 999 callouts to mental health incidents soar”, 18 October, page 28). A review of the documentary film White Riot referred to punk bands in the 1970s having “significant numbers of NF and Britain First supporters”. Britain First was not founded until 2011; the intended reference was to the British Movement (TV review, New Review, 18 October, page 29). A column described the artist Laura Knight as “the first female Royal Academician” (“Guess the painting”, New Review, 11 October, page 38). Knight was the first fully elected female Royal Academician, after the founding members Mary Moser and Angelica Kauffman. Other recently amended articles include: Coronavirus: 1 million young Britons ‘face jobs crisis within weeks’ Police call for urgent review of stop and search protocols after officer’s death in Croydon Pizza, kebabs, chicken tikka masala: make your own takeaway favourites Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736
5||Letters: Britain at fault for Brexit fishing woesYour interesting article did not explain why so much fish in British waters is now caught by boats from other EU countries (“Brixham fishermen hope Brexit will tip the scales for shrinking industry”, Business). In the late 1980s, grants from Europe were made available for fishing communities to modernise their boats and tackle. This funding had to be match-funded by national governments. Other governments supplied this funding, unlike the UK. The result was that British fishermen were unable to compete with the bigger, more efficient boats, and many sold their quota to French, Spanish or Dutch fishing companies. The quotas were introduced to preserve fish stocks. The reason the future of fishing is so fraught in the Brexit negotiations is that other European nations paid British fishermen to be able to fish for what had been British quotas. Veronica Hardstaff, MEP for Lincolnshire 1994-1999 and former member of the European parliament fishing committee, Sheffield The most serious threat to the UK fishing fleet is that 37% of fish caught by UK boats are landed in the European Economic Area, with the largest shares being exported to Norway, the Netherlands and France. The UK fleet may well want a larger quota of available stocks, but the main species found in UK waters are mackerel and herring, which do not have a UK market. The continuation of EU/EEA landing rights without tariffs, quotas or phytosanitary restrictions is far more important than sharing a few cod with France. A no-deal Brexit would result in the loss of substantial and valuable exports for the UK fishing fleet. Eric Goodyer Birsay, Orkney Rough justice on golf course It is regrettable that Aberdeen has granted planning permission for a new Trump golf course on the Menie estate (“New Trump golf course provokes fury in Scotland”, News). But had Trump been refused planning permission, he could have appealed directly to the Scottish government. But objectors to planning applications have no equal right of appeal, despite repeated attempts to get this introduced into Scottish law. Should Trump act on his granted permission, the invaluable coast and dunes will be further destroyed. Rose Harvie Dumbarton, West Dunbartonshire Arts bailout ‘blackmail’ I am appalled that arts organisations are being compelled to give public praise to named members of the government and to the Treasury and Arts Council England (“Want an arts bailout? Then you’d better praise Sunak &amp; co”, News). Were the artists told that this blatant blackmailing would be integral to the government’s culture recovery fund? It appears the government is shamefully taking advantage of the Covid crisis to bring the arts to heel and to give the appearance that artists are supportive of its notoriously unprincipled behaviour. Philip Hedley, director emeritus, Theatre Royal Stratford East, London WC1 Land is our heritage too Joe O’Donnell, the director of the Victorian Society, is not alone in his concerns about the government’s proposed changes to the planning system (“‘Greatest threat in a generation’ faces heritage buildings”, News). Heritage is just one of several qualities that places possess. He cites English Heritage research on the carbon savings of refitting existing buildings. In Wales, government agencies were quick out of the blocks, introducing in 2008 their unique land use information system, Landmap, with its all-Wales coverage of areas that merit being taken into account in land management and change decision-making. This information base of more than 10,000 areas is freely available online, just the kind of thing England’s public sector ought to introduce without delay to ensure a place’s qualities are properly understood and not wasted, for example, in carbon-costly new developments or habitat loss. David Eagar Birmingham Word ban is hard to swallow Barbara Ellen hit the nail on the head in her criticism of the powerful meat industry’s attempt to ban words such as “banger” and “burger” in relation to similar-tasting alternatives that cut out the cruelty (“Bangers and burgers belong to us vegetarians and vegans too”, Comment). It is obvious that the meat industry does not, and cannot, own words. The use of the phrase “cultural hijacking” by the meat industry is frankly hilarious and rather pathetic. The only “hijacking” I can see is directed towards our planet, exploiting its precious resources for the mere benefit of a consumer to buy a chunk of butchered meat. Sebastian Monblat Sutton, London Held back by my class I share Kenan Malik’s scepticism about the reporting, both political and academic, of the assumed educational disadvantage of “white”, working-class boys (“Being white won’t hold boys back. Being working class just might”, Comment). I am from a northern, white, working-class background, failed the 11-plus and then got to university from a secondary modern, which limited my academic choices and future. I found the work of the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu a useful insight into this “disadvantage”. Like Malik, he contended that the main factor was the constrained life chances of being working class; he contended that this was “operationalised” through “cultural capital”. Our heavily exam-based, traditional and elitist schooling and curriculums are biased towards “middle/upper class cultural capital”, with all the enrichment, private tutoring and access to literary/musical/cultural opportunities that go with it. Philip Wood Kidlington, Oxfordshire Sins of the Flesh Your article on the “lost” Nic Roeg Flash Gordon film does not mention that an “erotic” comedy version titled Flesh Gordon actually was released in 1974 (“Flesh Gordon? Artwork reveals erotic version that was never made”, News). Having sneaked in to see this film aged 15 in the days before ID was required, I can vouch that it was neither erotic nor particularly comedic, although I do remember many people in the audience rolling about with laughter at the heavy-handed script. But a Nic Roeg version I would love to have seen! Dougie Mitchell Edinburgh
3||Kleptopia review: power, theft and Trump as leader in Putin’s own imageIn a year dominated by a US presidential election between a kleptocrat and a democrat, a book about world-class thieves laundering trillions ought be the perfect bedtime reading for anyone curious about the unprecedented amounts of money that have been looted and hidden over the last 20 years. Tom Burgis, a reporter for the Financial Times, is certainly an impressive investigator. He works hard to explain how myriad financial institutions, from the Bank of New York to Merrill Lynch and HSBC, have tried to deceive regulators and wash the ill-gotten gains of countless dictators. The oligarchs of Putin’s Russia are big players in these pages. So are Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, British bankers turned regulators, a trio of Central Asian billionaires, and no fewer than 30 other major characters, all listed at the beginning. This results in so many competing storylines that it becomes almost impossible to keep track. We bounce back and forth, from the Russian and Italian gangsters of Brooklyn to the oil fields of the former Soviet Union, from the platinum mines of Zimbabwe to the copper and cobalt of the Congo. There are long sections about the wholesale theft of natural resources in post-Soviet Russia and the birth of the oligarchs, all of whom were forced to become Putin’s partners – or face imprisonment or death. For example, the purchase of a three-quarter stake in Yukos, for $350m, made Mikhail Khodorkovsky the richest man in Russia. Five years later, the vast oil company with 100,000 employees was worth $12bn. Khodorkovsky was arrested, jailed and eventually sent into exile. Burgis draws useful parallels between Putin’s kleptocracy and Hitler’s Germany, each home to both a “normative state” that generally respects its own laws and a “prerogative state” that violates most of them. According to the German-Jewish lawyer who was the author of the theory in the 1930s, “Nazi Germany was not a straightforward totalitarian system. It retained some vestiges of the rule of law, chiefly in matters of business, so that the capitalist economy had the basic rules it needed to keep going. But the prerogative state – Hitler’s political machinery – enjoyed … ‘jurisdiction over jurisdiction.” Putin has used his jurisdiction over everything to vanquish almost all of his enemies. And since Donald Trump has been collaborating with Russians in one way or another for almost 40 years, our kleptocrat-in-chief does finally make an appearance in Kleptopia, on page 250. After we’ve read a lot about Felix Sater, a second-generation Russian mobster connected to several schemes including the Trump Soho in lower Manhattan, Trump is identified as the “crucial ingredient” in Sater’s “magic potion for transforming dirty money”. Once the ratings of The Apprentice had washed away the public memory of multiple bankruptcies and “reinvented” his name as “a success”, Trump’s role in real estate deals became simply to “rent out his name”. “The projects could go bust,” Burgis writes, and “they usually did – but that wasn’t a problem.” The money had completed “its metamorphoses from plunder to clean capital”. Then there was the notorious sale of Trump’s Palm Beach mansion, to Russian oligarch Dmitry Rybolovlev for $95m, more than twice what Trump paid a few years before. According to Michael Cohen, Trump’s former fixer, Trump thought the real buyer was Putin – a story which hasn’t gotten nearly as much attention as it should. With his election as president, as Burgis puts it, Trump helped to construct a new “global alliance of kleptocrats”. Their whole goal is the privatization of power, and they control “the three great poles” – the US, China and Russia. In our new world of alternate facts, corruption is “no longer a sign of a failing state, but of a state succeeding in its new purpose”. The new kleptocrats have subverted their nations’ institutions, “to seize for themselves that which rightfully belonged to the commonwealth”. This is a ghastly and very important story. But the secret to great storytelling is knowing what to leave out. If Burgis had found a more focused way to tell this one, he would have written a much more powerful book.
5||Trump assaulted American democracy – here's how Democrats can save itBarring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. The vote on Barrett’s confirmation will occur just eight days before election day. By contrast, the Senate didn’t even hold a hearing on Merrick Garland, who Barack Obama nominated almost a year before the end of his term. Majority leader Mitch McConnell argued at the time that any vote should wait “until we have a new president”. Barrett was nominated by a president who lost the popular vote by nearly 3m ballots, and who was impeached by the House of Representatives. When Barrett joins the court, five of the nine justices will have been appointed by presidents who lost the popular vote. The Republican senators who will vote for her represent 15 million fewer Americans than their Democratic colleagues. Once on the high court, Barrett will join five other reactionaries who together will be able to declare laws unconstitutional, for perhaps a generation. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? For starters, increase the size of the supreme court. The constitution says nothing about the number of justices. The court changed size seven times in its first 80 years, from as few as five justices under John Adams to 10 under Abraham Lincoln. Biden says if elected he’ll create a bipartisan commission to study a possible court overhaul “because it’s getting out of whack”. That’s fine, but he’ll need to move quickly. The window of opportunity could close by the 2022 midterm elections. Second, abolish the Senate filibuster. Under current rules, 60 votes are needed to enact legislation. This means that if Democrats win a bare majority there, Republicans could block any new legislation Biden hopes to pass. The filibuster could be ended with a rule change requiring 51 votes. There is growing support among Democrats for doing this if they gain that many seats. During the campaign, Biden acknowledged that the filibuster has become a negative force in government. The filibuster is not in the constitution either. The most ambitious structural reform would be to rebalance the Senate itself. For decades, rural states have been emptying as the US population has shifted to vast megalopolises. The result is a growing disparity in representation, especially of nonwhite voters. For example, both California, with a population of 40 million, and Wyoming, whose population is 579,000, get two senators. If population trends continue, by 2040 some 40% of Americans will live in just five states, and half of America will be represented by 18 Senators, the other half by 82. This distortion also skews the electoral college, because each state’s number of electors equals its total of senators and representatives. Hence, the recent presidents who have lost the popular vote. This growing imbalance can be remedied by creating more states representing a larger majority of Americans. At the least, statehood should be granted to Washington DC. And given that one out of eight Americans now lives in California – whose economy, if it were a separate country, would be the ninth-largest in the world – why not split it into a North and South California? The constitution is also silent on the number of states. Those who recoil from structural reforms such as the three I’ve outlined warn that Republicans will retaliate when they return to power. That’s rubbish. Republicans have already altered the ground rules. In 2016, they failed to win a majority of votes cast for the House, Senate or the presidency, yet secured control of all three. Barrett’s ascent is the latest illustration of how grotesque the power imbalance has become, and how it continues to entrench itself ever more deeply. If not reversed soon, it will be impossible to remedy. What’s at stake is not partisan politics. It is representative government. If Democrats get the opportunity, they must redress this growing imbalance – for the sake of democracy. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a columnist for Guardian US
5||The Observer view on the Commons vote to let poor children go hungryIt speaks volumes of the government that it has taken a 22-year-old footballer to step into the vacuum to provide moral and compassionate leadership during a pandemic. Perhaps Boris Johnson thought that giving Marcus Rashford an MBE for his campaign for holiday food vouchers for poor children would muffle his voice. But Rashford has continued to speak truth to power in a way that puts the government to shame. Johnson last week instructed Conservative MPs to vote against a motion to uphold Rashford’s continued calls to extend holiday food vouchers for poor children. Just one Conservative minister, Caroline Ansell, thought this was a resigning matter. The rest of the sorry pack, including education secretary, Gavin Williamson and children’s minister, Vicky Ford, dutifully trooped through the lobby. That vote to deny children who get free meals during the school term food vouchers in the school holidays was bad enough. Even worse are the arguments MPs wheeled out to justify their decision. Brendan Clarke-Smith said giving food to hungry children was akin to “nationalising children”. Ben Bradley implied these vouchers were spent in crack dens and brothels over the summer. Mark Jenkinson argued that food parcels were being traded for drugs in his constituency. (Neither offered a shred of evidence for these ridiculous suppositions.) Selaine Saxby hoped those businesses in her constituency stepping in to provide free meals would not be seeking further government support. Philip Davies lambasted a 16-year-old constituent who wrote to him about the issue for being “intolerant”. Senior ministers know better than to openly voice these sentiments. But these views are far from fringe: they offer an ugly glimpse into a persistent strand of Tory thinking about poverty. Too many who have lived privileged lives on the Conservative benches believe their successes are down purely to their hard work, not the advantages that were handed to them on a silver platter. The corollary of this fantastical belief is that people who live in poverty, who cannot get a job that pays enough to support their family, are somehow morally deficient. This is nonsensical dogma. Poverty is less the product of individual life choices but overwhelmingly the inevitable result of the deficient economic and social orders that shape all of our lives. It is generated by low pay, unemployment and poor mental health. Minimum-wage jobs do not pay enough for parents to provide for their children without state support; little wonder that seven in 10 children in poverty come from working families. Just as bad is the poverty that sets in when large numbers of jobs vanish from an area and a lack of support to retrain consigns many to the scrapheap, making it hard for their children and grandchildren to escape the shackles of multigenerational joblessness. But it does not suit small-state Conservatives to acknowledge this. Even as they stigmatise people for relying on state handouts, they refuse to ensure cleaners and carers are paid enough to support their families. The Conservative MP Kit Malthouse justified voting against last week’s motion because a better way to help children in poverty was to “pump money into the welfare system”. We wholly agree, but this was an odd sentiment from someone whose party has spent the last decade eroding tax credits and benefits – many families lost the equivalent of thousands of pounds of support a year – in a way that has contributed to rising levels of child poverty. Conservative chancellors may have told us it was a necessary economy, but the tax cuts they handed more affluent families and businesses that cost billions of pounds a year suggested otherwise. If unemployment soars, as expected, in the coming months, things will get worse. The £20 a week boost to universal credit is set to be rescinded next April, dropping unemployment benefits to their lowest real-term levels since the 1990s. Meanwhile, the government has failed to mitigate the educational and mental health impacts of the pandemic on children. And, rather than address the root causes of the under-attainment of poor children at school over the last decade, Conservative ministers have flirted with the notion that it is somehow the widespread teaching of critical race theory in schools that is disadvantaging white, working-class children. Alongside asylum seekers and the legal profession, children now appear to be fair game in the culture-war politics of Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings: whether it is to take potshots at those campaigning against structural racism or to make Victorian-era aspersions about the feckless poor. They have made a massive misjudgment. The dogwhistle politics of Vote Leave cannot carry the country through a pandemic and the overwhelming response to Rashford’s call – the hard-pressed businesses, councils and individuals who have come forward to reduce the number of children going hungry – shows they have misjudged a nation. It is a heartwarming antidote to the callousness of ministers. But what do we teach our offspring when, though we can afford to, we choose not to ensure that all children have somewhere safe and warm to live, that they don’t go to bed hungry, that they have a pair of shoes without holes? We teach them that to be poor is to be shameful, that there is nothing wrong with a world where despite working all the hours under the sun you will never escape the fear and anxiety of what would happen if your fridge breaks or your landlord serves notice. We teach them that what should be theirs by right is theirs only through charity and benevolence.
1||Daniel Andrews under fire over delayed easing of restrictions after seven new cases reportedScott Morrison has criticised the Victorian government for delaying an announcement about the easing of coronavirus restrictions, saying Victoria’s public health systems “are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not”. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews on Sunday held off announcing opening dates for the retail and hospitality sectors pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs. It prompted criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. Morrison said the decision to delay the announcement – which he interpreted as a decision to keep businesses closed longer – was a “profound disappointment”. “At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave,” Morrison said in a statement “Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening.” The prime minister’s statement was another step in an increasingly bitter dispute between the Victorian and federal governments. In a heated press conference earlier on Sunday, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. “We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs,” Andrews said. “We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and [there] will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. “This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there … is more virus there than we think.” However, Andrews did announce a further easing of restrictions for regional Victoria. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday, the same number as on Saturday. Six of those were linked to other known cases in the outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs while the seventh was a healthcare worker with no known links. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 tests are among the 1,000 tests still awaiting results on Sunday. Andrews said it would be irresponsible to announce an easing of restrictions until those test results had been received and analysed, to determine whether any new cases were linked to the outbreak or if there were signs of untraced community transmission. That could take 24 hours, and Andrews said he would then be able to announce changes on Monday or Tuesday. After 60 minutes of questioning, he said that he still anticipated that restrictions would be eased by 1 November, as slated last week. “I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt,” he said. “November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening up before then.” Asked by a reporter why he did not say that at the start of the press conference, Andrews sighed and said he’d had a late night and early morning discussing the northern suburbs outbreak. From midnight on Sunday, greater Shepparton, which had been held back due to an outbreak, will be under the same rules as the rest of the regions. From midnight on Tuesday, 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funeral; 20 an outdoor religious service; and gyms and indoor pools will reopen to a maximum of 20 participants. Children’s indoor non-contact community sport will also be allowed to resume. Andrews had been foreshadowing a Sunday announcement for a week and said, as recently as Friday that the northern suburbs outbreak would not delay the “significant” easing of restrictions from Sunday. On Saturday he warned that he would “caution people from banking” on that announcement. The timeline for easing restrictions in Victoria has changed several times. In early September the government released a roadmap for reopening, which included a plan to lift Melbourne out of lockdown on 26 October provided the rolling 14-day average was fewer than five cases per day, and there had been no more than three mystery cases in the proceeding 14 days. The rolling average on Sunday was 4.6, and there have been seven mystery cases. Then in early October, Andrews brought forward the easing of restrictions to 19 October. On 18 October, he announced a limited easing of restrictions and promised a further easing from 1 November, with some changes to be outlined from 25 October. The shifting goalposts have caused frustration among some Victorians. At the press conference, Andrews rejected suggestions that the Victorian public had been on a rollercoaster of announcements. Asked if he had misled the public, he said “no”. The Business Council of Australia said it was “at a loss” to understand why Victoria was unable to reopen, when businesses in New South Wales have been able to operate with low numbers of locally-acquired cases for months. New South Wales recorded no new locally acquired cases on Sunday, for the third day in a row. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. “Victorians cannot hang on week to week,” the Business Council CEO, Jennifer Westacott, said. “People are at a financial and mental breaking point.” Earlier on Sunday, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said the only reason the Victorian government would not open up “is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system”. Andrews, the Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, and Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, all separately rejected that suggestion, saying that the number of tests conducted in connection to the northern suburbs outbreak, with up to 400 primary and secondary contacts identified and isolated, showed the system was working well. Andrews refused to comment on a comment from his recently departed health minister, Jenny Mikakos, who tweeted: “The set reopening is gradual and safe so any delay is unnecessary. It’s paralysis in decision-making.” “I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them,” Andrews said. “That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything.” Sutton said none of those criticising Victoria’s public health response were privy to all of the the health data. “None of them are in the tent,” he said.
2||Hopes for Kylie Moore-Gilbert after detained academic moved out of Iran's Qarchak prisonDetained British-Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert has reportedly been moved from Iran’s Qarchak prison, along with all of her belongings, but it is not known to where she has been taken. Family and friends who have been campaigning for her release hope the move is a positive sign, but there is no official word from the Iranian government. A Cambridge-educated Middle East scholar, Moore-Gilbert has served just over two years of a 10-year sentence for espionage. She was arrested in Tehran in September 2018 and convicted in a secret trial. No evidence of Moore-Gilbert’s alleged crimes has ever been publicly presented. She has denied the allegations against her and the Australian government rejects them as baseless and politically motivated. The Iranian Association of Human Rights Activists reported Moore-Gilbert was moved on Saturday – along with all her possessions – to an unknown place. That move came 11 days after she was shifted, along with 15 other political prisoners, to Ward Eight of Qarchak prison, formerly known as the Mothers’ Ward. Qarchak has been trying to quash an outbreak of novel coronavirus among inmates and guards at the prison. Iran, more widely, is suffering under a surging third wave of infections, with nearly 600 new cases and more than 300 deaths in the last 24 hours. Moore-Gilbert’s health has been poor in detention and she has had difficulty getting food that she can tolerate. But sources with knowledge of Iranian detention cases are cautiously hopeful the move could be good news in Moore-Gilbert’s case. “Obviously one hopes the move might be good news for Kylie, but we don’t know yet,” said Elaine Pearson, Australia director of Human Rights Watch. “Kylie has been detained for more than two years now, and she has endured very difficult conditions including extreme isolation. The Australian government should press forcefully and consistently for Kylie’s release and safe return to Australia.” Moore-Gilbert spent the first 22 months of her incarceration in Tehran’s Evin prison, including months in solitary confinement, before being moved to the desert prison Qarchak, widely regarded as the worst women’s prison in Iran, and known as a site of extrajudicial killings, torture and other rights violations. Sources have told the Guardian Moore-Gilbert was closely watched inside Qarchak – with two fellow prisoners assigned to follow her – restricting her contact with the outside world. Australia’s ambassador to Iran, Lyndall Sachs, has met with Moore-Gilbert in Qarchak and urged more regular consular access. In letters smuggled out of prison, Moore-Gilbert revealed she had rejected an offer to spy on behalf of Tehran in exchange for her freedom, but said she felt “abandoned and forgotten”. In a rare phone call earlier this year she said couldn’t eat anything in Qarchak: “I feel so very hopeless … I am so depressed.” On Friday, Human Rights Watch said Iranian judiciary authorities were prosecuting human rights defenders for reporting abuse inside detention, despite the presidential cabinet ordering its justice minister investigate claims of torture against an environmental conservationist, Niloufar Bayani. There has been no report. Born in Bathurst, New South Wales, Moore-Gilbert is a lecturer in Islamic Studies at the University of Melbourne. She hold both British and Australian citizenship, but was travelling on her Australian passport. She was arrested in September 2018 after attending an academic conference in Qom. Fellow conference delegates and an interview subject for her academic work flagged her as “suspicious” to Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, who arrested her at Tehran airport as she prepared to fly out of the country. Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said their efforts to secure Moore-Gilbert’s release were “an absolute priority”. “We remain focused on her health, wellbeing and safety,” a spokeswoman said. “We do not accept the charges upon which Dr Moore-Gilbert was convicted, and want to see her returned to Australia as soon as possible. Our Ambassador in Tehran has regular consular access to Dr Moore-Gilbert.”
1||Regional Victoria ‘step 3’ coronavirus roadmap restrictions and lockdown rules explainedRegional Victoria has consistently outperformed its metropolitan counterpart in suppressing the Covid-19 virus and as such is subject to significantly fewer restrictions. Currently, it is in the third step of the state’s roadmap out of lockdown allowing for a significant reopening of the retail and hospitality industries. On 19 October, premier Daniel Andrews announced some easing of restrictions, increasing capacity in restaurants and cafes as well as allowing more guests to enter private homes. Further changes were announced on 25 October. Here are the main things you need to know about the step three restrictions in regional Victoria: When can I leave my house? The only restriction on leaving home is that you cannot travel into areas with higher restrictions, which includes metropolitan Melbourne. Otherwise, there are no restrictions on reasons for leaving your house or on where you go within the state. People can gather in groups of up to 10 people outdoors. What are the rules for wearing masks? People must still wear a mask or covering whenever leaving the house. There are a few exceptions. People with a medical reason are exempt, as are children younger than 12. Those who have a professional reason “or if it’s just not practical, like when running” are also exempt, but those people will still be expected to carry a face covering at all times “to wear when you can”. In schools, teachers will not need to wear a face covering while teaching, but students attending classes will. Both teachers and students will need to wear a mask on the way to and from school. Andrews said “common sense” would guide how the new rules are enforced. People would not be required to wear one when it was impractical, such as when exercising or visiting a bank. Breaking the rules is punishable with a $200 fine. Can I have visitors to my house? Can I see my partner? Whereas previously regional Victoria operated under the “household bubble”system, this was replaced from 19 October. You can now have up to two people visit you at home once a day. These do not have to be the same people each time and the two people can come from separate households. Infants under 12 months are not included, and other children or dependents can come if they cannot be left unattended or cared for by another. There is no time limit on how long they can visit but you can only have a single visitation each day. Can I now dine-in at a restaurant or cafe? Hospitality businesses are now able to serve up to 70 people outdoors with a minimum of one person per two square meters. From 19 October, indoor spaces are allowed to operate with up to 10 people per distinct space, with a minimum of four square meters per person and no more than 40 indoor customers total. Tables must be spaced at least 1.5m apart, cleaned after every customer and the details of all patrons must be kept. Businesses must continue to ensure people from metropolitan Melbourne do not eat-in. Will the shops be open? Yes, all shops can open. Hairdressers, tattoo parlours and beauty servers are also open, but only where a mask can be worn for the duration of the service. What about other businesses and services? Similar to dining out, entertainment venues and events that are predominantly outdoors are now open. Real estate inspections are still by appointment only, but outdoor auctions can return, subject to gathering limits. Libraries and toy libraries can open for up to 20 people indoors, but no more than 10 people can gather in a single space, and there must be at least four square meters per person. Licensed tourism services that use open-air vehicles only are also now allowed to operate. A vehicle is considered an open-air if at least two sides are open to airflow at all times. What are the rules for exercise? All community sports have resumed for children in regional Victoria, but only non-contact sports are allowed for adults outdoors, within gather and density limits. Outdoor exercise is also now allowed for groups of up to 10 people. Outdoor skateparks have also opened. From 11.59pm on 27 October, indoor gyms will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with minimum space requirements in place. Children’s indoor non-contact community sports will also be allowed to resume, provided participants can remain 1.5m apart. Outdoor pools are open and from 19 October indoor swimming pools can open exclusively for those aged 18 and under. One parent or guardian is allowed per child to supervise, and swimming classes can resume. Indoor pools can also open for one-on-one hydrotherapy sessions with a limit of 10 people in the pool at one time. From midnight on 27 October, indoor pools will be open to up to 20 people. What is happening with schools? All students in regional Victoria will now be expected to return to onsite learning. The return will be staggered and will apply when term four begins during the week of 12 October. Childcare centres remain open while adult education remains restricted, with students encouraged to learn from home if they can. What happens to weddings, funerals or religious services? Weddings can now have up to 10 people, including the couple, two witnesses and a celebrant. Funerals are now allowed to have up to 20 people, not including children under 12 months and people required to conduct the funeral. From 28 October, up to 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funerals. Outdoor religious gatherings are allowed for up to 20 people plus one faith leader. This includes ceremonies, but no sharing of food, drink or utensils is allowed. From Wednesday up to 20 people plus one faith leader will be allowed to attend a religious gathering indoors, and up to 50 will be allowed to attend outdoor religious gatherings. Where can I travel? Restrictions on travel within regional Victoria have been eased, with people now allowed to travel within the state, with the exception of areas with higher restrictions. In this case, that means everywhere except metropolitan Melbourne. Tourist accommodation is open, but exclusively for regional Victorians travelling and holidaying within regional Victoria. Caps and density limits still apply, however. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
1||Australian production of non-protein Covid-19 vaccine may take an extra year, minister saysIt could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine if a non-protein-based version proves safe and effective, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews said CSL would be able to immediately start making a protein-based vaccine, but “significant work” would be required if it was another type based on mRNA, or messenger ribonucleic acid. Vaccines traditionally introduce proteins into the body to provoke the immunity system into responding but if an mRNA vaccine of the kind being developed by US company Moderna is approved it would be the first of its type, experts say. During an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday, Andrews was pressed to give a timeframe to get production up and running in Australia if an mRNA vaccine was approved. “I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe,” she said. “But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range.” Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades – with some of that work already under way. The rollout of a successful vaccine has implications for opening international borders and restoring a sense of normality to social and economic activity in Australia. The federal budget, released earlier this month, assumed that a population-wide Australian Covid-19 vaccination program would be “fully in place by late 2021”, with social distancing restrictions continuing until a vaccine was available. The health minister, Greg Hunt, moved to assure people later on Sunday that Australia was “very strongly placed” when it came to securing access to and producing vaccines. “We in a strong position, we’re progressing, there’s never a guarantee – but what we know is that we’ve been exceptionally cautious in relation to vaccines and each day the evidence is stronger and the proximity to distribution of that treatment is closer,” Hunt told reporters in Canberra. Hunt said Andrews had been asked a hypothetical question about non-protein vaccines and was “absolutely right that some of the mRNA ones will take longer”. But he said the protein-based vaccine candidate being developed by AstraZeneca and the University of Oxford remained “on track for first quarter [2021] commencement and significant rollout during the course of the year [2021]”. “So our timeframes are unchanged. On the hypothetical if there were no protein-based vaccine, Minister Andrews was 100% correct. But when you take away that hypothetical, when we look at the board reality, Australia is on track for first quarter commencement of that rollout.” Hunt said Australia had reached a deal to access 33.8m units of the Oxford and AstraZeneca vaccine, including 3.8m units brought in from overseas in early 2021, subject to approvals in the UK and Australia. He said Australian manufacturing would able to commence and be well under way in the first quarter of 2021. Hunt said CSL was also aiming to make sure that the vaccine developed by the University of Queensland was “available during the course of next year – about the middle of the year”. He said there were contracts for 51m units of the UQ vaccine to be manufactured in Australia throughout 2021. He said the government was also “highly advanced” in investigating other vaccine candidates, and had joined the Covax international buying facility.
1||Storm cuts power in Queensland as thunderstorm asthma alerts issued for southern NSW and CanberraAlmost 29,000 homes in south-east Queensland have been left without power due to wild thunderstorms. Large hailstones, damaging winds and heavy rain hit the region on Sunday afternoon. Electricity provider Energex reported 28,898 outages around 3pm (AEST), with about 7,000 of those in Brisbane. Social media photos have shown ice cube-sized hail in the city’s northern suburbs. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe weather warning for Redland City, parts of Ipswich, Logan, Scenic Rim, Lockyer Valley, Gold Coast, Brisbane City and Moreton Bay Council areas. Earlier this weekend, thunderstorm asthma alerts were issued for the Australian Capital Territory and New South Wales’s nearby Murrumbidgee region. The Bureau of Meteorology said a low-pressure trough and strong cold front would continue to cross NSW on Sunday, reaching the north-east of the state by evening and leaving significantly cooler conditions in its wake. A new high-pressure system was forecast to strengthen south of Tasmania early this week, with the potential to maintain showery conditions across eastern areas for a number of days. Health authorities warned that severe thunderstorms, combined with existing elevated pollen levels, could create a situation conducive to a thunderstorm asthma event. “Not all thunderstorms produce an asthma event, and thunderstorm asthma is a rare event,” ACT Health said in a statement. “However, people who suffer from hay fever or asthma are encouraged to be vigilant over the weekend for any worsening of their condition. Where possible avoid being outside during a thunderstorm – especially in the wind gusts that come before the storm. Go inside and close your doors and windows. If you have your air conditioning on, turn it on to recirculate.” The NSW public health unit director, Tracey Oakman, issued a thunderstorm asthma alert for the Murrumbidgee local health district area for the entire weekend. “If you know you have asthma, carry your asthma puffer with you at all times and try to stay indoors with the windows and doors closed during the storm period,” the NSW Health statement said. “Be aware that thunderstorm asthma can also affect people who have not had asthma before.” Ten deaths were attributed to a thunderstorm asthma event in Melbourne in November 2016 and 14,000 people were taken to hospital with breathing difficulties. A sheep graziers’ warning was also in force for the NSW south coast, southern tablelands, Snowy Mountains and parts of the Illawarra, south-west slopes, Riverina and Australian Capital Territory. And in Victoria, the north-central, south-west and central districts and parts of the west and South Gippsland and East Gippsland areas were subject to the same warning. The BoM said cold temperatures, showers and strong winds could cause losses of sheep and lambs on Sunday. A gale warning was in force for the Hunter and Sydney coastal areas on Sunday and a minor flood warning was in place for the Murray River around Jingellic. In Victoria there were also flood warnings for the Bunyip and Kiewa rivers and Dandenong Creek.
20||Investors fear there'll be no bright post-Covid dawn for oil majorsThe oil market may have heaved itself out of the darkness of “Black April” but investors are far from convinced that major oil companies will walk away unscathed from the coronavirus pandemic. Royal Dutch Shell and BP will both face investors this week with quarterly financial results that will deliver profits well below those achieved a year ago, against a backdrop of tumbling share prices and rising Covid infections across major economies. On Tuesday, BP is expected to report an underlying loss of $120m for the last quarter, according to analysts’ estimates. This would be a major improvement on its underlying loss of $6.7bn in the second quarter, following heavy writedowns on the company’s exploration business, but would still be well below the $2.3bn third-quarter profit reported in 2019. BP’s announcement will come days after its share price fell below 200p a share for the first time since 1994, and months after the company cut its dividend for the first time since the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and set out plans to cut 10,000 jobs. In the same week, Shell is expected to reveal a modest underlying profit, of $146m, for the third quarter, according to analysts, after plunging to a loss of $18.4bn for the second quarter. This is still a fraction of the $4.76bn profit recorded in the same quarter last year, and follows the company’s decision to cut 9,000 jobs and reduce the dividend for the first time since the second world war. This trend is expected to be followed across the world’s oil companies, tracking the fragile and uncertain recovery of global oil markets amid a second wave of coronavirus infections. The price of oil reached an average of $43 a barrel in the third quarter – stronger than the average of $30 a barrel in the second quarter, when US oil prices fell below zero for the first time in April – but still well below the $62 a barrel price that prevailed in the third quarter a year ago. Oil industry investors may have already weathered the darkest days of the pandemic, but in recent months it seems to have dawned on many that there is a very long road ahead – and that a full oil industry recovery may never happen. Many experts believe that the heavy hit to demand for oil during the pandemic may mean it is years before market prices recover to $50 a barrel. BP’s own global energy forecasts suggest that oil demand may never recover from the impact of coronavirus on the global transport industry, heralding a sooner-than-expected existential decline for fossil fuels. The company’s energy outlook report seemed to underline the importance of BP’s plans to reduce production of oil and gas by 40% over the next decade while investing billions in renewable energy to transform it from oil major to modern energy company. But in investors’ eyes the oil industry’s battered balance sheets don’t look in good shape for fuelling a green energy transition. BP’s shares have languished at 25- year lows for the past month, taking its £41bn market cap to less than a third of what it was a decade ago, following its failed bid to move “beyond petroleum” in the early 2000s. The company’s market value has been topped by offshore wind developer Ørsted, once known as Danish state oil company Dong Energy, which has a market valuation of £49.6bn on the Copenhagen exchange. Its valuation has doubled in the past two years after it switched from fossil fuel investments to renewable energy a decade ago. Ørsted is a stark reminder of what might have been possible for other oil companies had they seized the opportunity to invest in the nascent renewables industry, and may prove a formidable rival for the favour of investors, too.
2||Test-and-trace chief Dido Harding should quit, says senior ToryBaroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the government’s much-criticised test-and-trace programme, should be removed and replaced, a senior Conservative MP has said. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. He warned of a “vacuum of leadership in test and trace, which is destroying public confidence and compliance”, it was reported on Saturday evening. He went on to criticise the handling of calls and data in a “spaghetti of command and control” at the top of the organisation. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. “Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. “The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace,” he wrote in the Sunday Telegraph. His sharp criticism came as it was reported that officials on the Downing Street Covid-19 taskforce have been asked to consider cutting the self-isolation quarantine period for those infected from 14 days to between seven and 10 days. After a week in social isolation, people testing positive could be offered a second test, with the quarantine period ending as soon as a negative result is declared. The proposal came after the prime minister was apparently told that 14 days’ isolation is a major barrier to widespread support for the rules.
29||Azed crossword 2,524Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.
29||Speedy crossword No 1,308
2||Colombia due to surpass 1m cases; arrests made at London anti-lockdown protest – as it happenedWe’ll be closing down this blog shortly, as the Sydney team get a new one up and running. Thanks to everyone who wrote in with tips and suggestions for coverage. In the meantime, here’s a quick summary of recent key developments: Several European countries have reported record daily increases in coronavirus cases, including Italy, Greece, Austria, Luxembourg and France. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. The government is facing a legal battle with academics over its “unlawful” decision to reopen universities for face-to-face teaching last month. The UK’s largest academic union is seeking a judicial review of the government’s decision to ignore advice from its own Sage committee of experts to move all non-essential university and college teaching online in September. In a pre-action letter, sent to the education secretary Gavin Williamson and shared with the Observer, the University and College Union (UCU) argues the government’s failure to direct universities to move to online teaching this term was unlawful, unfair, unjust and irrational. The proportion of younger adults in the UK who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a new poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer shows the proportion of 18- to 34-year-olds who admit breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35- to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. Interesting Reuters update from Colombia amid global anticipation for a vaccine: As scientists around the world race to find a coronavirus inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine which proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme which offers 21 vaccines to everyone in the South American nation - among the region’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not just Colombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country distributes about 23 million doses per year. Colombia has already committed $213 million to the global COVAX initiative, guaranteeing COVID-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. In Australia, Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. This is a small figure on a global scale, but to residents of Melbourne it is worryingly high. Melbourne has been under stay-at-home orders for 109 days and the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to announce an easing of restrictions today. It comes as the 14-day rolling average of new cases in the city fell below the target of five cases per day, to 4.6. However, Andrews said on Saturday that the easing of restrictions could be in doubt because of a new outbreak in the city’s northern suburbs. Labour is ramping up the pressure on the UK government to U-turn and extend free school meal provision over the holidays, warning it will bring the motion back to parliament if ministers do not reverse their position before Christmas. Shadow education secretary Kate Green called on the prime minister to meet with the taskforce set up by footballer Marcus Rashford “as a matter of urgency” to discuss its proposals for ending child poverty. “There is still time to change approach, but the Government must act quickly. If you change your policy now, we can ensure that no child goes to bed hungry on Christmas Day,” Green wrote in a letter to education secretary Gavin Williamson. “Labour will not give up on the fight to ensure that no child goes to bed hungry, and if you do not change course we will bring this issue back to the House of Commons before Christmas.” Australians have become accustomed to the daily announcements of new Covid-19 cases. Although the majority of those cases – bar Victoria – have come through returning travellers from overseas, little has been known about Covid-positive cases that have passed through hotel quarantine, and how governments are tracking the origins of these cases. But data provided to Guardian Australia by three states – New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia – offers some important insights into Covid-positive returning travellers. The states each provided data from 29 March, when the travel restrictions were introduced, to 19 October, revealing that they were indeed monitoring countries-of-origin where returning travellers may have contracted the virus. Data from NSW Health shows the majority of 873 Covid-positive travellers who arrived in the state were returning Australian nationals. Melissa Davey with the full report here: Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police, some mounted on horseback, fired teargas and beat up the protesters, who had set up barricades along the roads using skips, boulders and burning tyres, while others set a national flag ablaze, according to an AFP photographer. A police source who asked not to be identified told AFP that the demonstration – demanding the holding of local government elections – “resulted in barricades and acts of vandalism”. Municipal elections, which had been scheduled for this year, have been postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic. “Those were acts of rioting, in a flagrant violation of (new pandemic restrictions), which do not allow street gatherings of more than five people,” he said. UK paediatricians have published an open letter calling on the government to extend provision of free school meals until at least Easter 2021 – you can read it here: The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. It took the country of 10.7 million seven months to reach 1,000 deaths after the first reported case. The number of patients in a serious state grew to 772 as of Friday, up from 438 two weeks ago. Hospitals were treating 5,314 people with coronavirus in total. Here are the main developments from over the last few hours: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. Net approval of the UK government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has fallen to a record low of -21%, a poll by Opinium shows. Public health officials and contractors in England have barely used check-in data from millions of people who have visited cafes, pubs and restaurants, the Guardian has learned. As a legal condition introduced last month, venues are obliged to record customer details in an effort to contain the spread of Covid-19, but the government’s hamstrung test-and-trace scheme has appeared unable to cope with the swiftly rising number of coronavirus cases. Mattha Busby reports here: France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. A further 138 people have died, taking the toll to 34,645. The Welsh first minister has said the government will be “reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets”, amid anger over a ban on selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. A petition to reverse the ban has gathered more than 30,000 signatures. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. Mark Drakeford has said the restriction is in place as a “matter of fairness” to non-essential shops that have been ordered to close. The US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections above 100,000 a day, health experts have warned, just as a presidential campaign with the pandemic as its core issue enters its final week. In a further blow to Donald Trump’s hopes of keeping the White House, the US death toll from Covid-19 will pass 225,000 by early this week, bringing extra scrutiny to the president’s repeated but evidently false claims that the crisis is “rounding the turn”. Richard Luscombe has the story here: Spain’s cabinet will meet on Sunday morning to discuss announcing a national state of emergency, the government announced on Saturday. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez “has called an extraordinary cabinet meeting at 10am to study the conditions for a new state of emergency,” it said, saying such a proposal had been “positively welcomed by most of Spain’s autonomous communities, who had requested it”. The meeting comes just days after Spain registered more than one million virus cases, becoming the sixth country in the world to pass the grim milestone – and the first in the European Union. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. Five further deaths were also reported, taking the country’s toll to 564. The previous highest increase in cases was on Thursday, when 882 cases were reported. New measures were announced on Thursday, including a 12.30am-5am curfew in areas with high numbers of infections which comes into force tonight. Face masks are now compulsory in outdoor spaces as well as indoors. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London, for offences including breaching coronavirus regulations, assaulting an emergency service worker, violent disorder and for being already wanted. Three officers suffered minor injuries, the force said. Commander Ade Adelekan, the Met’s gold commander for the protest, said: “Organisers did not take reasonable steps to keep protesters safe which then voided their risk assessment. At this point, officers then took action to disperse crowds in the interests of public safety. “I am grateful that the vast majority of people listened to officers and quickly left the area. Frustratingly, a small minority became obstructive, deliberately ignoring officers’ instructions and blocking Westminster Bridge.” Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The previous record daily increase in cases was on Thursday, when 595 infections were added to the tally. This brings the country’s total number of cases to 13,713, while the death toll stands at 144. It follow Friday’s announcement of new measures to tackle the virus’s resurgence, including a curfew between 11 and 6pm. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Last Saturday, 1,747 cases were reported – which was also a record at the time. The total confirmed cases in Austria rose to 79,770 cases, There are currently 25,825 active cases in the country, according to Metropole. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, entered self-isolation on Saturday after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Tebboune, who is 74, has been advised by medical staff to isolate for five days. Algeria has officially recorded 55,630 coronavirus cases and 1,897 deaths so far. Jason Rodrigues with the latest from the anti-lockdown protest at Westminster Bridge New coronavirus measures have been announced in Brussels. From 26 October, masks will be compulsory throughout the country, while cultural venues (museums, galleries) and sports facilities will be closed. Other measures include shops closing at 8pm, and takeaways operating until 10pm. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a nationwide lockdown like the one during spring. Several regions have imposed overnight curfews. It follows clashes between protesters and police in Naples late on Friday night after a nighttime curfew was ordered in the Campania region. Arrests have been made on the anti lockdown demonstration in London after a group of protesters decided not to disperse and instead carried on a march from Trafalgar Square to Westminster Bridge. Police blocked the path of protesters at the north end of the bridge, leading to scuffles as some tried to carry on marching and calls went up from some to rush the police lines. The Guardian saw police making at least three arrests. One group of protesters tried to stage a sit down protest on the bridge. They were being forced south by a line of police. Damien Gayle with a video from London’s anti-lockdown protest, which has been ordered to disperse: Jason Rodrigues also reports that there’s been “at least one arrest” by Westminster Bridge: There have been a further 23,012 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases recorded in the UK, according to government data. This compares with 20,530 new cases registered on Friday. A total of 854,010 people have tested positive. A further 174 deaths within 28 days of a positive test were reported on Saturday, bringing the total to 44,571. There were 224 deaths on Friday. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is mainland China’s first local case since 14 October, when one was reported in Qingdao. No new cases have been found in Xinjiang since 15 August, when a cluster of infections were reported. The case was identified after the patient, a 17-year-old woman, was tested during a regular inspection. She has been transferred to a hospital in the city and all close contacts have been isolated. Police have called time on the anti-lockdown protest in London, where several thousand people remain in Trafalgar Square after a long march through the city. In a tweet posted on a Metropolitan police account, the force said: “The protest under the name of ‘Stop The New Normal’ have failed to comply with the terms of their risk assessment, government guidelines and they are not maintaining social distancing. “The officer in charge has now determined their protest is no longer exempt from the regulations and is an illegal gathering. “We are now telling those participating in this protest to leave. Officers will be engaging with crowds and informing them of this development. “By leaving now, you can keep yourself safe and avoid any enforcement action being taken by officers.” The square was flooded with police asking people to leave soon after. The announcement came at the end of a long and noisy protest march through the city. Louise Creffield, founder of Save Our Rights UK, who organised the protest said: “We’re really pleased, the turnout was phenomenal and we’ve managed to get away with no one being injured or arrested. “It’s really good to be able to have a voice, and this is the only way we get it.” Among the protesters taking part was Chloe Toop, 32, a schoolteacher. “I’m doing it for the next generation, fighting for them,” she said. She said she was anxious about young people “not having a life that I have growing up, not being able to go on holiday or to festivals”. “Kids are now scared to go and meet each other, hug each other. Social interaction is so important,” she said. Hello, Clea Skopeliti taking over the blog for the next few hours. My Twitter DMs are open for any suggestions for global coverage, or you can drop me an email. Thanks in advance! I will shortly be handing over the blog to my colleague. Below are the latest updates. Welsh government called on to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit country tried to tackle its third wave of infections. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Thousands of people have signed a petition calling on the Welsh government to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown in Wales. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. Supplies for the “essential upkeep, maintenance and functioning of the household” - such as batteries, lightbulbs and rubber gloves - can be sold during the lockdown. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme that offers 21 vaccines to all Colombians, among the South America’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, the secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not onlyColombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country delivers about 23 million vaccinations a year. Colombia has already committed $213m to the global Covax initiative, guaranteeing Covid-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. Colombia’s cases have climbed steadily despite more than five months of a gradually loosened lockdown. The death toll is set to top 30,000 people over the weekend. Chile has identified more than 500,000 coronavirus cases since the outbreak began in March, the health ministry said on Saturday. The ministry said 500,542 Chileans were now confirmed to have suffered from the virus, including 1,631 cases added in the past day and 48 deaths, taking fatalities to a total of 13,892. Active cases are at a record low of 9,900, it added. Chile, which was among the worst-hit countries in July, ranking only behind Qatar globally for per capita cases , has gradually eased its lockdown over the past two months. Restaurants and bars have opened with limited capacity, office workers are returning and some schools have reopened. Chileans will vote on Sunday in a referendum on whether to replace the country’s Pinochet-era constitution. The charter, drawn up by a key lieutenant of the military leader Augusto Pinochet in 1980, is blamed for segmenting pension, health and education provisions and entrenching inequality. The organiser of a party attended by more than 50 people has been handed a £10,000 fine for “blatant disregard” of Covid-19 regulations. Police were called to a flat in Simpson Street, Angel Meadows, Manchester, shortly after 11.20 pm (BST) on Friday. Officers found DJ mixing decks, speakers, a buffet and about 50 people in attendance, Greater Manchester Police said. The force said the party was closed down and the organiser given a £10,000 fixed penalty notice for breaching coronavirus legislation, one of the first issued since Greater Manchester entered tier 3 restrictions. A further 1,324 people have tested positive for coronavirus in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 41,577. Public Health Wales said 16 people with Covid-19 had died, bringing the total number of deaths to 1,772. The government is set to deliver £75m in grants to 35 of the country’s top cultural organisations and venues, from the Old Vic to Shakespeare’s Globe. It is the latest tranche of money to be distributed from the government’s £1.57bn culture recovery fund. These grants are the largest to have come from the package to date and will go to bodies which require between £1m and £3m. Money was allocated based on whether applicants provided jobs, supported the wider community and engaged with the public through innovative means during the pandemic. More than £52m – 70% of the total awarded in this round - will go to organisations outside London. The culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, said: “As part of our unprecedented £1.57bn rescue fund, today we’re saving British cultural icons with large grants of up to £3m - from Shakespeare’s Globe to the Sheffield Crucible. The fund has also distributed £188m to the devolved administrations - with £97m for Scotland, £59m for Wales and £33m for Northern Ireland. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit nation battled the third wave. Latest officials figures showed coronavirus had killed 32,320 Iranians and infected 562,705, with 5,814 new cases and 335 fatalities in the previous 24 hours. Taking a swipe at arch-foe the United States, Khamenei said Iran must enforce curbs better and end disputes between institutions over the pandemic. Thanks, everyone for following the blog and for your emails. Please do get in touch if you have any news tips or want to share any information from where you are. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com Spanish regions are urging the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as the country battles a resurgent coronavirus epidemic. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. “I would say with almost total certainty there will be one. But it has not officially been called yet,” a source from the Spanish government told Reuters. While many regions favour some form of curfew, the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Thousands of anti-lockdown protesters have begun a noisy march through central London. After gathering at Speakers’ Corner in Hyde Park, crowds began to walk down Oxford Street in the direction of Oxford Circus. Before leaving, they heard from Piers Corbyn, the brother of the former Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who exhorted followers to “stop new normal, save lives”. Louise Creffield, the founder of Save Our Rights UK, one of the groups behind the protest, told the crowd: “Today we are standing in our power and we are not abiding by their rules. “It doesn’t matter what they say, it doesn’t matter what threats they bring, it doesn’t matter if they try and intimidate us, we are not going to accept it, because we don’t abide by their rules. We don’t listen because we do not consent.” As they marched down Oxford Street, protesters chanted for freedom and told passersby to take off their masks. Others played the drums, blew whistles and played music on portable sound systems. Here are the latest developments in the coronavirus crisis: More than 1.1 million dead The virus has claimed at least 1,145,847 lives worldwide since it first emerged in China late last year, according to an AFP tally based on official sources. At least 42,262,299 cases have been registered across the globe. The US is the worst-affected country with 223,998 deaths, followed by Brazil with 156,471, India with 117,956, Mexico with 88,312 and Britain with 44,571. WHO warning The WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. Germany deaths top 10,000 The Robert Koch Institute, a federal government agency, has recorded a total of 10,003 coronavirus deaths in Germany, where 14,714 new cases have also been diagnosed in the last 24 hours, a record figure. Lothar Wieler, the president of the institute’s disease control authority, said the country was facing a very serious situation. The chancellor, Angela Merkel, told citizens in a weekly video podcast that “the order of the day is to reduce contacts, to meet as few people as possible”. New daily record cases in US Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Poland president tests positive Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Naples clashes Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late on Friday during a demonstration against restrictions in the southern Italian city. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as a curfew in the Campania region started at 11:00 pm. Some protesterslit smoke bombs. Grants for UK arts institutions The British government has announced a £75m rescue package to save 35 cultural institutions hit by the pandemic, including London’s Globe Old Vic theatres. New coronavirus restrictions are to take effect in Madrid on Saturday as the Spanish government weighs declaring a national state of emergency to allow curfews to be imposed. Days after the country registered more than a million cases of Covid-19, the regions - which are responsible for managing public healthcare - have put pressure on the government to give them legal right to impose tighter restrictions. In practice, that would involve the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez declaring a national state of emergency that would enable the regions to impose curfews, a measure increasingly applied across Europe. Nine of Spain’s 17 autonomous regions have formally requested such a move, and a decision is expected to be at an extraordinary meeting of ministers on Sunday. The government can impose an emergency for up to a fortnight, but it would need parliamentary approval to extend it. Spain used the powers in spring to enforce one of the world’s tightest lockdowns, and a similar measure has been in force in Madrid for the past fortnight, although only to impose movement restrictions on the capital and various nearby towns. That measure ends at 4:47 pm (1447 GMT) on Saturday, when new restrictions drawn up by the regional authorities will come into force. Hello everyone. I am running the Guardian’s global live feed, updating you on all the latest coronavirus news from around the world. Please do feel free to contact me while I work today, providing any news tips or comments. Thanks Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and the World Health Organization (WHO), probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Istanbul’s mayor Ekrem Imamoğlu has been admitted to hospital after testing positive for coronavirus and suffering a fever. “Yesterday evening around 9pm I got a fever and with a temperature of 38 degrees. I came and spent the night in hospital,” he said in a video. “Now I am actually well. My fever is not bad. The process is continuing. There is nothing that can be viewed as negative in a medical sense.” Istanbul’s American hospital said in a statement that Imamoğlu, an opponent of the country’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, was admitted at 10pm (1900 GMT) after displaying symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection. It said he tested positive for coronavirus and that his treatment was continuing. Imamoğlu, from the secular Republican People’s party (CHP), was elected mayor in a re-run election in June 2019 in a blow to Erdoğan and his ruling AK party. There have since been sporadic tensions between his municipality and the central government, including disputes over fundraising and measures to combat the coronavirus pandemic in its early stages. Spanish regions have urged the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as coronavirus cases rise. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement, Reuters reported. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. Many regions favour some form of curfew, but the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Total cases rose to 1,046,132 on Friday, and the death toll is nearing 38,000. Catalonia said on Friday night that it would impose a curfew across the region, which includes Barcelona, as soon as the central government acted. The deputy Catalan leader, Pere Aragones, told a press conference: We need a decentralised state of emergency in which the Catalan government maintains all management capacity. The evolution is very worrying. Either we increase our efforts or Covid-19 increases. Some regions are considering imposing curfews by alternative means, such as going through regional courts, if the central government does not act. “We cannot wait any longer and we have to take steps forward,” Murcia’s regional president, Fernando López Miras, told the Spanish broadcaster TVE on Saturday. “If the central government does nothing, we will approve a curfew.” Malaysia reported 1,228 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, a record daily jump since the start of the pandemic, bringing the total number of cases to 25,742. The health ministry also said seven new deaths had also been recorded. Recent data has highlighted the struggle authorities around the world face in bringing the coronavirus pandemic under control, as the US reported 80,000 infections in a single day, France extended a curfew to two-thirds of its citizens and Germany’s death toll passed 10,000. The World Health Organization had earlier warned of an exponential rise in infections that threatened health systems’ ability to cope. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions to slow the resurgent virus’ spread. There were clashes overnight in Naples between Italian police and hundreds of protesters. Covid-19 has become a central election issue in the US ahead of the presidential election on 3 November. Donald Trump promised attendees at a Florida rally on Friday that “we’re going to quickly end this pandemic, this horrible plague”. Joe Biden matched Trump’s vow to make a vaccine available free to all who want it “whether or not you’re insured” and said the Republican incumbent has “given up” on controlling the outbreak. Johns Hopkins University had earlier reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Ministers may be forced to close schools in England to older children if coronavirus cases continue to increase at the current rate, a scientist has said. Prof Neil Ferguson, whose modelling led to the original lockdown in March, said the NHS would soon be unable to cope unless the spread of the disease was stemmed. He said there were 8,000 people in hospital with coronavirus - around a third of the peak earlier this year - and that numbers were continuing to rise. “It is a worrying situation,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “If the rate of growth continues as it is, it means that in a month’s time we will above that peak level in March and that is probably unsustainable. “We are in a critical time right now. The health system will not be able to cope with this rate of growth for much longer.” His warning came as South Yorkshire became the latest region to enter the tightest Tier 3 restrictions in England following Liverpool city region, Greater Manchester and Lancashire. Ferguson said it would be another week or two before it became clear whether the stricter measures would have an impact on case numbers. He said the restrictions on households mixing should have a significant effect, but that further action may also be needed. Bulgaria’s capital Sofia, home to about 2 million people, will close nightclubs and discos on Sunday for two weeks in an effort to contain a surge in coronavirus infections straining its health system. Speaking on national BTV television on Saturday, the city’s mayor, Yordanka Fankakova, also urged Sofia universities to switch to online education and appealed to businesses to let as many employees as possible work from home. “The situation is Sofia is becoming increasingly alarming. We have a new increase in infections and of people who need hospital treatment. This is straining the hospitals,” she said. Hello everyone and thanks for following the Guardian’s live feed today. I am keeping you up to date with all the news on coronavirus from around the globe. Please do email or message me if you want to share thoughts, comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com In the UK, Prof Neil Ferguson has said a decision about whether restrictions on households mixing should be relaxed over Christmas will be a “political judgment” . “It risks some transmission and there will be consequences of that. Some people will die because of getting infected on that day,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “But if it is only one or two days the impact is likely to be limited. So that is really a political judgment about the cost versus the benefits.” Indonesia reported 4,070 new coronavirus infections on Saturday, taking the total number of cases to 385,980, official data from the country’s Covid-19 taskforce shows. It also reported 128 new deaths, taking the total to 13,205, and 4,119 people recovered from the virus on Saturday, bringing the total to 309,219. Wales’ firebreak lockdown should bring the R value - the number of people each coronavirus case infects - below one, health minister Vaughan Gething has said. Gething told BBC Breakfast the 17-day period would be followed by a set of national measures to control the spread of Covid-19. Asked about economists warning that the lockdown could cost the Welsh economy more than £500m, Mr Gething said: “It’s not just about the direct costs within the firebreak, when we know there will be a challenge and loss in economic activity. “It’s about saving a much greater loss if we need to have longer, deeper, more sustained measures.” The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus and is subject to quarantine but is feeling good, presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country imposed new restrictions on Saturday to curb the spread of the illness. Poland faces a surge in the COVID-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of 13,632 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. Russia has reported 16,521 new coronavirus cases and 296 deaths in the past 24 hours, up from 17,340 new cases and 283 deaths the previous day. The Czech Republic reported 15,252 new cases for 23 October, the highest daily tally. Deaths rose by 126 to 1,971. In the UK, Sheffield city region mayor Dan Jarvis has said he will not hesitate to seek additional government support for South Yorkshire after the region entered the strictest Tier 3 coronavirus controls. Jarvis said a 41 million funding package had been secured after a “tough” process of negotiation and he had won an agreement from ministers to keep the situation under review. “The scale of the challenge is very significant,” he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “We are acutely aware of the pressures our NHS is under, not least because winter hasn’t bitten yet, so we are looking very carefully at what we need to do. “But if there is a requirement for more resource - whether it is economic support or it is other measures of assistance from the Government - I won’t hesitate to go back and ask for them.” Morning all from London, where it is 8am (BST). I am taking over the coronavirus live feed, bringing you all the latest information on the virus from around the world. Please do keep in touch with me while I work, by sharing any comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com That’s where I will leave you for now, but never fear Sarah Marsh is here to take you through the rest of the day’s news. The Czech Republic recorded 15,252 new Covid-19 cases on Friday, the country’s highest ever daily increase. It also recorded 126 deaths overnight, bringing the death toll to 1,971. The Czech Republic managed to escape the first wave of Covid-19 relatively unscathed, with case numbers rarely rising above 200 a day prior to September, but has been hit extremely hard as Europe battles a resurgence in the virus. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus but is feeling good, the presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country faces a surge in the Covid-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of more than 13,600 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role, but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. From Saturday, more restrictions to curb the spread of the virus are due to come into force in Poland, including a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. The health ministry reported 153 coronavirus deaths on Friday, taking the total toll to 4,172. The Conservative MP Ben Bradley has been accused of “stigmatisation of working-class families” over a tweet that labelled the free school meals programme as “20 cash direct to a crack den and a brothel”. Bradley replied to the post, which was by another user. The MP wrote: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did ...” The deputy leader of Labour, Angela Rayner, said: A Conservative MP has said that free school meals are effectively a direct payment to brothels and drug dealers. Notwithstanding the fact that the vouchers in summer could only be used to purchase food, this stigmatisation of working class families is disgraceful and disgusting. MPs rejected a campaign, started by the Manchester United player Marcus Rashford, to offer free school meals for local children during half-term. A vote on the measures was backed by Labour and made its way to parliament this week but it was defeated by 322 votes to 261. Bradley said the context of his tweet “wasn’t as clear as I’d thought it was”. Needless to say, I haven’t said what I’m being accused of, nor would I ever. I’m sorry if others get dragged into the fire. If you want a proper debate you have to accept that sometimes you get it wrong. Proper debate is important. You learn from it, you move on. We’re all human. More than a million people in South Yorkshire are now living under the strictest coronavirus rules in England after the region moved into the tier 3 controls as health officials battle to stem the spread of the disease. The region joined Liverpool city region, greater Manchester and Lancashire on the highest alert level for England with the new rules kicking in on Saturday at 12.01am. Meanwhile, talks were continuing between the government and local leaders in Nottinghamshire, with parts of the county expected to enter tier 3 on Wednesday. And the council in Warrington in Cheshire – where many residents commute to Manchester and Liverpool – has confirmed that it will be moving to tier 3 on Thursday. It means households will be banned from mixing except in parks and other open spaces while pubs and bars will have to close unless they serve meals. Three more areas – Coventry, Stoke and Slough – have now also moved into tier 2, the second highest alert level. It came as Wales began a two-week national “firebreak” at 6pm on Friday evening with a return to the “stay at home” message of the initial lockdown in March. In Scotland, the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has set out a five-tier series of controls that will come into force on 2 November if they are approved next week by the Holyrood parliament. In England, ministers have said they hope the latest measures will suppress the virus sufficiently to enable families to spend Christmas together. Thailand reported one more locally transmitted case of the coronavirus on Saturday, after confirming five domestic infections last week. The new patient is a 57-year-old French woman in the southern province of Surat Thani who tested positive for the virus a few days after she had completed a 14-day quarantine, the country’s coronavirus taskforce said. The patient’s husband and child tested negative, health officials said. Earlier in the week five people in the town of Mae Sot, on the border with Myanmar, tested positive, and in September a prison inmate in the Bangkok area tested positive. Before these six cases, Thailand reported its first confirmed local transmission in more than 100 days on 3 September. In total, Thailand has reported 3,731 cases of the virus and 59 deaths. Victoria’s Department of Health and Human Services has put out its daily press release, which gives us a bit more clarity on exactly where those seven cases came from. Six of today’s seven new cases are linked to known outbreaks and cases. One is a close contact already identified as part of the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak and was already in quarantine and one is a staff member from Estia Keilor. One is a student from East Preston Islamic College, one is a student from Croxton Special School, also linked to East Preston Islamic College through family and two are parents from East Preston Islamic College. The remaining case is a previously positive case that is currently under investigation. Of today’s seven new cases, there are three cases in Darebin, and single cases in Banyule, Greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. In his daily press conference, the premier, Daniel Andrews, suggested that one remaining case is being investigated as a possible reinfection, but is more likely to be someone who has recovered from Covid-19 but is still shedding the virus. The AFP has provided this wrap of the current Covid-19 situation in Europe: The European Union’s disease control agency has joined frantic health workers to sound the alarm over a coronavirus surge across the continent, as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in infections. Even countries that avoided severe outbreaks during Europe’s first wave of contagion in the spring have watched their case numbers surge, with Germany’s death toll passing 10,000 on Saturday. Governments have reintroduced containment measures to slow the renewed spread of the virus in nations that only weeks earlier believed they had triumphed over the crisis. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions, including overnight clashes in Italy’s hard-hit Naples between police and hundreds of protesters. After Spain became the first European country to officially record a million Covid-19 cases earlier in the week, the prime minister, Pedro Sanchez, said on Friday the real number of infections was likely more than triple that number. France followed Spain past the million-case milestone on Friday while Germany hit a fresh daily record of nearly 15,000 new cases, with health authorities urging the public to follow social distancing measures. Urgent new restrictions on daily life have come into effect in several nations, with France extending a curfew to cover 46 million people. Wales entered a full lockdown on Friday evening, a day after Ireland shut down, while Poland adopted a nationwide “red zone” lockdown mandating the partial closure of primary schools and restaurants. Only Sweden, which famously refused to lock down earlier this year, continued to stick to its guns despite a rise in cases. Belgium has seen one of Europe’s deadliest per capita outbreaks and has found itself suffering some of the highest second-wave infection rates in Europe. “We’re losing. We’re overwhelmed. We’re bitter,” said Benoit Misset, the head of the intensive care unit at the University hospital in the city of Liege, where several of his staff are having to work despite being positive – if asymptomatic – themselves. Queensland health officials are working to determine the strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Australian state’s Sunshine Coast. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland’s health department to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given [the cases] have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... [to] the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters. You can read the full story here: Hello, Matilda Boseley with you now to take you through the next few hours of Covid-related news. No new cases of Covid-19 in South Australia for today. A man who allegedly refused to comply with self-quarantine rules in Western Australia has been taken into custody and refused bail following a struggle with police, AAP reports. The 32-year-old New Zealander, who resides in Queensland, had been granted approval to enter WA to work and was issued a FIFO self-quarantine direction on 13 October when he arrived in Perth. He was required to remain in quarantine for 14 days at an East Perth apartment but police say that on Friday a compliance check found he was not there but in front of the complex. Police said it was further found he had been socialising with a 30-year-old man from the same company who was also quarantining in the complex. Both men were told they would be fined $1,000 for failing to comply with directions. But on leaving the complex police officers again found the 32-year-old man at the front of the property, WA police said in a statement on Saturday. The man was told he would be moved to a secure self-quarantine hotel for the remainder of his quarantine but he became “aggressive and hostile towards the officers”, refusing to comply with the direction, the statement said. “The man was arrested after a short struggle and was relocated to the Perth watch house.” He was charged with four counts of failing to comply with a direction and was refused bail to appear in the Perth magistrates court on Saturday. South Korea has reported 77 new cases of Covid-19, AP reports, mostly from the greater capital area where officials are scrambling to stem transmissions at hospitals and nursing homes. More location notifications from Victoria. I appreciate that they’re getting pretty speedy with getting these out now. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah will consult with other rulers to discuss proposals by the prime minister, Muhyiddin Yassin, the palace said on Saturday, after sources told Reuters the PM had asked the king to declare a state of emergency. Muhyiddin met with the king on Friday to present the emergency proposal that includes a suspension of parliament, sources said – a move the opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, denounced as an attempt by the PM to cling to power amid a power struggle. The proposal comes as Malaysia sees a resurgence in coronavirus cases and as Muhyiddin faces a leadership challenge from Anwar, who last month said he had majority support in parliament to oust the PM. The palace did not identify the recommendations made by Muhyiddin, and said the king would soon hold the consultation with other Malay rulers. “Al-Sultan Abdullah greatly understands the need for the country’s administration to continue to tackle the threat of Covid-19,” the palace said in a statement. The Council of Rulers, which groups the heads of Malaysia’s nine royal houses, has the power to withhold consent from any law and deliberate on questions of national policy. A source familiar with the matter said the rulers would meet on Sunday. Muhyiddin’s office has not commented on the emergency proposal. The government is scheduled to propose its 2021 budget on 6 November, and there have been questions over whether it can muster a majority in parliament for that. Defeat on the budget would count as a vote of no-confidence in Muhyiddin and could trigger an election. Emergency rule might mean the budget would not be put to a vote at that time. Western Australia has reported four new cases of Covid-19 overnight. The positive cases – all males aged between 30 and 57 – returned to Perth from overseas. They are all in hotel quarantine, and none are in hospital. This is probably a good time to summarise some of what we have learned so far today: The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19, and no new deaths. There are fewer than 100 active cases in the state for the first time since late June, as Victoria seeks to contain an outbreak in the northern suburbs of Melbourne before more restrictions ease. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country. Germany has reached 10,000 deaths from Covid-19. The country has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths.It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths. Authorities in Sri Lanka on Saturday closed at least two fishery harbours and many stalls after a surge of 609 cases linked to the country’s main fish market, AP reports. The government also widened the curfew in parts of Colombo. At least 11 villages were isolated in the densely populated Western province, which includes the capital. Health authorities on Wednesday temporarily closed the fish market on Colombo’s outskirts after 49 traders tested positive for the coronavirus. By Saturday, the number of cases went up to 609. Hundreds of traders and fishermen are being tested. Authorities say the outbreak is related to a cluster in a garment factory early this month, which has grown to 3,426 cases, almost half the country’s total of 6,287. It broke a two-month lull in infections. Several thousand people have been asked to quarantine at home. Schools and key public offices are closed, gatherings banned and restrictions imposed on public transport. Sri Lanka has had 14 deaths since March. Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late Friday during a demonstration against coronavirus restrictions in the southern Italian city, AP reports. Calls were issued on social media to challenge a curfew that took effect in the Campania region ahead of the weekend, enacted in response to a spiralling second wave of infections that saw nearly 20,000 new cases detected in the last 24 hours. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as the curfew started at 11 pm, with some lighting smoke bombs. One carried a makeshift sign that read: “If you close, you pay.” Regional president Vincenzo de Luca had called for stricter confinement measures to contain the virus in Campania, which recorded 2,300 cases over the last day. “We are on the verge of tragedy, we need a national lockdown,” he said. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte has so far avoided reimposing the kind of restrictions that saw the entire nation confined to home quarantine for two months earlier this year and precipitated the country’s worst post-war recession. Italy was the first European country to be badly hit by the virus. It has now registered nearly 500,000 cases and 37,000 deaths, according to health ministry figures. Some new exposure site information for Victoria. AFP has more on the Germany numbers: 14,714 were diagnosed in the last 24 hours – a daily record. Robert Koch Institute president Lothar Wieler said Germany was facing a “very serious” situation and asked the population to adhere to social distancing measures. Germany was spared during the first wave of coronavirus infections that hit Europe in spring but is now suffering a sharp increase in cases along with the rest of the continent. Authorities have tightened measures against the pandemic including the adoption of a public assembly ban. Chancellor Angela Merkel last weekend asked the country to reduce their social contact and stay home as much as possible. “What winter will be, what our Christmas will be, will be decided in the days and weeks to come,” she had warned. Queensland health officials are working to determine the mystery strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Sunshine Coast, AAP reports. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new mutated strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected with Covid-19 and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland Health to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given (the cases) have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... (to) the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters on Friday. He said the additional testing would take about a week. The Sofrana left New Zealand earlier in the month with fresh crew from the Philippines before stopping at Noumea in New Caledonia and then sailing for Brisbane. New Zealand requested Australian health officials perform the additional testing after an engineer who had previously worked on the ship tested positive in Auckland. Miles on Saturday said zero new cases of Covid-19 had been uncovered inside Queensland, meaning the state still had six active cases. It has been 44 days since the last locally acquired case in Queensland. Miles on Friday said it was likely an announcement would be made about Queensland’s border reopening to NSW late next week. Asked when Victorians would be free to travel to Queensland, Miles said it would be after health restrictions in that state were eased and several incubation periods had been completed. Earlier this week I reported former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott has been allowed to leave Australia not once but twice as part of his new trade envoy role for the Boris Johnson government in the United Kingdom. The former PM was allowed to leave on what was termed an “auto-exemption” because it was government business. I’d been trying to figure out how many people have been allowed to leave while Australia has had a travel ban in place during the pandemic. Australian Border Force refused to say how many auto-exemptions have been granted, but I just came across some data on how many exemptions in total. According to Border Force in documents tabled in the Senate, between April and September this year, a total of 73,848 Australians and permanent residents have been allowed to leave Australia. More are coming back, however. Border Force also reports 93,937 Australians and permanent residents have travelled to Australia in that time. It’s not clear how many have left and come back, or how many, if any apart from Abbott, have made multiple trips. Senate estimates heard Abbott would be expected to go into hotel quarantine for a second time when he returns. Meanwhile, our current prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said he will seek to get 26,000 stranded Australians back home before Christmas. Some extra capacity will be made available, with around 6,290 places in hotel quarantine available each week. Germany has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths. It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country, according to a Reuters tally. The spike in cases comes less than two weeks before the presidential election on 3 November and is hitting battleground states such as Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. On Thursday, the United States reported a near-record 76,195 new cases. The previous record was 77,299 new cases on 16 July. At the time, hospitalisations for Covid-19 patients hit 47,000 and two weeks later deaths rose to an average of 1,200 per day. Now, hospitalisations are over 41,000 and deaths average nearly 800 per day. Health experts have not pinpointed the reason for the rise but have long warned that colder temperatures driving people inside, fatigue with Covid-19 precautions and students returning to schools and colleges, could promote the spread of the virus. The United States has the most cases in the world at 8.5 million and the most fatalities with 224,000 lives lost. The United States has reported over the past week an average of 60,000 new cases per day, the highest seven-day average since early August. The Midwest has been the epicenter of the latest surge but infections are rising nationwide. The Northeast reported an 83% increase in cases in the past month. New cases have doubled in Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and New Jersey in the past four weeks as compared to the prior four weeks, according to a Reuters analysis. Western states including Montana, New Mexico and Wyoming have reported a 200% increase in cases in the past four weeks when compared with the previous four weeks. Mexico’s northern border state of Chihuahua returned to the highest level of alert and lockdown Friday after coronavirus cases jumped there and hospitals began to fill up. The Chihuahua state government declared the return to the “red” level of alert Friday, which closes down most non-essential services and encourages people to stay at home. The Health Department said the state’s hospital beds were now 69% occupied, and that only about 23% of intensive care beds were open. The department said steps were being taken to expand hospital facilities. The department also said that three other northern states — Durango, Coahuila and Nuevo Leon — were at risk of returning to maximum alert unless infections were brought under control. Nationwide, 19 of Mexico’s 32 states will be at high alert starting Monday, 11 will be at medium alert and one state was considered at moderate risk level. Mexico as a whole has seen 880,775 test-confirmed cases, up 6,604 from the previous day’s count, and 88,312 confirmed deaths, up by 418. Here is a bit more info on the Covid-19 situation in NSW today: It’s the second consecutive 24-hour period in which NSW recorded no new locally acquired virus cases, and comes as the state government from this weekend eases some restrictions. Up to 30 people are now allowed to gather outdoors, group bookings at hospitality venues have been extended from 10 to 30 people and up to 300 are allowed at places of worship. Protesters can also gather en masse, with up to 500 people allowed to convene outdoors. Staffing regulations at gyms across NSW have also been relaxed, with a safety marshal only required when more than 20 people are working out. Two drugmakers have announced the resumption of US testing of their Covid-19 vaccine candidates. Testing of AstraZeneca’s vaccine candidate had been halted since early September, while Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine study was paused at the beginning of last week. Each company had a study volunteer develop a serious health issue, requiring a review of safety data. The two coronavirus vaccines are among several candidates in final-stage testing, the last step before seeking regulatory approval. The drugmakers said they got the go-ahead on Friday from the Food and Drug Administration to restart tests in the US. Such temporary halts of drug and vaccine testing are relatively common. In research involving thousands of participants, some are likely to fall ill. Pausing a study allows researchers to investigate whether an illness is a side effect or a coincidence. You can read the full story below: Sutton was asked when the press conference will be held tomorrow, and he said “when it is called”. And that’s the end of that. Victorian chief health officer Prof Brett Sutton says he is “very confident” Victoria will get control of the cases associated with the northern Melbourne outbreak, but reiterates there is a need to find the links between the cases, and that will inform the easing of instructions. Sutton declines to comment on why he instructed lawyers acting for the health department not to include evidence where it showed he was included on emails on 27 March that mentions the use of private security guards well before he previously said he was made aware. Sutton says he is providing an affidavit to the inquiry and it is appropriate to wait for that to be provided to the inquiry. Andrews won’t cop criticism of the public health team who communicated with the family at the centre of the East Preston Islamic College outbreak. He said the family were advised what to do, but the message didn’t get through because one child went to school while infectious. Andrews disagrees with the suggestion it would be a miracle to have low case numbers tomorrow given all the tests waiting to be processed. I wouldn’t say that. We have done, haven’t got a weekly total, but we have had a very, very strong week in terms of test, right back to the weekend. And we have turned up a relatively low number of cases this week and the vast majority have been linked to other known cases. Andrews says the 25km radius limit and the Melbourne metro/regional border are on the table to be eased tomorrow, if that happens, but suggests both could remain in place to prevent potential spread of Covid-19 to popular tourism locations like Mornington Peninsula. Daniel Andrews says the school, community and faith leaders are calling people in the northern Melbourne area to get tested. The two schools involved are organising for everyone who hasn’t been tested to get tested. I had a conversation this morning, Jerome and I, with some of the school leadership. They have gone through and booked in family by family to come and be tested at the site that the testing station is on the school grounds. They will work through all those different appointments and that will give them a list of people who did not show and that is not a criticism, they may have gone somewhere else. Circumstances may have intervened. But then they will go back and do that for a second time, a third time. We are confident we will get all of those people to come and get tested and then we will get the results as fast as possible. Daniel Andrews says “it’ll be a very late night, and a very early morning” when it comes to making decisions around restrictions easing tomorrow. Earlier in the press conference he said the easing of restrictions tomorrow could not be “banked on”. We really do have to wait to see what those test results show us ... what we are hopeful of is connections and linkages to these cases and these cases do not speak to the virus being in the northern suburbs more than we had thought, so it is all about trying to find those linkages and that is why there is a very big team of people interviewing, re-interviewing, looking at things from every conceivable angle to try to find linkages. He says Victoria is still in a good position with low case numbers, and will proceed with easing of restrictions if possible. It’s just about getting those test results. I’m trying to be as frank as possible. A lot of people had banked tomorrow as the day where we would have absolute clarity about what the rest of October and November looks like. If we can do that, we will. But the appropriate thing to do if you have thousands of tests in the laboratory being processed, you have to wait for the results. Jeroen Weimar says the Victorian health department is focused on close and secondary contacts for the northern Melbourne outbreak, and says he doesn’t think schools opened up again too soon. “Some family members live in all sorts of housing, some in public housing, some in community housing, many in private accommodation. We are increasingly doing door-to-door testing for them so we are going to them to ensure that they get the care they need and support that they need but also to get tested,” he said. “If I look at the response of the school leadership of the schools that we are leading with, dealing with in this particular outbreak, they have taken prompt and swift action. We are talking about cases that happened on Monday this week.” The positive case at Croxton school is a student, they are part of a family of four, and all four of the family are positive, Jeroen Weimar said. One of the family’s other children attends the East Preston Islamic College, but it is not clear whether the cases are connected. The two children attended school while infected on one day. A total of 9,405 tests have been conducted for staff, students or close contacts at the East Preston Islamic College, Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, says. There are 101 close contacts associated with the college isolating, and 307 secondary contacts isolating. There are 34 close contacts of the Croxton special school also isolating. The Victorian health department sent out 22,000 text messages and emails to taxi and Uber drivers in the northern Melbourne area, and Weimar has encouraged the drivers to come forward for testing. Daniel Andrews flags the long-awaited easing of restrictions announcement tomorrow should not be “banked on”. He says the announcements will still come tomorrow, but the actual easing will depend on the thousands of tests results waiting to come back as a result of the testing blitz in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. Now is not the time for us to start ignoring when we find significant virus ... whether it be in a given community or in a given geographical area ... We are still optimistic that we will be able to have positive things to say, but I’m just ... It’s a note of caution, with so much information yet to come to us, we need to be guided by that. That has always been the way. That is what has delivered these low numbers. On the northern Melbourne outbreak, Daniel Andrews says he met with the community leaders this morning. I had a meeting early this morning with a number of community and faith leaders from the inner northern suburbs and, indeed, the northern suburbs more broadly. I want to thank them for the very proactive and cooperative way – the partnership that we have with them. They’re reaching out to literally hundreds and thousands of people in their own networks, whether they be faith-based or community-based networks, setting up telephone trees, calling upon people to come forward and get tested, making sure that they’re reminding people that, if you’ve been asked to stay in your home – either pending a test result or because you’re a positive or a close contact – that that’s critically important to do and that everybody, regardless of your background, everybody is in this together. This virus does not, in any way, discriminate between different members of the Victorian community and neither does the government and its agencies when it comes to providing the most appropriate public health response. He says there are thousands of test results from people in the area still waiting to come back, and hundreds if not thousands of more people are likely to be tested today. He says it is a 35% increase in the normal amount of testing you would expect to see in that community. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews says Victoria has under 100 active cases of Covid-19 for the first time since 19 June. Of today’s seven cases, Andrews says six are linked to outbreaks or known cases, including East Preston Islamic College, Croxton special school Northcote, the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak, and Estia in Keilor. One of those seven cases is under investigation. There are three new cases in Darebin and single cases in Banule, greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. There were 17,219 test results since yesterday, which Andrews says is “another very, very strong number.” Eight people are in hospital, and none in the ICU. There are seven active cases among healthcare workers. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. I am in Melbourne, the city with one of the, if not the, longest lockdowns in the world. Now we only have around 100 actives cases left, we are on the verge of opening up. We all crave a return to “Covid normal” as the politicians like to say, but there’s a fear it could return, and we might be forced to endure another lockdown. For the second day in a row, the Australian state of New South Wales has reported no new locally acquired Covid-19 cases. There were five cases reported in hotel quarantine. There were 12,890 tests reported to 8pm last night, compared with 13,686 in the previous 24 hours. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, will provide his daily update at 11.30am AEDT today. It’s the last update before tomorrow’s expected announcement of the further easing of restrictions in the state. Australia’s ABC has reported the principal of the East Preston Islamic College in Melbourne has said the family of the child who attended school while infectious with Covid-19 is considering leaving the area after being devastated that it has led to the virus spreading. The family had been isolating, but was told by the Victorian health department that two of the family’s children could return to school. English is not their first language, and it was interpreted that this meant all three children could go back to school, too. The child was meant to keep isolating, and tested positive on Wednesday. Now four new cases connected to the outbreak of 32 cases were reported on Saturday and around 800 people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne are currently isolating and being tested. A bright yellow helicopter rose into a blue sky on Friday carrying a Covid-19 patient from the Netherlands to a German intensive care unit, the first such international airlift since the pandemic first threatened to swamp Dutch hospitals in the spring, AP reports. The clatter of the helicopter’s rotors as it lifted off from a parking lot behind a hospital 30km east of Amsterdam was a noisy reminder of how the coronavirus is again gripping Europe and straining health care systems that struggled for equipment and staff during the pandemic’s first wave. Elsewhere on the continent, an absence of noise will underscore the virus’ resurgence. More than two-thirds of the people living in France were to be subject to a nightly curfew starting at midnight Friday, hours after health authorities announced that the country had joined Spain in surpassing 1 million confirmed cases since the start of the pandemic. “The epidemic is very strongly accelerating,” French President Emmanuel Macron said after visiting a hospital near Paris. France became the second country in Western Europe and the seventh world-wide to reach that number of known infections after reporting 42,032 new daily cases. Of the 445,000 confirmed cases the World Health Organization had recorded in the past 24 hours, nearly half were in Europe, Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on COVID-19, said. I’m Josh Taylor and I will be seeing you through the rest of the morning and early afternoon of Saturday, Australian time. Here’s what we know so far today: Victoria has reported no new deaths and seven new cases of Covid-19 overnight, including four new cases linked to an outbreak at the East Preston Islamic College. About 800 people who are either close contacts or secondary contacts of those associated with the school are currently isolating and awaiting test results. All staff and students from the nearby Croxton School have also been told to get tested and self-isolate, even if they aren’t experiencing symptoms. AstraZeneca has resumed the US trial of its experimental Covid-19 vaccine after approval by US regulators, the company said. It was paused on 6 September after a report of a serious neurological illness, believed to be transverse myelitis, in a participant in the company’s UK trial. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US infectious disease expert, said the White House coronavirus task force’s meetings have become less frequent, even as infections rise in dozens of US states. The EU’s disease control agency joined health workers across Europe in sounding the alarm about the surge in coronavirus infections as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in cases. Several countries in Europe are reporting infection rates higher than during the first wave of the pandemic in March and April, with Spain saying it has now more than 3 million cases. France’s second wave of coronavirus could be worse than the first, the boss of Paris public hospital group AP-HP said on Friday as the country registered a record number of daily cases. With pressure on hospitals rising fast, France has expanded a 9pm to 6am curfew to cover 46 million people, more than two-thirds of its population. Italy registered 19,143 new coronavirus infections, a jump of more than 3,000 within the last 24 hours. The northern Lombardy region, the worst hit region during the first wave of the pandemic, recorded almost 5,000 new cases while in Campania, in the south, there were 2,280. More than half a million people in the US could die from Covid-19 by the end of February next year, but about 130,000 of those lives could be saved if everybody were to wear masks, according to estimates from a modelling study.
0||Jürgen Klopp and Chris Wilder at odds over Anfield VAR callsJürgen Klopp claimed Liverpool were “disadvantaged” by VAR once again as his side overcame a controversial penalty award and a disallowed Mohamed Salah goal to beat Sheffield United 2-1 at Anfield. The Premier League champions moved level on points with Everton at the top of the table thanks to Roberto Firmino’s first goal of the season and Diogo Jota’s second‑half header, but had to come from behind when the VAR official, Andre Marriner, awarded Chris Wilder’s team a penalty for a tackle by Fabinho on Oli McBurnie. Mike Dean had awarded a free-kick outside the area before VAR upgraded the punishment to a penalty converted by Sander Berge. “There was no foul,” the Liverpool manager said. “It is now six games into the season and in three of them we have been on the wrong end of these kind of decisions. We are not asking for an advantage – we just don’t want to be disadvantaged. And that is the situation. The penalty gave Sheffield a proper boost. Until then they couldn’t get to us. “Then we lost a bit of patience but we scored a goal from our best attack of the first half, scored a second goal and I don’t know any more if it is offside or not. Then we did get the second goal and Mo had an incredible chance. They had their moments too but we defended with big hearts. It has been a tough week with a lot of minutes and tough opponents, so I am really pleased.” Chris Wilder disagreed about the spot-kick, saying: “I thought it was. I’ve been informed there might have been another couple as well. I thought their reaction to the challenge was quite telling.” Overall the Sheffield United manager was pleased with how his team had played. “The performance was good, it had to be to come here and get an opportunity to get a result and I thought we had opportunities to get a result. “There is lots of disappointment in our dressing room. We got on the bus believing we could get a result and we get back on the bus disappointed we haven’t got that.”
17||Sunak's £12bn scheme for self-employed was 'terribly targeted', says analysisRishi Sunak’s flagship scheme to help the self-employed through the pandemic has handed £1.3bn to workers who saw no loss of income while giving nothing to 500,000 people left without work, new analysis has revealed. In a sign of major flaws in the £12.7bn self-employment income support scheme (SEISS), more than 400,000 workers were able to claim support despite losing no income in the crisis. The analysis by the Resolution Foundation thinktank, to be published later this week, concluded that the scheme had been “terribly targeted”. The findings are part of its review of the labour market six months into the crisis. It finds that the self-employed have suffered “an even bigger labour market shock” than employees. Three in 10 self-employed workers stopped working altogether at the peak of the crisis. Many have returned to work but their recovery has been slow. Around one in six (17%) are still without work, rising to almost a quarter (24%) of 18- to 34-year-olds who were self-employed pre-crisis. The SEISS has been an expensive scheme to run for the Treasury and apparently more generous than the job retention scheme for employees. Some £2,518 was spent supporting each self-employed worker through the scheme, twice as much as the £1,128 spent per employee. However, the new analysis raises major doubts over how the money has been directed. While 78% of SEISS claimants lost income, in many cases that loss was smaller than the amount claimed. Meanwhile, 67% of self-employed workers who had not claimed under the scheme did lose income during the crisis. The thinktank blamed strict eligibility rules and weak assessment rules for the issues with the scheme. Applicants were not asked to prove they had been hit financially by the crisis. Hannah Slaughter, economist at the foundation, said: “The UK’s five million self-employed workers have been at the heart of its jobs crisis. A quarter of young self-employed workers are still without work today. This crisis is far from over for the UK’s self-employed workers. Future support should avoid excluding so many groups, while ensuring payments reflect genuine falls in income. And an immediate priority should be to strengthen universal credit for the many self-employed workers who will really need it in the months ahead.” It comes with the government under increasing pressure to increase its help for the self-employed further as Covid restrictions increase again. A slimmed-down version of the scheme is now in operation, though Sunak last week doubled the value of the grants the self-employed can access from 20% to 40% of average monthly profits. This is half the level available during the spring’s lockdown. Andy Chamberlain, director of policy at the Association of Independent Professionals and the Self-Employed, said: “Two-fifths of income simply will not be enough for many of the UK’s creative freelancers, who are the backbone of our vital cultural, entertainment and hospitality sectors. It’s also crucial to remember how many freelancers in these industries have been entirely excluded from claiming even 40% of their income – because they work through limited companies or are newly self-employed. “Government must take note and drive more and better targeted support to self-employed people in need – especially our forgotten freelancers and those working in badly struggling sectors.” The Treasury disputed the Resolution Foundation’s findings, arguing that there were safeguards designed to ensure the help only reached those who needed it. “As the report states, we were right to introduce the self-employment scheme – which has helped protect the livelihoods of 2.7 million people and is just one part of our £200bn package of unprecedented support.” “The scheme is targeted to help those most in need. All those who apply must confirm they have been adversely affected by the pandemic and the vast majority of those who do not qualify either earn more than half their income from another source or have trading profits of over £50,000.”
2||Ministers ‘still hiding’ full details of 2016 pandemic simulationThe government has been accused of withholding the full findings of a simulation exercise that warned ministers that the UK would not cope in the event of a pandemic. Campaigners have questioned what the government is hiding by choosing not to release all the documents relating to Exercise Cygnus, a three-day wargaming simulation that examined what would happen if there were an influenza pandemic in the UK. Last week, in response to pressure from the Information Commissioner’s Office, health secretary Matt Hancock announced that he had published the report into the exercise. However, it transpired the report was the same as that leaked to the press in May – but failed to include numerous other reports that are believed to make up the full filings. Now an NHS doctor and journalist who have been campaigning for the full disclosure of the documents relating to Cygnus have called on the government to release all the findings from the exercise. Dr Moosa Qureshi and Tommy Greene submitted a Freedom of Information request to see the full findings in April. They have lodged an application for judicial review into the government’s decision not to release the full report that is due to go to appeal on 19 November 2020. The pair have been told that the full findings of Exercise Cygnus are contained in numerous reports, not just the one released by Hancock. In their legal case they explain that it is their understanding that there is a “compendium” document containing all of the lessons and recommendations from Exercise Cygnus which does not resemble the report now published. They say that they are aware there are specific reports focusing on NHS population triage – the process for deciding how to treat patients – and what powers would have to be enacted legally to prepare for a pandemic. There are also individual reports assessing the performance of the different bodies and organisations that were involved in the three-day simulation. “This announcement by Matt Hancock to the House of Commons on Tuesday does not take us any further,” Greene said. “We already know what is in the version of the report he has ordered to be published. We want to see the full findings of the report that details in full the gaps in NHS provision that would have helped this country be better prepared when Covid hit and could still help us as we go into a the second wave of the pandemic.” The pair claim that further attempts by their lawyers, Leigh Day, to have the full findings published have been met throughout by “evasion” and “obstruction”. Recently, the Information Commissioner ordered Hancock to respond to Qureshi and Greene’s Freedom of Information request by Friday 23 October. Government lawyers said they required further time until 9 November to provide a substantive response. “We have been requesting Cygnus for many months now, and the government has repeatedly delayed disclosure, saying each time that it was ‘weighing the public interest’ while NHS frontline workers were struggling blindly, deprived of potentially life-saving data,” Qureshi said. “Now the government has published what the newspapers published months ago, and its document is preposterously bereft of the healthcare data expected from a national pandemic exercise, which begs the question, “What else is this government hiding?” Tessa Gregory, a partner at Leigh Day, said: “Our clients understand that there are other key documents which set out more fully the findings of Exercise Cygnus and the action which the government should have taken following the exercise. Our clients will continue to fight for transparency and seek the release of the full findings of Exercise Cygnus as the findings had and continue to have a bearing on the government’s response to the ongoing pandemic.” A government spokeswoman said it could not comment on a matter involving potential legal action. But she said: “Exercise Cygnus was a national exercise that looked at how well prepared the UK was to respond to a serious flu pandemic. “It was not designed to consider other potential pandemics, or to identify what action could be taken to prevent widespread transmission. “We have used the lessons learned from Exercise Cygnus to rapidly respond to this unprecedented global crisis.”
3||Obama campaigns for Biden in Florida as Trump heads to battleground Ohio – as it happenedIt’s been a lively day on the election trail. We’re closing this blog now but will be back with all the developments in US political news, as it happens, tomorrow. Here are the main events of the day: Alaska’s Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski has hopped off the fence and says she will confirm Amy Coney Barrett for the US supreme court in the vote expected on Monday. Barack Obama, speaking at a drive-in rally to support Joe Biden in the key swing state of Florida, laid into Donald Trump for his response to the coronavirus pandemic. Democratic vice-presidential nominee Kamala Harris, campainging in Ohio, also decried the Trump administration’s handling of Covid-19 and lamented that the crushed economy has led to a “hunger crisis” in America. Campaigning at two rallies in Pennsylvania today, Joe Biden said at each that he would not ban fracking - a very active industry in the swing state. Top infectious disease public health official Anthony Fauci supports the idea of a national face mask mandate if that’s the only way to get people to wear them and curb the spread of coronavirus. Both Donald Trump and his most controversial coronavirus adviser Scott Atlas have been spreading misleading info on Twitter about Covid-19. Democratic vice-presidential candidate Kamala Harris is calling for an administration that is frank about racist police brutality in America. “There isn’t a Black man I know, be it a relative or friend, who has not had some sort of experience with police that’s been about an unreasonable stop, some sort of profiling or excessive force,” she said. She said Donald Trump “says people who are protesting are looters and they are violent, and talking about law and order, not understanding that peaceful protest is part of how this nation was founded.” Harris said peaceful protest is what has allowed her to become only the second Black woman elected to the United States Senate (hat tip to groundbreaker Carol Moseley Braun). “But there is still a lot of work to be done” not just to speak out about police brutality but to do something about it.” She said she had spoken out about Breonna Taylor, shot dead by police in March during a botched raid on her Louisville, Kentucky, apartment, “but there are many Breonnas and Georges”, referring to George Floyd who was killed by police in Minneapolis this spring when an officer kneeled on his neck on the ground for almost nine minutes, reinvigorating the Black Lives Matter movement. “There needs to be ban on chokeholds and carotid holds, across the board. Let’s have a national registry of police officers who break the law.” She added that there needed to be “accountability and consequences” not just for individual police but for “the system”. The latest CNN opinion poll in Ohio has Democratic candidate Joe Biden and Republican candidate Donald Trump in a statistical dead heat, with 46% of those surveyed backing Biden for the White House in November, 47% favoring Trump. No Republican in modern history has lost Ohio but won the White House. The 2020 race continues. Donald Trump is on his way to begin another rally in Circleville, Ohio, about a 30-minute drive from Columbus, and Joe Biden is speaking now in Dallas, north-eastern Pennsylvania. This Dallas is not far from Scranton, Biden’s birthplace. The Democratic candidate for president just said “maybe it’s the Scranton in me” that gives him “a bit of a chip on my shoulder” about Trump’s flaunting of and focus on his own wealth. Biden is at his most fired up on the campaign trail right now, he doesn’t have the oratory skills of Obama, but he is impassioned. After so many months in the basement, campaigning online, it’s truly exciting to see Biden, as well as Harris and Obama out on the trail in person talking to motivated voters - not leaving it all to Trump. Biden just said once again that he won’t ban fracking. And he’s slamming Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. He’s using what has become one of his standard lines, bringing up the revelation from Bob Woodward’s book Rage that the president told him very early on in the outbreak that he knew exactly how dangerous Covid-19 was but downplayed it to the public because he didn’t want to spread panic (instead his stance just spread coronavirus). “The American people don’t panic,” Biden said. “Donald Trump panicked.” He called the president’s approach to controlling the outbreak “weak and chaotic”. Biden said he is determined to shut down the virus if he is president, without shutting down the economy, although it’s not entirely clear yet how he would thread that needle for the nation. Biden said Trump “hasn’t delivered on a damn thing”. Voters honking their car horns and cheering. Supreme Court nominee Amy Coney Barrett won crucial backing this afternoon when one of the last Republican holdouts announced her support for Donald Trump’s pick ahead of a confirmation vote expected Monday. Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska said during today’s Senate session that while she opposed her party’s decision to push ahead with the nomination process so close to the November 3 presidential election, she supported the federal judge, who is on track to lock in a conservative court majority for years to come, The Associated Press reports. Barrett already appeared to have enough votes for confirmation from Senate Republicans who hold the majority in the chamber and are racing to install her on the high court before Election Day. But Murkowski’s nod gives her a boost of support. Only one Republican, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, is now expected to oppose the conservative judge. “While I oppose the process that has led us to this point, I do not hold it against her,” Murkowski said. The Senate opened the rare weekend session despite Democratic efforts to stall Trump’s nominee. Democrats mounted more procedural hurdles during the day, but the party has no realistic chance of stopping Barrett’s advance. Barrett, a federal appeals court judge from Indiana, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. The fast-track confirmation process is like none other in US history so close to a presidential election. Democrats, notably the vice-presidential nominee and California Senator Kamala Harris, who sits on the judiciary committee, call it a “sham” and say the winner of the presidential election should name the nominee to fill the vacancy left by the recent death of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Senators planned to stay in session Saturday and Sunday. Read the Guardian’s latest report on the Amy Coney Barrett. Not only is her confirmation process controversial but she is a controversial judge and individual. Here’s our last report on Barack Obama’s rally in Florida on behalf of Joe Biden today. In his speech, which lasted almost an hour, he worked through several major election issues, such as the economy and the pandemic and touched on others as he continued to lash Trump. “Let me just see a show of hands, how many people here have a secret Chinese bank account?” Obama asked, referring to a story that emerged in the week that Trump had paid more than $200,000 in taxes in China, weeks after it emerged his federal income tax liability in the US was far less. “His first year in the White House he only paid $750 in federal income tax,” Obama said. “You’ve got secretaries, you’ve got construction workers, you got your health care workers, nurses, who pay a lot more in income taxes than that.” There was a staunch defense of Obamacare, his signature Affordable Care Act, which provided millions more Americans with affordable health insurance, that Republicans have tried numerous times to dismantle during the Trump administration. “When they’re asked about it they say, ‘Well look, we’re gonna have a great replacement. It’s coming. It’s gonna be there in two weeks.’ They’ve never had a replacement. Nothing. Nada. Zero. Zilch. “They’ve attacked the Affordable Care Act and every time they’ve driven up costs, they’re driving up the uninsured. Now they’re trying to get the Supreme Court to take away your health care as we speak, in the middle of a pandemic,” referring to the high court’s hearing into the constitutionality of the ACA on 10 November. Appealing to Florida’s sizeable Hispanic demographic, Obama had harsh words for Trump’s handling of the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, which devastated Puerto Rico in 2017, and efforts by some among Miami’s Cuban and Venezuelan communities to portray Biden as an extreme socialist. “Listening to the Republicans, you’d think Joe was more communist than the Castros. Don’t fall for that garbage,” Obama said. “Folks would know if he was a secret socialist by now. What is true is he’ll promote human rights in Cuba and around the world and he won’t coddle dictators the way our current president does.” The former prescient ended on an upbeat note. “I’m here to report that America is a good and decent place. We just see so much noise and nonsense,” he said. “Sometimes it’s hard for us to remember but I’ve been all across this country. There are a lot of good people here. There are a lot of folks who share the values of looking out for one another and doing right by one another.” Here we go again with Donald Trump’s antipathy to the wearing of face masks to help prevent the spread of coronavirus. Having just arrived in Columbus, Ohio, for his next campaign trail event, the president had a few words with reporters and is talking utter nonsense. First he said there are so many cases of coronavirus being reported in Wisconsin, where the disease is surging, at the moment because of all the testing. So if no testing, then no coronavirus? This is a highly misleading and wrongheaded argument that the president of the United States has tried numerous times over the months in order to downplay the coronavirus pandemic. And at a question from another reporter, Trump barked: “I can’t hear you with your mask on” and moved to the next reporter without waiting for the person to repeat the question. The Texas state supreme court this afternoon temporarily reinstated the governor’s ban on multiple drop-off sites for mail ballots, in a short-term victory for Donald Trump. The ban will remain in effect while the state supreme court fully reviews a Friday appeals court ruling that overturned the order by Governor Greg Abbott, a Republican like the president, who faces Democrat Joe Biden in a race for the White House on November 3, Reuters writes. The Texas 3rd court of appeals had unanimously agreed with a lower court that limiting the number of drop boxes would lengthen lines, increase the risk that voters could get infected with Covid-19, and infringe on their right to vote. Trump has repeatedly criticized mail-in ballots, claiming - without evidence - they would lead to widespread fraud. Abbott issued his order limiting mail-in ballot drop boxes to one per county on October 1, saying it was aimed at preventing fraud. The move, which closed more than a dozen satellite locations in at least two counties, drew condemnation from Democrats and voting rights advocates. Texas, which Trump won by nine percentage points in 2016, has not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate in more than four decades. But opinion polls have suggested it might be in reach for Biden, in part because of dissatisfaction over Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. The Guardian’s Erum Salam noted in this story from earlier in the month that large, populous counties such as Travis and Harris county will be disproportionately affected by Abbott’s order. These counties includes Texas’s most diverse cities: Austin and Houston, respectively. Nine per cent of Travis county’s population are black and 33% are Hispanic. In Harris county, 20% of the population are black and 43% Hispanic. Harris county is the third most populous county in the country with more than 4.7 million residents. As of 2018, it has nearly 2.4 million registered voters. After Abbott’s new order, the vast county has gone from having 12 ballot drop-off sites to just one, located at the NRG Stadium in central Houston. Full story here. Richard Luscombe writes that Barack Obama is delivering a sparky speech at a drive-in rally for Joe Biden in North Miami, Florida. His event continues with him highlighting the difference between Trump’s “empty promises” for a second term and Biden’s plans for his first. “Tweeting… doesn’t fix things. Inventing conspiracies doesn’t make people’s lives better,” he said. “You’ve got to have a plan. You’ve got to do the work. And along with the experience of getting things done, Joe Biden has concrete plans and policies that are going to turn our vision of a better, fairer, stronger country into reality.” Seeking to heap blame on Trump’s lack of response for a coronavirus pandemic that has killed almost 225,000 Americans and cost millions of jobs, Obama pointed out that his own administration had left plans. “We literally left this White House a pandemic playbook that showed them how to respond before a virus reached our shores,” Obama said. “It must be lost along with the Republican health care plan. We can’t find it, eight months into this pandemic.” Also squandered, Obama said, was the nation’s strong economy: “Unemployment was steadily going down during the Obama-Biden presidency. And then he gets elected and it keeps on going down and suddenly he says, ‘Look what I did there.’ “He did inherit the longest streak of job growth in American history that we got started but just like everything else he inherited he fumbled it. “The economic damage inflicted by [his] pandemic response means that Donald Trump will be the first president since Herbert Hoover that actually loses jobs.” Obama also teased Trump for ending his interview early for 60 Minutes, with journalist Lesley Stahl, early. The interview airs tomorrow night, ditto one with Biden. A quick reminder that Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which they accuse the senior White House advisers of showing “indifference” to Americans suffering and dying under Covid-19. Saying the billboards would stay up, the group called Kushner and Trump “entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people”. My colleague Martin Pengelly has just updated the story with the following: In an email to the Guardian on Saturday, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said: “It does seem unlikely that Ivanka and Jared would actually sue the Lincoln Project, especially before election day, while after that hopefully they won’t care, can return to New York and stop pretending to be public servants. “Her father has honed litigation abuse as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias added, but “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Read the full story here: And here’s the latest tweet from the project: Barack Obama is wasting no time in mocking Donald Trump during the former Democratic president’s appearance in North Miami, Florida this afternoon. “He’s had a tough week. Everybody has been very unfair to Donald Trump, this week,” the former president said to joyous honks of car horns at a drive-in rally. Referring to the final presidential debate between Trump and Joe Biden on Thursday, Obama said: “Trump was asked, ‘What is your plan for the new phase of Covid?’ which is a pretty good question considering that we just saw the highest number of cases spike up yesterday. “So you think he’d be ready for a response. Instead, he just said it wasn’t his fault, he didn’t have one. He said, ‘It’s now gone and a bunch of states.’ Just as states are reaching new record highs nationwide he doesn’t have a plan. He doesn’t even acknowledge the reality of what’s taking place all across the country.” As he did earlier in the week at a rally in Pennsylvania for Biden, his former vice-president, Obama kept the focus firmly on Trump. “It’s a good idea to have an answer to this question. It’s a good idea if you’re running for reelection to say, ‘Here’s what I want to accomplish.” What did Trump say? He got mad and walked out of the interview,” Obama said, referring to an ill-tempered 60 Minutes due to air on CBS Sunday night but already posted on Trump’s Facebook site. “He thought the questions were too tough. If he can’t answer a tough question like, ‘What would you like to do in your second term?’ then it’s our job to make sure he doesn’t get a second term.” Obama said he didn’t know Biden very well when he picked him to be his Veep. But he said he got to know his character as their administration proceeded, and that Biden “made me a better president”. Also campaigning today in Pennsylvania is Bernie Sanders. He’s out on the trail for Joe Biden, who defeated him in the primary process this spring to become the Democratic nominee for president. Here’s a post from the Sanders event from the Democratic councilwoman at large for Allegheny county, Bethany Hallam. Hallam has become a little bit famous of late for her unique campaign to persuade voters in Pennsylvania to be careful to enclose their mail-in ballots in the privacy envelope issued by the state, inside the outer envelope, if you follow me. Read all about it here. And in North Carolina, former Democratic presidential candidate and New Jersey Senator Cory Booker is campaigning today to help get Joe Biden elected next month. More from Edward Helmore… Facebook has demanded that New York University stop collecting data about its political ad targeting practices, arguing the engineering project violates its terms of service. The argument between the social media giant and NYU’s Ad Observatory project, which launched last month with more 6,500 volunteers assigned to collect data about political ads, flared up on Friday, according to the Wall Street Journal. In a letter to the engineering department, Facebook said “scraping tools, no matter how well-intentioned, are not a permissible means of collecting information from us”. Facebook went on to say that if the university does not cease harvesting the data and delete it, it “may be subject to additional enforcement action”. Last month, Facebook said it would stop political advertising for a month ahead the 3 November presidential election, seeking to prevent the spread of misinformation. After the 2016 election of Donald Trump, Facebook was accused of allowing Russian disinformation and political profiling to flow almost unchecked. NYU has said the Ad Observatory is designed to provide the public, journalists, researchers and policy makers with the ability to search political ads floated to specific audiences and to see how those ads are funded. Facebook’s demand that NYU cease the program met with criticism. “Facebook is making it harder for Americans to get information about online political ads,” Democratic senator Amy Klobuchar, a sponsor of a bill called the Honest Ads Act, said in a statement to the Journal. Social media platforms, she added, have pledged to make online advertising more transparent – but Facebook’s threatened action “is further evidence that voluntary standards are insufficient”. After the Journal’s article was published, Facebook partially retracted its threat, signaling the sensitivity of the issue. It said it would not take any action until after the election. The Democratic vice-presidential nominee, Kamala Harris, is offering a searing view of the Trump presidency in Cleveland, Ohio, right now. She decries, loudly and in a sharply scathing tone, Donald Trump’s having politicized mask-wearing in relation to the coronavirus pandemic, when the president indicates that if you don’t wear a mask you’re for Trump, if you wear one then you are against him. “Can you imagine?” she asks rhetorically. She’s talking as Barack Obama just took the stage at a drive-in rally in North Miami, Florida, where the former president just jogged in wearing a “VOTE” mask. Harris, in the swing state of Ohio, went on to describe Trump as the kind of vain man “who looks in the mirror rather than looking into the faces of the American people.” “And so we find ourselves in this crisis,” she said. With the pandemic decimating the public health and the economy, Harris said that in Ohio right now, one in 10 families are concerned that they don’t have enough food, one in six families are concerned that they won’t be able to pay the rent next month, and one in five businesses have closed “with no prospect of being able to reopen.” “We are in the middle of a hunger crisis in America,” the California Senator said. She called the Trump presidency the greatest failure of an administration in US history. New Yorkers are jamming polling places and standing in line for hours to cast ballots on the state’s first day of early voting today. They are rushing to record their choices 10 days ahead of the November 3 presidential election, Reuters reports. Lines formed before polls opened across New York City and neighboring Long Island, videos on social media showed, as New Yorkers joined a flood of more than 56 million Americans across the country who have cast early ballots at a record-setting pace. Saturday was the first time that voters in New York, a reliably Democratic state where Democrat Joe Biden has a wide lead in polls over the Republican president, Donald Trump, have been allowed to vote early in a presidential election. A majority of New York voters haven’t supported a Republican candidate for president since Ronald Reagan’s re-election in 1984. Early in-person voting will continue in the state until November 1. “Patiently waiting for Mommy to vote early!” the New York City Board of Elections tweeted, showing a photo of a young girl sitting in line with a drawing book. About 56.1 million Americans already have cast early ballots across the country either in person or by mail, a pace that could lead to the highest voter turnout rate in more than a century, according to data from the US Elections Project. The high level of early voting has led Michael McDonald, the University of Florida professor who administers the US Elections Project, to predict a record turnout of about 150 million, representing 65% of eligible voters, the highest participation rate since 1908. Donald Trump’s long-sought after tax records, obtained by the New York Times, appear to show he may have given far less to philanthropic causes than he has claimed. According to the documents, the Times reports, Trump has given at least $130m since 2005. But the majority of that total, $119.3m, came from simply agreeing not to move forward on land development projects. In three cases the agreements, known as conservation easements, came after Trump had abandoned the projects but was permitted under US law to keep title and receive a tax deduction equal to their appraised value. Trump’s tax records, the Times also reported, show that much of his charitable giving has come during periods of financial or public-image duress, including as he faced high tax bills from earnings related to his long-running reality TV series, The Apprentice. One land deal, currently being investigated by the New York attorney general, involves land donated for a state park. The investigation focuses on whether the appraisal used to secure a tax easement was improperly inflated. According to an earlier report at least four Trump properties – the Trump International Hotel and Tower in Chicago, a 212-acre Seven Springs estate in Westchester county, New York, the Trump National Golf Club in Los Angeles and a skyscraper at 40 Wall Street in Manhattan – are being reviewed by state and federal authorities for potential tax, debt or insurance irregularities. The latest reporting contributes to a perception that Trump’s claims to philanthropic largesse are inflated or misleading at best. His charitable foundation was shut down two years ago. Former New York attorney general Barbara Underwood said at the time the foundation functioned “as little more than a checkbook to serve Mr Trump’s business and political interests”, and had engaged in “a shocking pattern of illegality.” The current New York attorney general, Letitia James, is investigating whether the Trump Organization falsely reported property values to secure loans or tax benefits. Investigators with her office this month deposed Eric Trump, the organization’s executive vice president, in what is currently a civil matter. The president’s son described the investigation as “the highest level of prosecutorial misconduct”. In response to questions posed by the Times about public philanthropic promises that appear either to have been exaggerated or non-existent, Trump Organization spokeswoman Amanda Miller said: “President Trump gives money privately. It’s impossible to know how much he’s given over the years.” Everyone’s on the move. Donald Trump is en route from North Carolina to his next campaign event, in Ohio, and Joe Biden has another rally in Pennsylvania, this one featuring rock god Jon Bon Jovi, who 10 years ago described himself to the Observer (the Guardian’s sister Sunday newspaper) as “overweight, drinking too much and bored to tears”! And very soon, Barack Obama is speaking at a drive-in rally in support of Joe Biden in Florida. Obama began hitting the campaign trail in person a few days ago, giving a blistering critique of Donald Trump’s presidency at a raucous rally in Philadelphia. The timing appeared very strategic - don’t campaign too early as if your former vice-president needs rescuing, but skid in for the closing when Biden has a strong lead in the polls but some of those last few swing voters in key states are still deciding which way to go.... Here’s Lauren Gambino’s report on that event in Philly. Richard Luscombe will bring us some reporting from Obama’s event in North Miami in a few minutes. Joe Biden is repeating that he has no plans to ban hydraulic fracturing in Pennsylvania, a critical battleground state where many jobs depend on the industry. Speaking at a drive-in rally on the grounds of a community college in Bristol, near Philadelphia, earlier The Assocated Press reports that he said: “Let me be clear, I’m not banning fracking in Pennsylvania or anywhere else.” People in about 100 cars blared their horns. Still, Biden noted that climate change could lead to more catastrophic floods in places like along the nearby Delaware River. “We can do something about it,” he said. “But we’ve got to come together.” Donald Trump has repeatedly accused Biden of supporting a ban on fracking. Biden mistakenly suggested during a Democratic presidential primary debate that he did, but his campaign quickly corrected that. The former vice president has promised to end fracking on federal land. Biden also said during this week’s presidential debate with Trump that the country would have to “transition away from the oil industry” to combat climate change -- something he didn’t mention at his rally today. Biden has since clarified that the process would be gradual and not cost people who rely on the energy sector their jobs. The comment pleased environmentalists but drew criticism from Republicans and even some national Democratic politicians in close congressional races in oil country. Jill Biden wore a “vote” mask to the rally this morning - here’s a reminder of the great Guardian piece from a few weeks ago about “vote” fashion. The war of words on the campaign trail is heating up. Donald Trump is still talking in North Carolina, about an hour in, in 82F heat under sunny skies (according to the pool report - your blogger is in the cloudy, cool Big Apple) and the president is mocking Democratic rival Joe Biden’s drive-in rallies and the focus on the coronavirus pandemic. Trump said all he hears about is “Covid, Covid, Covid” asserting that on November 4, the day after the election, the topic will disappear from headlines and Biden’s utterances. That seems unlikely as the autumn surge in cases continues across the country, and dire warnings from experts that the death toll, which is currently 224,000 in the US, could more than double to 500,000 in the next four months. Those attending Trump’s rally lined up for hours and can be seen on the television failing to keep social distance or wear a mask, while also hugging each other and cheering loudly. Biden held one of his drive-in rallies in Pennsylvania earlier, where voters listen from their cars and cheer, clap and honk in appreciation while keeping away from each other in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. “People in cars. People in cars!” Trump said sarcastically of Biden’s methods, getting his crowd chuckling. Some Trump supporters in cars made a point of creating a hullabaloo close to Biden’s rally, interrupting the candidate, who called them “chumps”. Just 10 days to go, folks. Meanwhile, Barack Obama is getting ready to hold a drive-in rally for Biden in North Miami within the hour. Meanwhile, top infectious diseases expert and the leading public health official on the White House coronavirus task force, Anthony Fauci, has suggested in his latest interview that it could be time to mandate mask-wearing across American in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. With the pandemic still out of control and infections rising, Fauci expressed exasperation. “If people are not wearing masks, then maybe we should be mandating it,” Fauci told CNN later yesterday. The doctor has been reluctant to talk about a national mandate, hoping that information campaigns, local efforts and facts about the effectiveness of masks would sway the public. Now he appears to be running out of optimism that common sense will prevail. “There’s going to be a difficulty enforcing it, but if everyone agrees that this is something that’s important and they mandate it and everybody pulls together and says, you know, we’re going to mandate it but let’s just do it, I think that would be a great idea to have everybody do it uniformly,” he said last night. Unfortunately, Fauci has been undermined all along the way by Donald Trump and now by the president’s newest official adviser, Scott Atlas (see previous post), whom Fauci has acknowledged is being allowed to edge him out and capture the president’s ear. Fauci also said late Thursday that Trump hasn’t met with the whole task force for months and whereas the White House coronavirus task force met daily earlier in the pandemic they are now only being convened about once a week. While the US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections that could exceed the grim threshold of 100,000 cases a day, Donald Trump’s most controversial official White House coronavirus adviser, Scott Atlas, has put out a tweet, backing up misleading information from the president. CNN’s ace fact-checker Daniel Dale is not having any of it. The country set a record daily number of new coronavirus cases on Friday at more than 83,000, eclipsing the previous high set on 16 July by more than 6,000. Dozens of states have reported their own surge in numbers, with the governor of Utah, Gary Herbert, warning that health services are at breaking point. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. “If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” Good afternoon, Joanna Walters in New York now taking over the reins from my colleague Bryan Armen Graham. Trump just arrived in Lumberton, North Carolina, and has begun addressing a rally there. He’s out of the gate with an entirely unsubstantiated assertion (and a split infinitive) that: “We are going to quickly end this pandemic.” Trump also remarks to the crowd that the sun is hot and he might have to cut his speech short because: “I’m going to be a lobster”. The crowd is having a whale of a time. And then, Christmas greetings. Joe Biden told a rally crowd in the key battleground state of Pennsylvania that he misses up-close campaigning, but doesn’t want his supporters to become “superspreaders”. “I wish I could go car to car and meet you all,” the former vice-president said at the top of his 25min remarks. “I don’t like the idea of all this distance but it’s necessary. I appreciate you being safe. What we don’t want to do is become superspreaders.” Biden’s speech at a drive-in event at Bucks County Community College in the Philadelphia suburb of Bristol came as Donald Trump embarked on a three-state, three-rally jaunt in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin as campaign season hurtles down the homestretch with early voting under way in all 50 states. A Rose Garden event in late September has been labeled a “superspreader” for the virus. More than two dozen people linked to the White House have contracted Covid-19 since the president’s reception on 26 September announcing Amy Coney Barrett as his nominee to the US supreme court. The US Senate has convened a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. Barack Obama was promising to step up for his former vice-president with an appearance in Miami on Saturday afternoon. The problem is nobody seems to know exactly when or where. Democrats have posted only vague details about the event on social media, leaving in the dark hordes of supporters keen to hear the most recent president speak. Not even the hometown Miami Herald appeared to be in the picture, noting only that Obama “planned a drive-in rally Saturday in North Miami”. “Does anyone know where in Miami Obama is going to be at,” one woman asked on Twitter on Saturday lunchtime, echoing dozens of similar messages from baffled supporters. Others speculated there were no details because the event was invite only. The Florida Democratic Party, meanwhile, isn’t saying either way. Florida, a traditional battleground state which Obama carried in his successful 2008 and 2012 campaigns, is crucial to both candidates’ hopes of winning the White House. Donald Trump flipped the state back red in 2016 but trails Biden in latest polls, albeit by a percentage inside the margin of error. National Guard soldiers in the North Dakota capital of Bismarck have helped notify 800 people who tested positive for the coronavirus but initially weren’t told due to a backlog of cases, the AP reports. The backlog was due to a recent sharp increase in coronavirus cases. North Dakota leads the nation with more than 1,272 new cases per 100,000 people over the past two weeks, according to the COVID Tracking Project. This week, North Dakota National Guard soldiers began telling people they tested positive for the virus. They previously were informing people who had contact with someone positive and should monitor their health for signs and symptoms of the virus. North Dakota reported 886 new infections on Friday, down from a record 1,038 cases on Thursday. Health officials reported nine deaths Friday, increasing the statewide death toll to 440. A surge of coronavirus cases in Wisconsin and the Dakotas is forcing a scramble for hospital beds and raising political tensions, as the upper midwest has emerged as one of the nation’s most troubling hotspots. Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new coronavirus cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. The World Health Organization (WHO) chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and WHO, probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Donald Trump has just cast his ballot in the 2020 presidential election at a library in West Palm Beach not far from his Mar-a-Lago resort. “It was a very secure vote, much more secure than when you send in a ballot, I can tell you that,” the US president says. “Everything was perfect. Very strict, by the rules. When you send in your ballot, it can never be like that. It could never be secure like that.” Early voting began in Florida on Monday. More than 52m Americans have already voted, according to the Election Project. Asked by a reporter which candidate he voted for, he smiles and says: “I voted for a guy named Trump.” A busy Saturday lies ahead with 10 days to do until election day: three rallies in three states (North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin). A fascinating and troubling read from Johnny Kaufmann in Georgia, part of our ongoing series The Fight to Vote: Tariq Baiyina has lobbied politicians, shaken hands with governors, set up a college program, and delivered dozens of sermons. Despite all this, the 42-year-old has never voted. And the reason is simple: since 2002, when he was convicted of a felony, he hasn’t been allowed. Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the group of anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which the White House advisers are accused of showing callous disregard for Americans suffering under the Covid-19 pandemic. On Friday, the Project posted to Twitter a letter from Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented Donald Trump. “I am writing concerning the false, malicious and defamatory ads that the Lincoln Project is displaying on billboards in Times Square,” Kasowitz wrote. “Those ads show Ms Trump smiling and gesturing toward a death count of Americans and New Yorkers, and attribute to Mr Kushner the statement that “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem” … with body bags underneath. “Of course, Mr Kushner never made any such statement, Ms Trump never made any such gesture, and the Lincoln Project’s representation that they did are an outrageous and shameful libel.” The Lincoln Project’s response, posted by members including the former GOP strategist-turned-bestselling author Rick Wilson, was typically pugnacious. “The level of indignant outrage Jared Kushner, and Ivanka Trump have shown towards the Lincoln Project for exposing their indifference for the more than 223,000 people who have lost their lives due to the reckless mismanagement of Covid-19 is comical,” a statement said. “…The billboards will stay up. We consider it important that in Times Square, the crossroads of the world, people are continuously reminded of the cruelty or density and staggering lack of empathy the Trumps and the Kushners have displayed towards the American people.” On 22 October, almost three weeks before one of the most consequential presidential elections in recent history, more than 6 million Californians had already voted. The number was several times that of the same point in 2016. The pandemic, massive wildfires and the ongoing fight against police brutality have galvanized voters in America’s most populous state. “We knew the Covid-19 pandemic would pose significant challenges, but elections officials have prepared and voters have responded,” said Alex Padilla, the secretary of state. California has sent mail-in ballots to 22 million registered voters, and the flood of votes that have been returned so far make up about 25%. It’s still unclear whether voter turnout will be higher than in previous years. But the early turnout is “shattering prior election returns”, said Paul Mitchell of Political Data, a bipartisan voter data firm based in California. “We’ve been tracking this kind of stuff for over a decade, and there’s just nothing that compares to how quickly voters have been returning their ballots this election cycle.” Here’s some of the Associated Press report on yesterday’s worrying coronavirus milestone in the US, a record caseload of more than 83,000 in one day. States from Connecticut to the Rocky Mountain West are reeling under the surge. The US death toll has grown to 223,995, according to Johns Hopkins University. The total US caseload reported on the site Friday was 83,757, topping 77,362 cases reported on 16 July. The impact is being felt in every section of the country – a lockdown at the Oglala Sioux reservation in South Dakota, a plea by a Florida health official for a halt to children’s parties, dire warnings from Utah’s governor, an increasingly desperate situation at a hospital in northern Idaho, which is running out of space and considering airlifts to Seattle or Oregon. “We’ve essentially shut down an entire floor of our hospital. We’ve had to double rooms. We’ve bought more hospital beds,” said Dr Robert Scoggins, a pulmonologist at the Kootenai Health hospital in Coeur d’Alene. “Our hospital is not built for a pandemic.” Utah governor Gary Herbert proclaimed Friday “a record day for Utah – but not a good one” as cases reached an all-time high. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” By public health order, masks are required in 21 counties, said Herbert, urging Utah residents to wear one whenever they are around someone outside their immediate household. The seven-day rolling average for new daily cases in the US surpassed 61,140 on Thursday, compared with 44,647 two weeks ago. The record was reached on 22 July when the rolling average was 67,293. The head of the World Health Organization warned that countries in the northern hemisphere are at a “critical juncture”. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. According to scientists at the University of Washington, things could be about to get much, much worse: Joe Biden’s remark in Thursday’s final debate that he would support a “transition” away from oil in the US, in favour of renewable energy, has given Trump an in – and he has tried to seize it. “That could be one of the biggest mistakes made in presidential debate history,” the president said on Friday at a rally at The Villages, a retirement community in central Florida where thousands of people gathered outdoors on a polo field – most not wearing masks. Later, in Pensacola, Trump recounted the moment with glee. “It looked like he made it, it looked like it was going to be OK. He got off the stage, going back to his basement, and then they hit him with the energy question. They hit him with a thing called oil.” Here’s what Oliver Milman, an environment reporter, wrote for us on Friday: Biden attempted to mend potential political damage after the debate when he told reporters he wanted to end subsidies for fossil fuels rather than the industry itself. But two vulnerable House Democrats in oil-producing states, Kendra Horn in Oklahoma and Xochitl Torres Small in New Mexico, quickly used Twitter to distance themselves from Biden’s remarks, perhaps mindful of the persistent attacks on Hillary Clinton in 2016 when she was portrayed as being happy to eliminate coalmining jobs. Climate activists have pointed out that a phase-out of the oil industry is simply a logical consequence of Biden’s climate action plan, which calls for 100% clean energy within 15 years and the negation of all planet-warming gases in the US by 2050. Even some major oil companies, such as BP, have embraced a similar goal of net zero by 2050. Scientists have warned that emissions must hit zero globally by mid-century to avoid the worst ravages of the climate crisis, including mass suffering and displacement of people due to heatwaves, flooding and wildfires. Biden’s comments on the oil industry “now count as the conventional wisdom”, said Bill McKibben, co-founder of the climate group 350.org. “That matters.” States such as Texas, which Democrats are trying to shift from being reliably Republican, have large numbers of workers in the oil and petrochemical industries. But the economic and political terrain is shifting – Texas is also the largest wind energy-producing state in the US while polls show that nearly eight in 10 Americans want the country to focus on boosting renewable energy rather than fossil fuels, including a clear majority of Republican voters. … and welcome to another day of coverage of the US presidential election, US politics in general and of course the coronavirus pandemic, ever a subject of political debate. There are 10 days to go until election day, and Donald Trump is trailing Joe Biden in most national and battleground polls, some deficits by more than 5%, suggesting that even polling inaccuracies of 2016 proportions might not see the president right the ship. This morning, Trump will vote in Florida, then travel to North Carolina. Here is a story about how one leading expert thinks turnout is heading to be the highest since 1908, early voting surging because of the pandemic – and perhaps because of Trump himself. More than 52m votes have been cast, with 100m or so more expected. It’s a three-rally day for Trump, with Ohio and Wisconsin after North Carolina. According to the fivethirtyeight.com averages, he’s a fraction ahead of Biden in Ohio, a fraction behind in North Carolina – and quite a long way behind in Wisconsin. Biden will be in Pennsylvania, where he also leads by more than 5%, for two drive-in rallies, one attended by … Jon Bon Jovi. “To continue our movementI am going to rely on you,” Trump told supporters in Florida on Friday. “Get out and vote. Vote early. Bring your friends, your family, your neighbors, your co-workers. Even grab your boss and say: ‘Come on, boss. You got to vote.’” Don’t, to put it efficiently, expect much evidence of Covid-19 mitigation measures at the Trump events today. Don’t expect much discussion of how case numbers have now hit record highs – and could reach terrifying levels, according to one new report. More to come, of course, from me and other Guardian writers. In the meantime, here’s something I helped Ed Pilkington write, about Trump’s dirty tricks …
2||Poll reveals steep rise in younger adults flouting UK's Covid restrictionsThe proportion of younger adults who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer showed the proportion of 18 to 34-year-olds who admitted breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35 to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. While the poll showed the overwhelming majority were complying with the regulations, the figures came as infections continue to rise ahead of a winter predicted to be very difficult for the NHS to manage. The survey also revealed that the public’s approval of the government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has dropped to its lowest levels since polling began. Currently, 50% disapprove of the government’s handling of the crisis, while 29% approve, down from 31% two weeks ago. Labour has a two percentage point lead over the Tories. The Conservatives are down two points from a fortnight ago, while Labour is stable. The public is split on who would make the best prime minister. Keir Starmer leads by just one point, the same as a fortnight ago. While 31% thought the Labour leader would make the best prime minister, 30% opted for Boris Johnson. Following the battle between the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, and the government over funding, Burnham has a net approval rating of +23 points among those living in the Greater Manchester area. The prime minister has a national net approval rating of -14 points. The public is divided on the clarity of the new tiered system of Covid restrictions. Half (50%) said they thought the system was clear, 44% thought the opposite. Nearly two in five (38%) thought the new measures had not gone far enough, 32% thought the measures were about right and 18% thought they had gone too far. A third (34%) said they were not confident they know what the rules are in their area. Opinium polled 2,002 adults online from 22 to 23 October. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the question over the first graphic; an earlier version said the poll results showed numbers of people abiding by the Covid-19 rules, rather than those who admitted breaking them.
4||Dustin Martin cements status as AFL great with another standout showingAs Richmond underlined their AFL dynasty with a third premiership in four years, the club’s talisman during its era of success, Dustin Martin, secured his status as one of the all-time greats of the game after adding a third Norm Smith medal to his collection. In a breathless finale on Saturday night to a season that will never be forgotten for its singular unpredictability, it was with a contrasting sense of inevitability that the Tigers star added to his individual wins of 2017 and 2019. Martin was the pre-grand final favourite to do what no other player has done before and win a third best-on-ground award in a premiership decider. And when it came to it, the man who seems to thrive on the biggest stage lived up to expectations. Having already kicked goals either side of half-time and with Richmond in the ascendancy as the full-time siren loomed, Martin iced back-to-back flags for the Tigers with a characteristic moment of magic, skidding a dribble kick through to open up a 22-point lead with just under eight minutes remaining. That was probably enough to hammer a nail into Geelong’s coffin – and to ensure he would go home with another Norm Smith medal around his neck. But Martin saved his best for last, snapping a fourth goal as time ran out, having won possession and fended off the attentions of Patrick Dangerfield. Added to his goal tally on a historic night under the lights in Brisbane, Martin had 21 disposals, 10 contested possessions, three tackles and four clearances in yet another outstanding grand final performance. There could have been no argument when the announcement was made on the Gabba stage. The vote was unanimous: each of the five judges put Martin top of their lists, giving him a maximum 15 points, well ahead of Jayden Short (six), Shane Edwards (four), Mitch Duncan (three) and Nathan Broad (two). The medal sees him move ahead of the already elite group of players to have won two Norm Smiths – Hawthorn pair Gary Ayres (in 1986 and 1988) and Luke Hodge (in 2008 and 2014), and Adelaide’s Andrew McLeod (in 1997 and 1998). Asked after the game in an interview with Channel Seven if the enormity of his feat had sunk in, Martin was as understated as ever. “It’s just surreal,” he said. “I can’t believe we’ve won three premierships and that’s just an added bonus. It’s pretty cool.” Tigers coach Damien Hardwick was more effusive. “He’s an incredible athlete isn’t he?” Hardwick told Channel Seven. “He’ll go down probably now as the best finals player of all time ... the way he just controls a game and knows where to be when to be, is incredibly important.” Martin had earlier played an important role in stemming the Geelong tide in the second quarter, breaking a run of five consecutive Cats goals with his first of the night to keep the Tigers in touch going into the major break. And an opportunistic snap from 50m with six minutes remaining in the third quarter gave the Tigers the lead and set them on the path to victory. Martin adds his record third Norm Smith to the Brownlow medal won in 2017 – and his three premiership rings. “It still doesn’t feel real,” he said. “I don’t know what to say. I’m just so grateful to be a part of such an unbelievable group. I’m lost for words to be honest. It’s been a tough road. I couldn’t be prouder of the way we faced a bit of adversity this year and the way we stuck at it. That’s why we’re a great club.”
3||Trump tells GOP donors that holding Senate will be 'tough' – reportShortly after Donald Trump insisted to reporters in Ohio he expected a “red wave” on election day, 3 November, it was reported on Saturday that he told Republican donors this week it would be “tough” for the party to hold on to the Senate. Trump trails Joe Biden in most national and battleground state polls. Democrats hold the House of Representatives and expect to keep it, while many forecasters think they have a good chance of re-taking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47, thereby achieving unified government. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” the Washington Post said Trump told donors in Nashville, Tennessee, on Thursday, before his last debate against Biden, according to an anonymous attendee. “The Senate is very tough.” The Post said Trump also insisted Republicans “are going to take back the House”. As Democrats hold that chamber by 232-197, few forecasters think there is much chance of that. Senate Republicans face defeat in Colorado, Maine, Arizona and perhaps North Carolina. Supposedly safer seats in Georgia, Iowa and Montana look far from secure. Trump reportedly told donors North Carolina would hold and Alabama would be taken back, but said there were “a couple” of senators he did not want to help. “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in,” the Post quoted him as saying. “I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” Trump has clashed with senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who offered harsh criticism and predicted “a Republican bloodbath in the Senate”. Sasse is among conservatives eyeing post-Trump presidential runs. Others usually loyal but under pressure at the polls, such as John Cornyn in Texas and Martha McSally in Arizona, have mounted cautious bids to be seen as independent. Even Mitch McConnell, the ruthless architect of the Republicans’ push to install federal judges under Trump, has said he thinks his party has a “50-50” chance of keeping control. The majority leader, 78, set for re-election despite a tough fight in Kentucky, has rebuffed questions about his health after he appeared with severe bruising to his hands and face. Control of the Senate has allowed Republicans to rush through the nomination of Amy Coney Barrett to succeed Ruth Bader Ginsburg on the supreme court, thereby tipping it 6-3 in favour of conservatives. If the White House and Senate are lost, a reactionary court would be Republicans’ bulwark against a Biden legislative agenda that could include reform to the court and the Senate. The court is due to hear a challenge to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, on 10 November. Trump has said he wants the justices to bring the ACA down, thereby depriving millions of healthcare in a pandemic and kneecapping his own drive to defeat HIV. One senator who initially stood against the push for Barrett said during debate on Saturday she would vote to confirm. When the nomination comes to the floor on Monday, said Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, “I will be a yes. I have no doubt about her intellect … I have no doubt about her capability to do the job.” Generally a defender of abortion rights Democrats say Barrett will threaten, Murkowksi had said no new justice should be named before the election.
0||England's Keira Walsh relishes her new-found freedom after strugglesManchester City’s Keira Walsh is preparing to anchor England’s midfield against Germany on Tuesday with a new-found freedom. It has been a long time coming. Despite a domestic cup double and an almost unbeaten season having meant that the 23-year-old travelled to the 2019 World Cup full of confidence, the pressure of her first major tournament hit hard and the criticism that followed even more so. She told the Guardian in January: “There were times when I thought: ‘Is this actually for me? Do I want to play football any more?’” and conceded that she still struggled on England camps even then, six months after the tournament. Whether it is having had time to settle or a new crop of young players alleviating the pressure that comes with being one of the least experienced, Walsh is starting to thrive “in my own head and my own mentality”, she said after England’s internal friendly on Friday. “I was playing a bit reserved. Now that I’ve taken the reins off a little bit and am not afraid to make mistakes I’m definitely playing a lot better and feeling a lot better on the pitch.” For that match, she was part of a formidable midfield trio with the Arsenal defender Leah Williamson and her City teammate Georgia Stanway and ran rings round England stalwarts Jill Scott, Izzy Christiansen and Fran Kirby, who picked up an ankle injury and is returning to Chelsea. “I definitely feel more comfortable,” Walsh said. “It makes it easier when you’ve got great teammates and players around you. They’re always there to encourage you and make you feel better if you make a mistake. That’s something the staff have spoken about, that if you’re making positive mistakes then they are not too bothered. If you’re trying to play forward and make something happen then they’re happy with that. That’s something I’ve been trying to work on.” Now it is about taking the next step. “I need to be scoring more goals and getting more assists. I play a slightly different role at England and City, I sit a little bit deeper at City, but especially with England there is no reason I can’t be getting in the box and adding more goals to my game.” Playing alongside her close friend Williamson in midfield was special because Walsh has “not played with her since I was about 12, in midfield”. She added: “We’re such good friends and it definitely makes it easier. We knew what each other wanted on the pitch, especially with Georgia in there as well, we spend a lot of time together off the pitch so in terms of the relationship there today we were playing a lot of one-two touches and it just clicked.” Phil Neville said his management team were looking at combinations when asked about the fresh partnerships on show. “We put two teams together two weeks ago and we wanted to change the dynamics a little, play some of the younger ones with different personnel to see if they could handle different scenarios and different systems. “We’re always looking for partnerships across the pitch, where we can get them playing together and gelling together and making sure there’s that connection in different units.” The FA has struggled to find opponents in this run of international breaks. With the Lionesses having no competitive fixtures, having qualified for the Olympics through their World Cup finish and for the Euros as the host nation, it has been hard to get teams to commit given the constantly changing Covid restrictions. That situation places even more importance on the games they do have, the first against Germany, ranked No 2 in the world behind the USA, on Tuesday and then Norway on 1 December. One method has been to take a smaller squad to Germany than they have had at St George’s Park to force players to play for a place in the travelling party. “We’ve 28 in the squad but we’re not taking 28 to Germany so there’s a decision to be had over the next 24 hours,” said Neville. “Every single player has trained really well, knitted in and deserves to go but unfortunately some won’t.”
0||Liverpool 2-1 Sheffield United: Premier League – live reaction!Premier League: Andy Hunter was at Anfield to see Liverpool come from behind to win against much-improved Sheffield United. Here’s how our man on Merseyside saw the action unfold. “It was hard, as expected,” he tells Sky Sports. “Sheffield United are a good side, they worked hard and made it difficult. They were in the game for long periods but we’re delighted that we kept going and got the three points in the end, which was important for us. On Liverpool’s centre-back pairing: “They were brilliant. It’s always going to be difficult against McBurnie up top, who’s very good in the air. I thought they worked the game out well, especially in the second half. We created some good chances and probably should have killed the game off with another goal or two. Overall, we’ve got to be delighted with the three points.” Have Liverpool answered a few questions from people critical of some recent results? “I’m not really interested in that, to be honest. I’m only interested in what I see in the dressing-room and I see hunger and desire every day to improve and win games. We’ve shown resilience and character tonight, digging in when we’re not playing as well as we should be.” The table: Liverpool go second, level on points with Everton having played one game more. Sheffield United remain second from bottom with just one point from a possible 18 but can take a lot of positives from their performance against the champions tonight. View the Premier League table Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeep! It was intriguing without being especially entertaining and Mike Dean draws proceedings to a close and Liverpool take all three points. They went behind to a controversially awarded Sander Berge penalty, but fought back to win courtesy of goals from Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota. 90+3 min: One suspects that was the chance for United. Liverpool have the ball back and are in no hurry to give it away. 90+2 min: Oli McBurnie wins a flick-on and puts the ball into the path of Oliver Burke. He shoots high and wide when he should have at least hit the target. He puts his head in his hands and berates himself in the strongest possible terms. 90+1 min: Ben Osborn is crowded out as he tries to drill the ball across the Liverpool penalty area. 89 min:Time is running out for Sheffield United, who are struggling to get a touch of the ball at the moment. There’s a break in play as Jordan Henderson takes a breath after coming out second best from an accidental collision with Oli McBurnie. 87 min: Sadio Mane leans back as he shoots from distance and the ball sails high over the crossbar. 85 min: Diogo Jota takes his place in the stand and has a big bag of ice taped applied to his right calf, strapped in place by a physio with far more Cling Film than is necessary. Won’t somebody please think of the environment?!?!?! 84 min: Liverpool substitution: Takumi Minamino and James Milner on, Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota off. 82 min: With his back to goal and the ball travelling towards him at speed, Mo Salah rolls John Egan and finds himself through on goal. He dinks the ball on to the upright and it bounces back into the grateful arms of Aaron Ramsdale. 79 min: Sheffield United remain in the game, with Ethan Ampadu playing a diagonal for Ben Osborn to chase. He gets in by the byline and looks up, but there’s nobody in a green shirt for him to pull the ball back towards. 76 min: Sheffield United substitution: David McGoldrick on for John Lundstram. The Republic of Ireland international almost has an instant impact, pouncing on a loose header from Fabinho and sending a half-volley wide of the upright. 75 min: Another header from Gomez, who puts the ball out for a throw-in as Sheffield United enjoy a spell of dominance. 74 min: John Egan plays a ball from deep down the touchline for George Baldock to chase. He picks out Sander Berge, who forces a smart save out of Alisson. 72 min: Ben Osborn sends in a half-decent cross from the left flank, which Joe Gomez thumps clear with a good header. 69 min: Going back to that disallowed Mo Salah goal - his two-touch finish was sublime, but the curtain-twitchers at Stockley Park got this decision right. He was marginally offside when he made his run to meet Alexander-Arnold’s cross. 68 min: As impressive as Sheffield United have been tonight, they’ll be ticked off that both Liverpool goals have come from preventable crosses sent in from the touchline. The first came from Jordan Henderson, the second from Sadio Mane. 67 min: Another corner for Liverpool as Sheffield United fail to clear properly. 66 min: Enda Stevens is booked for a foul on Jota and Liverpool have a free-kick wide on the right in a good position. Alexander-Arnold swings the ball in towards the near post and Firmino’s header is put out for a corner. Liverpool lead: Sadio Mane sends a cross to the far post from the left flank and Diogo Jota leaps to thump a header past Aaron Ramsdale. There was nothing wrong with that one! 63 min: Liverpool fans will love this - Salah’s goal has been ruled out for offside following a VAR intervention. Trent Alexander-Arnold picks out Salah with a cross from the right to the edge of the six-yard box. He controls it beautifully with his first touch, then turns and spanks it past Ramsdale with his second. 60 min: Past the hour mark we go and Sheffield United continue to play very well against the reigning champions. Oliver Burke takes on and beats Fabinho around his outside and scurries into the Liverpool penalty area. His shot from a narrow angle is blocked by Joe Gomez. 58 min: Jurgen Klopp effs and jeffs on the touchline, prompting Sky’s commentator to apologise for the Liverpool manager’s potty mouth. It’s after the watershed, there’s really no need. 55 min: Good play from Liverpool, as Jordan Henderson tries to play a low, curled pass from outside the area into the path of Sadio Mane, who was making a run to the far post. There’s a mite too much welly on it but Mane keeps it in play at the byline and pulls it back to Firmino. His shot from the edge of the penalty area is blocked. 54 min: Sheffield United substitution: Oliver Burke comes on for Rhian Brewster, who’s seen little of the ball and had a fairly quiet game. 51 min: Enda Stevens dives to head a Trent Alexander-Arnold cross out for a corner. From that set-piece, Liverpool win another. Alexander-Arnold’s inswinger is cleared by Oli McBurnie, but only as far as Mo Salah. He tries to arrow the ball into the top corner, but sends his effort high and wide. 50 min: Andy Robertson picks up a pass in space on the right flank but is quickly closed down by Ben Osbourn and forced to pass backwards. Liverpool are dominating but Sheffield United are doing a good job of keeping them at arm’s length. 48 min: Oli McBurnie has been making life very difficult for Joe Gomez and takes advantage of a poor touch from the central defender to win the ball in the Liverpool penalty area. It’s worked towards George Baldock, who tries his luck with a shot from distance. It’s a decent effort but fizzes wide of the left upright. 47 min: Liverpool begin on the front foot, dominating possession in the early stages of the second half, much like they did in the first. Diogo Jota dribbles across the face of the Sheffield United penalty area but has the ball nicked off his toe. 46 min: Play resumes, with Liverpool getting the ball rolling as they play into an empty Kop for this second half. There are no changes in personnel on either side. An email: “I assume that we will see those fine sportsmen from Liverpool vociferously protesting that the Blades should get a penalty for that trip,” writes Jonathan Leiper. “Given that they have invested so much emotional capital in Mane’s offside and all that.” Sheffield United have been excellent in that first half, with George Baldock standing out in a team full of players who are having good games. How on earth have they only got one point from their first five games? Peep! The sides traipse off with a goal apiece. Liverpool started in the ascendency but went behind after Sander Berge slotted home a penalty awarded when Fabinho was penalised for a fould on John Lundstram right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area. Bobby Firmino equalised for Liverpool shortly before the break, tapping into an empty goal after Sadio Mane had forced Aaron Ramsdale into a decent save. 45+3 min: ANother Baldock cross - the man is relentless on the right flank for Sheffield United - is cleared at the far post. 45 min: Another cross from Baldock is cleared by Fabinho, as Lundstram charges into the Liverpool penalty area with a late run. The ball drops for Basham, whose shot is blocked. 43 min: A tip of the hat to Jordan Henderson for his role in the build-up to that goal. His cross from the right touchline was a beauty and at the far post, Mane got a powerful header on the ball. Ramsdale kept it out but couldn’t hold on to it and Firmino’s task couldn’t have been simpler. The sides are level. Roberto Firmino taps in from a few yards out on the follow-up after Aaron Ramsdale could only parry a Sadio Mane header from point-blank range. 40 min: Yup, replays show that Jota tripped Berge but no spot-kick was awarded. Perhaps Andre Marriner and his VAR officials have gone for their half-time cuppa early. 38 min: Chris Basham intercepts a cross from Firmino from the left, with Mo Salah and Jordan Henderson lurking with intent behind him. Moments previously, Sander Berge was denied what looked a clear penalty for a trip on him by Diogo Jota inside the Liverpool penalty area. 37 min: Another George Baldock cross into the Liverpool penalty area is cleared by Jordan Henderson. 34 min: Trent Alexander-Arnold and Andy Robertson aren’t getting forward down the wings as much as usual this evening, with Sheffield United’s wing-backs keeping them pinned back as much as possible and forcing them to play the ball inside. As I type that, young Trent makes an eejit of me by getting forward and playing a raking pass into the Sheffield United penalty area, where Mo Salah tries to lift the ball over Aaron Ramsdale. Enda Stevens does well to distract him and the ball goes out for a corner from which nothing comes. 32 min: Joe Gomez plays a wonderful crossfield pass to Mo Salah on the right flank and the Egyptian jinks inside. He runs into traffic, turns and tees the ball up for Jordan Henderson, whose shot from just outside the penalty area is blocked by Enda Stevens. 30 min: Liverpool get the ball back to Alisson courtesy of headers from Fabinho and Robertson, while Rhian Brewster tracks both players waiting to pounce on any mistakes. 28 min: Nothing much to report as the game settles into something of a lull following periods of dominance from both sides. 24 min: Sheffield United have certainly found their groove now. A crossfield pass from George Baldock is caught on the volley by Ben Osborn. His ferocious rasper from about 12 yards is saved by Alisson. 23 min: Replays of that most recent Sheffield United penalty appeal show that George Baldock’s cross from the right definitely struck Andy Robertson’s arm. It wasn’t outstretched or in an “unnatural” position, which is probably why no spot-kick was awarded. 22 min: Alisson wins a free-kick as Sheffield United take a corner. He was being shoved as he tried to fist the ball clear. 20 min: Oli McBurnie squanders a glorious chance to put Sheffield United two up after beating the Liverpool offside trap, running on to a glorious cross-field pass, controlling with a wonderful first touch and then sidefooting wide of the far post from a narrow angle. 19 min: Another penalty shout from Sheffield United as a George Baldock cross from the right appears to hit an arm. The appeal goes unheeded. 17 min: Diogo Jota drifts into the centre from the right and picks out Salah with a pass before being fouled. Free-kick for Liverpool, in line with the right side of the United penalty area, a long way out. Trent Alexander-Arnold sends the ball into the penalty area, it finds its way to Gini Wijnaldum and he shoots high and wide. 14 min: Fabinho looks very aggrieved about that penalty decision that went against him. He stuck his foot in right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area, getting a little bit of ball and a little bit of John Lundstram’s foot. Mike Dean didn’t consult his pitchside monitor, choosing to take his VAR official Andre Marriner’s word for that the Brazilian had committed the foul. Sheffield United lead! Alisson dives to his right, Sander Berge shoots down the middle. Mike Dean signals for a penalty following a consultation with his VAR official. 9 min: John Lundstram is tackled by Fabinho on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area and goes down. That might be a penalty. 8 min: Liverpool have settled into the game quickly and are bossing the game, while Sheffield United have yet to find anything resembling a groove. 6 min: The foul that led to that free-kick was a daft one by John Lundstram on Mo Salah, which earned the Sheffield United midfielder a yellow card and almost cost his team a goal. 3 min: Liverpool win a free-kick inside their own half and Trent Alexander-Armstrong spots Ramsdale off his line and shoots for goal. The Sheffield United is almost embarrassed but backpedals furously enough to stretch and tip the ball over his crossbar. That was a great effort from Alexander-Arnold. Nothing comes from the corner. 2 min: John Egan is forced to slide in and prevent the ball reaching Mo Salah in front of an empty net after Aaron Ramsdale charged off his line to chase a long ball from Andy Robertson. Sadio Mane got to it first and squared it, only for Egan to get back and intercept. 1 min: Sheffield United get the ball rolling, their players wearing green shirts, yellow shorts and yellow socks. Liverpool’s players wear their usual home kit of red shirts, shorts and socks. Not long now: The teams are out on the pitch, Sheffield United trouping out first, closely followed by Liverpool. Alisson points to the sky, getting a quick prayer in before lining up with his team-mates in a socially responsible fashion. It’s all about the optics - they’ll be getting up close and personal in just a minute or so. Jurgen Klopp speaks: “Having ALisson back is good news,” says Liverpool’s manager, upon being asked the alarmingly stupid question: is having Alisson back good news. “It was his decision and he’s old enough and experienced enough to make it.” Chris Wilder: “He’s a talented young player and we’re delighted we brought him to the football club,” says Sheffield United’s gaffer upon being asked about Rhian Brewster. “I’m looking forward to watching him play tonight. Elsewhere in the Premier league In torrential rain, Manchester United and Chelsea have just played out a very boring stalemate in a match both managers seemed more intent on not losing than winning. Manchester United were lucky to survive a first-half penalty shout, when Harry Maguire clearly grappled Cesar Azpilicueta at a corner. Those teams: Jurgen Klopp makes three changes to the side that drew with Everton last weekend, two of them enforced. Gini Wijnaldum comes into midfield in place of Fabinho, who drops to fill the Virgil van Dijk-shaped hole in Liverpool’s defence alongside Joe Gomez. Thiago Alcantara has not recovered sufficiently to make the matchday squad, which means Diogo Jota is in. Joel Matip is also out injured, but Alisson returns to the side. A liverpool player until recently, Rhian Brewster makes his full debut for Sheffield United. Max Lowe appears to have been stood down after suffering a blow to the head against Fulham last week, while Oliver Norwood drops to the bench. Ethan Ampadu and Ben Osborn come into the side. Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Gomez, Fabinho, Robertson, Henderson, Wijnaldum, Salah, Firmino, Jota, Mane. Subs: Adrian, Milner, Jones, Minamino, Shaqiri, Phillips, Williams. Sheffield United: Ramsdale, Baldock, Basham, Egan, Ampadu, Stevens, Berge, Lundstram, Osborn, McBurnie, Brewster. Subs: Verrips, Sharp, Burke, Jagielka, Norwood, McGoldrick, Robinson. Tonight’s match officials Referee: Mike Dean Assistants: Darren Cann and Mark Scholes Fourth official: Andy Madley VAR: Andre Marriner Early Sheffield United team news Having scored just twice in five Premier League thus far, Sheffield United are in dire need of goals and former Liverpool player Rhian Brewster could be the man to provide them if he is handed his full debut for the club following his recent move. Left-back Max Lowe got a bang on the head against Fulham last week and was due to be assessed before the blades boarded their bus to Merseyside. Early Liverpool team news It’s flown below the radar so you may have missed the news, but Liverpool are going to be without Virgil van Dijk for the foreseeable future after he tore his ACL during last weekend’s Merseyside derby. The victim of an ludicrous Jordan Pickford challenge that went unpunished and has prompted no end of Liverpool supporters to call for the Everton goalkeeper to be brought to the Hague and tried for crimes against humanity, Van Dijk could miss the rest of the season and we wish him well as begins his recovery. Also clattered in that game, Thiago Alcantara will be assessed before kick-off. Having been out with a shoulder injury, Alisson Becker is reported to be returning to full fitness and may return tonight. Midfielder Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and defender Konstantinos Tsimikas are both out, while Naby Keita and Joel Matip are major doubts. Sheffield United’s bad start to the season could be about to get a whole lot worse as they travel to Anfield to take on the reigning champions. A revelation last season following their promotion from the Championship, Chris Wilder’s side picked up their first point of the current campaign in a slightly fortuitous draw against fellow strugglers Fulham last weekend. They’ll have their work cut out to take anything home today, but will fancy their chances against a team that have been imperious at times, but occasionally bang average and – against Aston Villa – downright awful. Kick-off is at 8pm (BST), but stay tuned in the meantime for team news and build-up.
2||Welsh government to review ban on sales of non-essentialsThe Welsh government is to review how the ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the 17-day lockdown is working, Mark Drakeford has said. The move followed growing calls to reverse the ban in the nation, with a senior police figure saying it benefits only Amazon and more than 30,000 people signing a petition calling for a U-turn on the restriction, which had led some shops to seal off shelves housing children’s clothes and books with clingfilm. “We’ll be reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets and making sure that common sense is applied,” the first minister tweeted. “Supermarkets can sell anything that can be sold in any other type of shop that isn’t required to close. In the meantime, please only leave home if you need to.” His announcement on Saturday evening came after he said the ban was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retailers have to close during the period, which began at 6pm on Friday. However, North Wales police and crime commissioner Arfon Jones said the move would only enrich online internet giants at the expense of high street retailers – concerns echoed by the Welsh Conservatives. “Personally I think the Welsh government decision to ban the sale of non-essential goods in shops that also sell essential goods is wrong and the only people that will benefit will be online sellers like Amazon,” he tweeted. “Bad move on this occasion by Mark Drakeford.” Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”, and it defended the ban on Saturday. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. “Supermarkets can keep selling items you can find in other essential shops – such as stationery/greeting cards,” it tweeted. “The purpose of selling essential items only during firebreak is to discourage spending more time than necessary in shops and to be fair to retailers who have to close. This is not for the sake of being difficult – we need to do everything we can to minimise the time we spend outside our homes. This will help save lives and protect the NHS.” A video posted on social media appeared to show a man ripping down plastic sheeting that was covering clothing aisles in a supermarket. “We do not agree that this is a prudent or rational measure, and will create more harm than good,” the petition stated. “We do not agree for example that parents should be barred from buying clothes for their children during lockdown while out shopping. “This is disproportionate and cruel, and we ask that the decision be reversed immediately.” On Saturday, Andrew Davies, the Welsh Conservatives’ shadow health minister, called for the ban to be “dropped immediately” and has written to the presiding officer of the Welsh parliament calling for members to be recalled to discuss the ban. “I have never witnessed such a fierce backlash against a decision from the Welsh Labour government,” he said. “This ludicrous ban has caused real anger across Wales and it’s not fair on those staff working in our supermarkets, and the general Welsh public who are already at their wit’s end with a difficult fortnight looming. “The Wales-wide lockdown is disproportionate, unnecessary and biting our economy hard. I’d rather see people being able to buy items in shops in their communities that provide employment to local people than see millions spent at online internet giants.”
0||Diogo Jota completes Liverpool's comeback win over Sheffield UnitedAnother Saturday, another dose of VAR torment for Liverpool; only this time Jürgen Klopp’s champions would not be denied victory by strange goings-on at Stockley Park. Diogo Jota’s header lifted Liverpool level on points with Everton at the top of the Premier League after VAR had awarded Sheffield United a dubious penalty and disallowed a sublime goal from Mohamed Salah. Despite the interventions that are driving Klopp to distraction his team extended their unbeaten run at Anfield to a remarkable 62 league games. The 9,999th goal in the club’s history means Liverpool can equal their record of 63 home league games unbeaten – set between 1978 and 1981 – when West Ham visit next Saturday. Klopp will be seeking improvement in his team’s performance, this was more hard-fought and dogged than slick and stylish, but their focus and resilience was faultless yet again. Jota’s winner, coming two minutes after Salah’s disallowed volley, was the hallmark of a single-minded side. The wait for a first league win of the campaign continues for Chris Wilder, although there was plenty to encourage the United manager here. Oli McBurnie and Oliver Burke, a second-half replacement for the former Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster, caused all manner of problems for the home defence but did not find the composure in front of goal to capitalise. Alisson, returning to the side after missing four games with a shoulder problem, was gainfully employed all evening as United created enough chances to claim a point. “They had more possession and control of the game but it wasn’t one-way traffic,” Wilder correctly stated. “We could have done better with the positions we got into in the final third. They did that and we didn’t. This league is ruthless and cruel and it is a cruel one to take tonight.” Jota brought even more quality and adventure to the Liverpool attack as Klopp made a rare formation switch to 4-2-3-1 with the Portugal international on the right and Salah leading the line. Jordan Henderson in particular relished the extra options ahead of him while Sadio Mané flourished as usual on the left. Mané almost put the champions ahead on 67 seconds when he latched on to Andy Robertson’s fine pass and beat Aaron Ramsdale as the United goalkeeper unnecessarily rushed from goal. The covering John Egan, one of several impressive defenders in the visiting ranks, cleared before Salah could tap into an empty net. Moments later Trent Alexander-Arnold almost scored with an audacious free-kick from inside his own half but the back-peddling Ramsdale tipped over to deny the defender one of the goals of the season. Liverpool were dominant from the start. United had not constructed an attack of note before they were awarded a penalty that altered the complexion of the first half. As with the finale at Goodison Park last week, when Henderson had a 92nd minute winner ruled out for a fractional offside against Mané, Klopp was left aghast at the intrusion of VAR. It looked a harsh decision to the naked eye when Mike Dean penalised Fabinho for a foul on McBurnie. The Brazilian appeared to win the ball just outside the area as he attempted to atone for a poor clearance. The VAR official, Andre Marriner, however, ruled that contact was made on the 18-yard line and upgraded Dean’s decision to a penalty. It was the first spot-kick awarded against Liverpool at Anfield for two years. Sander Berge sent Alisson the wrong way from the spot and United were emboldened by their lead. George Baldock’s crosses were a constant source of danger. McBurnie should have doubled United’s advantage from a superb crossfield ball by the wing-back but his shot lacked any conviction and sailed well wide. Another Baldock delivery teed up Ben Osborn for a volley that the Liverpool keeper pushed away and United had three more penalty appeals dismissed before the interval. Two – for a handball by Robertson and a push by Alexander-Arnold on McBurnie – were rightly ignored but Jota was fortunate VAR chose not to review his challenge on Berge when the midfielder darted into the box. Baldock and Osborn were effective in denying space to Liverpool’s marauding full-backs but Alexander-Arnold was involved in the hosts’ equaliser late in the first half. His lay-off was swept towards the far post by Henderson and Mané, somehow left unmarked, met the excellent cross with a powerful header. Ramsdale saved but the ball dropped kindly for Firmino to tap home his first goal of what by his elevated standards has been an underwhelming season so far. Salah thought he had edged Liverpool ahead with a stunning strike as pressure mounted on the visiting defence in the second half. The striker’s first touch to control Alexander-Arnold’s cross into the area was beautiful. His second was even better, volleying beyond Ramsdale in the same movement for his 101st goal in Liverpool colours. But no, it was back to 100 when VAR spotted he was just offside when the cross was played. Liverpool were not deflated by their latest slap from technology. Two minutes later the irrepressible Mané crossed from the left and Jota, left in too much space by Enda Stevens, steered an unstoppable header beyond Ramsdale. Salah could have given his team the comfort of a two-goal lead when he turned Egan inside the box but chipped against a post from close range.
2||'This song is the struggle': Vanuatu's treehouse troubadour on love, loss and languageVanuatu singer-songwriter Tio Bang Massing writes from a place that few still remember. He tries to live there too, with an almost Buddha-like simplicity, in a makeshift home tucked among the roots of a sprawling banyan tree. Massing has been performing most of his adult life, as a founding member of Vanuatu’s renowned fire dance troupe, and as one of the anchors of Dropvkal Groove, a roots music collective. But now he has emerged – from his first ever visit inside a recording studio – with a debut album, Sorousian, drawing inspiration from his volcanic home island of Ambrym, as well as his new arboreal place on Efate island. The album was produced by Wantok Records, a Brisbane-based label that specialises in fostering indigenous talent from Melanesia and Timor. Studio head David Bridie was one of Sorousian’s producers. Massing, he says, “is an effortless artist, in the way he sings and plays guitar ... he comes up with these very textured vocal layers, adds in overdubs of shakers and tam tam and percussion”. Black Butterfly, Massing’s first single, is about, ostensibly, a black butterfly. But the metaphor runs deeper, invoking the fleeting evanescence of the creature’s existence when he sings: “I’m still living, so I must sing, for the voices that can’t be heard any more.” Is Massing the black butterfly? “Maybe I am one of the black butterflies, one of the people who dream to live free with the land,” he tells the Guardian. “But you know it doesn’t really work today. It’s a dream … everyone loves it, they’re talking about it, but I’m not living it. Something we all claim to love, something we all say we want. Something we don’t have the courage and the frailty to be,” Massing says. “That’s the life I named black butterfly.” Living in Vanuatu, the country ranked the most vulnerable on earth to natural disasters and the impacts of climate change, the environment, its decay and its fragility, are recurrent themes. “I have to do something for this earth, as well as for the next generation: for my kids and their kids, you know?”, Massing says. He finds music – or rather music finds him – everywhere. “What is happening around inspires me to share my world through music. And I’m representing communities of other people as well,” he says, such as in Morning Star Bae Kam, a paean to Melanesian neighbour West Papua’s struggle for independence, where he urges a continued resilience: “This song is the struggle/The struggle is this song.” On the outskirts of Port Vila, Massing has built himself a single tiny room out of bamboo and cast-off timbers tucked into the roots of a towering banyan tree, known in Vanuatu as a nambanga. It’s an unhurried existence in his treehouse, an atmosphere that informs his songwriting. Massing’s songs shift from line to line between Vanuatu pidgin Bislama, Ambrymese, and English. Is he worried that his magpie lyrics will leave people behind? “It’s what I believe in, what I’m seeing.” But will people understand? “Maybe, or maybe not… like, if I get one person out of the crowd, then that’s alright, you know? If someone is trying to think of what I’m trying to see, then that’s all right. And if it’s no one, that’s all right.” He smiles broadly, “This album is kind of like an experiment of the local music of Vanuatu.” In polyglot Vanuatu, language is a potent bearer of history, and custom, and place. Mumbwe, Massing’s second single, is derived from from the custom of his home island of Ambrym. The bare bones melody is a reworking of a song used in the Rom customary dance Massing used to watch as a child. The language used in the song is lost from everyday use, but preserved in song. “That,” Massing says quietly, “is the kind of experimenting I’ve been doing.” Recording Sorousian was Massing’s first ever time in a studio, and there is quaint juxtaposition to the album that time has produced. The album, now, lives everywhere, on streaming services to every corner of the globe: Massing remains at home, under the banyan tree, just living.
4||British & Irish Lions could tour Japan in wake of sides meeting at MurrayfieldThe British &amp; Irish Lions have opened the door for a future tour of Japan after announcing only the third “home” match in their illustrious history against the Brave Blossoms next summer. Warren Gatland’s side will face Japan at Murrayfield on 26 June – the same day as the Premiership final – and while they will do so without any England players, the fixture will serve as a key part of the Lions’ preparations before facing the world champions. The trip to South Africa will be the first since the San Francisco agreement in 2017, when it was decided by the game’s powerbrokers that tours would be cut to eight matches. That meeting was controversial because the Lions were not properly represented and while the Murrayfield match increases the number of fixtures to nine, the Premiership clubs’ refusal to make any of their players available demonstrates further how the Lions are becoming increasingly marginalised. Their place on the international schedule is at least guaranteed up to 2032, according to the San Francisco agreement, but the global calendar is up for debate with a number of unions eager to move the existing summer window to October. Should that happen, a tour of Japan – which cemented itself as rugby’s biggest new broadcast market during last year’s World Cup – could move closer to becoming reality. The Lions’ managing director, Ben Calveley, said: “We’re developing a relationship here with Japan, this is the first time that the Lions has played against Japan and it will be a historic Test. My view is that the Lions can offer an awful lot to the growth of the global game and we should consider how best it can do that. “I will absolutely continue to represent the Lions as best I can within those global negotiations when they take place, whereas the Lions may not have been directly represented in the room previously, we are now directly represented and I make all the points that I need to make as any of those global season negotiations take place.” Calveley also revealed that Gatland, who has spent the past month attending a host of club matches, will delay naming his assistant coaches until the new year but confirmed discussions had opened with the home unions. Four years ago, Gatland wanted Gregor Townsend, who had just been appointed Scotland’s head coach, to be part of his backroom staff but he could not secure his release. Calveley, though, is optimistic no such problems will happen this time. The Ireland head coach, Andy Farrell, has been part of the coaching team for the past two tours and while he recently said he has not been approached by Gatland he did not rule out a third Lions trip. Calveley also said club coaches will also be considered, raising the prospect of the Crusaders’ Scott Robertson, who has expressed an interest, Stuart Lancaster from Leinster or Exeter’s Rob Baxter being involved. Calveley said: “What Warren and I have been doing is getting round the head coaches and the chief executives from each of the four unions and I can confirm they’re all incredibly supportive, as you would expect them to be because they absolutely understand the value of the Lions. “I don’t think there’s any assumption the coaches have to come from within the union constructs, they could come from a club environment. “We’re very open we’re interested in appointing coaches that can help us win in South Africa and that’s the main criteria. Anyone that can help us win these Test matches would be interesting to Warren and ultimately it’s his call.”
4||Henry Slade the rock as unstoppable Exeter roll on to cherished doubleNo scorching May heat or packed stands, just damp autumn leaves on a windblown concourse and a soaking, empty colosseum. On the face of it this was as far removed from grand theatre as a small flapping tent on a sodden campsite but Exeter are increasingly a team for all seasons and stages, whatever the opposition or the weather throw at them. It was properly Hitchcock shower-scene wet by the end but, when it absolutely counted, the Chiefs’ grip on a cherished double proved impossible to shake. They are in excellent company with only Leicester (twice), Wasps and Saracens (twice) having previously won the European Cup and Premiership in the same season. None of those fine sides had to contend with the unique challenges of this prolonged campaign, nor were they playing in the second tier of English rugby just a decade previously. It is not just what Exeter are achieving that sets them apart but where they have come from. Once again, though, they kept their absent supporters on edge, only a crucial late lineout steal by Jonny Gray and a concluding penalty by Joe Simmonds, his 33rd consecutive successful kick dating back to the end of August, finally relieving the suffocating pressure. Not for the first time in recent times, an English club clad all in black simply refused to be denied. Wasps also deserve massive credit, especially considering the Covid-disrupted buildup that cost them the services of four of their first-choice 23. At times Jacob Umaga played as if it were a midsummer night in the tropics, which was some feat, while Jimmy Gopperth played the angles beautifully alongside him. Until the Chiefs scrum finally began to ratchet up the pressure in the second half, it was anybody’s game. Did the conditions play into the hands of Exeter’s big forwards? Maybe to an extent but at times it was virtually impossible for anyone to do anything beyond the absolute basics. There is a reason why union administrators prefer their finales to be played in late spring or early summer, on hard, fast tracks rather than inside the equivalent of a dishwasher halfway through its cycle. The elements, though, could not stop Henry Slade displaying the class that makes him an increasingly sharp attacking threat. Ball in two hands, he was swift to spot a mismatch with two rather less mobile Wasps forwards and a little step took him over for another important big-game contribution. It is reaching the point where England need to think about building their starting midfield around Slade rather than endlessly agonising about where he might fit in. Over the next few weeks, however, Eddie Jones will have to do without Jack Nowell, who was on the field here despite having severed ligaments beneath his big toe. The injury will rule him of autumn international consideration but there was no way he was going to miss out on a second major final in eight days. Even on one tattooed foot, the winger is still guaranteed to give everything and, one day, he will enjoy the prolonged run of injury‑free rugby his Cornish fan club is yearning for. There will be no more active outings, though, for Exeter’s other backline totem, Gareth Steenson, for whom this was the final game before retirement. Along with Phil Dollman and others he helped set the tone for what has followed back in the Championship days, not least an instinctive ability to rise to the biggest occasions. This time there was no need for the extra-time penalty winner that sunk Wasps in the 2017 Premiership final but, had there been, the Ulsterman would not have flinched. Perhaps the only unanswered question is this: what would have unfolded had Saracens’ salary cap misadventures not removed them from this season’s equation? None of us will ever know but this is now a more confident, wiser Exeter team than the one overtaken in the closing quarter of last year’s Premiership final. Where Saracens faltered at the death in their European semi-final against Racing 92, too, the Chiefs have now twice held firm when it really mattered. This has been a season like no other and yet still, 12 months on, they remain tougher to shift than a superglued barnacle. Their key men all have plenty more mileage in them, Devon is suddenly a magnet for any ambitious player and they will be even harder to beat when their besotted fans are finally allowed back in Sandy Park. Assuming they can find a way to celebrate over the next few days without joining the Barbarians on the naughty step, it would appear the West Country feelgood factor will endure for a while yet. Exeter have just won a double and still have a good deal of improvement in them. If that is not the definition of club rugby heaven, nothing is.
22||Strictly Come Dancing 2020: week one – as it happenedAnd that’s IT for Week One of Strictly! So great to be back on the dancefloor. I’m predicting Jacquie and Anton to go next week, and a four-way final featuring Clara, Maisie, Nicola and HRVY. Feel free to make your predictions in the comment box, I’m hoping it will stay open a little longer than last week. Thank you for joining in and being hilarious as always - there’s no Halloween Spooktacular next week as it’s a bit early in the season for a theme week, but don’t let that stop you putting on fishnets and bat wings if that’s your thing. It all kicks off at 7.15pm on Saturday; in the meantime you can find me on Twitter @heidistephens, so please come and say hello. Have a great week, and I’ll see you then! Hx Bruno is on Zoom! DRINK. He’s been to the same hairdresser as Jamie, Karen and Gorka. It Takes Two is back throughout the week, maybe this will be the year I FINALLY get an invite. Summary of this VT: there is a great deal of Strictly content available if you’re so inclined. Scores: 8,8,9 - a total of 25 for HRVY and JNTT. Craig though it was spectacular, and Shirley thought it was fierce, fast and furious and HRVY is definitely one to watch. Motsi thought it was the best first dance she’s ever seen, and asks where we go from here. Well, quite. HRVY is humping a microphone, which just made me shout ‘EW NO’ like an absolute mum. His toes are very turned in but he’s definitely got some moves. Great timing and energy, that’s a pretty good outing for Week One. Good work, consonant boy. And finally it’s HRVY and JNTT! Their first dance is the Jive to ‘Faith’ by Stevie Wonder feat. Ariana Grande. Getting your Jive out on Week One is either genius or insanity, what happened to the days when everybody did a Cha Cha or a Waltz and eased themselves in gently? Next week in the bingo: ‘this is the favourite song of *insert relative here*’. Scores: 3,6,6 - a total of 15 for Bill and Oti. THREE, Craig? That’s just RUDE. ‘You two are a whole mood, guys,’ said Motsi. Great commitment but the technique needs work. Craig thought Bill created a whole new dance genre, like dancing on hot coals after a dozen double espressos. Shirley thought it was inspiring for every man watching, but his posture needs work. Everything about this is amazing. Oti is a goddess, Bill has amazing rhythm and some pretty decent footwork, despite it all looking a bit clunky in places. I don’t care, it’s pure joy and I want to watch it again. MORE PLEASE. Next up it’s BILL AND OTI! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Pata Pata’ by Miriam Makeba. Bill looked very promising in the group dance last week, and I suspect he’s going to throw himself into this Cha Cha with both barrels. Wouldn’t you if you got the chance to dance with Oti? You’d have to tie me down. Only two couples left! Hooray, but also boo. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Nicola and Katya. Shirley thought it was a partnership she’s really going to enjoy watching, and Motsi wasn’t disappointed either - Nicola needs to work on getting her upper body more stable, however. Craig though it was absolute dynamite, a fantastic partnership. Already this is incredibly cool, and Nicola and Katya look great together. Some nice footwork too, although a bit tentative from Nicola in places and the transitions need work. Nice timing though - another couple with bags of potential, can’t wait to see what they bring to the dancefloor in the coming weeks. It’s time for NICOLA AND KATYA! Their first dance is the Quickstep to ‘Get Happy’ by Ella Fitzgerald. I can’t wait to see these two dance together for the first time, it feels like such an exciting step for Strictly and I’m really intrigued to see what Katya is going to do. That said, a Quickstep in Week One feels…bonkers. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Ranvir and Giovanni. How do we feel about Gio’s hair? I can’t decide. It’s a bit One Direction. Part of me wants to brush it lovingly out of his eyes, the other part wants to take a pair of kitchen scissors to it. Craig thought Ranvir used her dress like a diva drag queen, it was a great first dance. Shirley thought Ranvir’s hands were exquisite, and she was a superstar. Motsi thought Ranvir has really improved since the launch show, she adored it. Ranvir looks absolutely FIERCE in her red Paso dress, I love it. Some nice skirt work to open, and some good footwork in hold. Giovanni is prancing about trying to steal the limelight, but Ranvir is giving it both barrels. I thought that was a really nice job for a Week One Paso. Next up it’s RANVIR AND GIOVANNI! Their first dance is the Paso Doble to ‘End of Time’ by Beyoncé. I love this song, and I love a Paso, and I have high hopes for this pairing. This show seems very long considering there are three fewer couples than usual. Is everyone still with me? Maybe I’m just out of practice. Scores: 4,6,6 - a total of 16 for Jason and Luba. Jason is quite...enthusiastic, isn’t he? Motsi loved the joy that Jason brought to the dancefloor, but Craig wasn’t fond of the Jackson 5 thing going into the Foxtrot. Shirley thought Jason gave 100% and didn’t hold back, and his footwork was fantastic - lots of potential. AGREE. Jason has some lovely performance skills for a sportsman, and this has bags of charm - his footwork and posture definitely need work but he’s another one that could go on a journey this year. It’s time for JASON AND LUBA! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘My Girl’ by The Temptations. It’s quite early for cutesy faux-romance that makes your teeth hurt, but I’ll let it go just this once because maybe cheesy love stories are what the world needs right now. Scores: 8,8,8, - a total of 24 for Maisie and Gorka. Rein it in Maisie, go on a journey. It’s the only way to win. Shirley thought Maisie was an absolute firecracker and Motsi loved the authenticity of it. Craig thought it was a-may-zing. Maisie’s dress is some kind of flamingo/peacock hybrid, and Maisie is shaking those tail feathers like she’s got ants in her knickers. It’s a proper full-on Samba and I love everything about it; it’s my favourite kind of chaotic party Latin. Maisie is clearly a great dancer, which means she’ll make the final but won’t win. Such is the way of Strictly. It’s time for MAISIE AND GORKA! Their first dance is the Samba to ‘Samba (Conga)’ by Gloria Estefan. Last year Kelvin and Oti did a Samba in Week One that was really quite special, I feel like that set quite a high bar. That said, Maisie strikes me as the kind of woman who would drink Woo Woos out of a fishbowl then shake everything she has on the dancefloor, so why the hell not. Scores: 6, 6, 7 - a total of 19 for JJ and Amy. Families on Zoom! DRINK. Craig thought there was gapping and it needed more drive, but had some nice rise and fall. Shirley agrees with Craig about the drive but it was simple, beautiful and lovely. Motsi got a bit emotional, it had lovely atmosphere and great chemistry. I’ve just realised what Motsi’s dress reminds me of. She looks like she’s got a full body plastercast, like they were supposed to fix her arm but somehow did the rest of her body instead. This is a lovely Waltz and it’s impossible not to find JJ a bit dreamy, although he’s got a few posture issues. But there’s a nice connection between these two and I’m looking forward to seeing his dancing journey. Liked that very much. Next up it’s JJ AND AMY. Their first dance is the Waltz to ‘What A Wonderful World’ by Louis Armstrong. This is next level 2020 denial and I can’t even be annoyed about it. Scores: 3 (drink),5,5 - a total of 13 for Jacquie and Anton. Motsi thought Jacquie looked comfortable on the floor, but needs to express herself more. Craig thought it lacked musicality and looked a bit lumpy, but on the bright side it was ten times better than Theresa May. Shirley was pleasantly surprised, it was a huge improvement compared to the launch show. This has a random election theme that means the first 30 seconds are spent faffing about with a ballot box. It’s a very odd song for an American Smooth, but Jacquie’s doing her absolute best despite hats and canes and superfluous props. No killer moves, but also not the worst partner Anton’s ever had by a country mile. It’s time for JACQUI AND ANTON! Their first dance is the Foxtrot to ‘Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life’ by Monty Python. Does anyone else feel like Anton has resigned himself to the early bus home next Sunday? Last week’s group dance would suggest Jacquie isn’t the world’s most natural dancer, although it would be kind of amazing if that was the biggest ruse of all time and she’s actually got killer moves. Scores: 5,6,7 - a total of 18 for Clara and Aljaz. Bit mean, Craig. I didn’t think that was stompy at all. Shirley loved the rhythm and the chemistry between Clara and Aljaz and Motsi loved the determination and the energy. Craig thought it was stompy and needed straighter legs, although he loved the disco elements. Clara looks incredible in electric blue fringing and has legs to die for. This is a great Cha Cha with lovely energyfrom Clara and some really nice footwork. She has loads of attitude and I think these two are going to be real contenders. LOVED that. Next up it’s CLARA AND ALJAZ! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Don’t Start Now’ by Dua Lipa. Am very glad to see they’ve binned off Week One ‘let’s do a song about your job’, because all the songs about DJs are rubbish. Apart from ‘God Is A DJ’ by Faithless, which I’m not sure quite works as a Cha Cha. Scores: 6,5,6 - a total of 17 for Max and Dianne. Am getting the feeling that the music brief this week was DO SOMETHING UPLIFTING EVERYTHING IS AWFUL. Not that I’m complaining, I’m very much here for happy happy joy joy on my telly every weekend. I think we can all agree that nobody ever needs to hear the Dave Arch version of Roxanne by The Police again. Craig didn’t like the free arm placement and Max needed to lead the dance more, but he’s very watchable and left Craig wanting more. Shirley thought Max has great chemistry and potential, but she wanted a traditional Tango without sections out of hold. Motsi thought Max had a beautiful neck and a good frame but Max was overthinking it and it inhibited Max’s energy. What’s the obsession with Max’s neck? It’s just a neck. We’ve all got one. So this is definitely a Tango, but lacking drive and thrust from Max. He’s got some half-decent timing, but his top line is all over the shop. Great effort for Week One though, feels like he could improve a lot over the coming weeks. It’s time for MAX AND DIANNE! Their first dance is the Tango to ‘Best Fake Smile’ by James Bay. My best fake smile wore out some time in April. Now it’s just a grimace. Some days I wake up looking like the Joker from Batman. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 31 for Caroline and Johannes. Motsi didn’t see a dancer, she saw a dancing queen. Caroline had lovely attention to detail. Caroline is WEEPING, and it’s only Week 1. Craig thought her feet were a bit turned out but Caroline’s musicality was sensational. Shirley thought it was graceful, charming and elegant, albeit her lower half needed some work. Honestly, I think that might be one of Tess’s worst outfits ever. Those wet look flares are just horrible, what was she thinking? I LOVE Caroline’s yellow dress, and she has lovely musicality and performance. A few balance issues in hold but some good solo sections. All rather charming and entirely joyous, enjoyed that very much. Next up it’s CAROLINE AND JOHANNES! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘9-5 (Morning Train)’ by Sheena Easton. What a song, and what a coupling; definitely one of my favourites this year. Becks has also worked with her a few times and confirms she is LOVELY. The emotion in training is all a bit overwhelming, I want to give her a hug. Scores: 4 (drink), 5,5 - a total of 14. Anyone else (whisper it), not really missing Bruno? Shirley thought it was a nice performance and full of enthusiasm. It needs work, but Jamie has potential. Motsi, who appears to be wearing a towel, thought it needed better technique. Craig thought it was stiff and flat-footed, and agreed that it was restricted due to the tightness of the trousers. But he loved the energy and commitment. Poor Tess, forced to socially distanced so she can’t manhandle the couples. What will she do with her hands? OK this is the campest thing I’ve ever seen, and Jamie is joyously terrible. Although I have no idea how he’s supposed to perform any kind hip action in white jeans that tight. This is not a great Cha Cha Cha by any standards, but I love Jamie’s enthusiasm and effort levels. Good work. First up tonight it’s JAMIE AND KAREN. Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Think About Things’ by Daði og Gagnamagnið. This was the Icelandic song that would have won Eurovision had it not been cancelled this year, and I can’t tell you how thrilled I am to see it on Strictly. It’s like my two liveblog worlds have collided, and honestly it feels like Christmas. Out come the stars! Nobody seems to have upset Wardrobe yet, but it’s early days. Bubble DRINK! Also many fake tans, so keep drinking. Out come the judges! Shirley has got tangled in some tights. Send help. TESS AND CLAUDIA DRESS WATCH: Tess has been dipped in tar, and Claudia is in a spotty prom dress. One of these outfits is quite nice. And we’re off! Time for a slow-mo intro VT with some washed out filters. Everyone is scared but excited, and can’t wait to get on the dancefloor. Ah, it’s good to hear that theme tune again. Ooh, pro dance! We don’t normally get one of those on a Saturday night. It’s a hectic latin hot mess with some truly hideous outfits, but it features Shakira and that’s never a bad thing. And Lionel Richie! Love a bit of Lionel. This week’s Strictly Come Bingo – a swig of something medicinal for any occurrence of the following: Zoom-based relatives Fake tans Craig giving a 4 or lower Mentions of tallness The word ‘bubble’ Also I’ve got HOUSEGUESTS this weekend, which is very exciting. My friend Becks is staying; she’s a huge Strictly fan and lovely to have company while I tap away madly. We’re also making room for a dog and a cat between us, so it’s quite busy on my liveblog sofa. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing liveblog! After last week’s launch it’s time for our couples to take to the floor for the first time, so we can make wild predictions about who’s going to make the final and who will be leaving the Strictly bubble next Sunday. There’s no elimination or Sunday results show this week, so let’s just enjoy a joyous evening of dancefloor fun. I’ll be analysing every flailing arm and pigeon toe from up here, so please feel free to join in in the comment bubble below, but only if you’ve quarantined for two weeks, had two Covid tests and are adhering to all government guidelines. Kick off is at 7.25pm, so join me then!
0||Frank Lampard makes case for the defence as forwards take back seatSplurge on the attack. Make yourself the envy of the world by signing Hakim Ziyech, Timo Werner and Kai Havertz in one wild summer. Make the journey to Old Trafford, where Manchester United were last seen losing 6-1 to Tottenham, and pick a back-five. Take Werner and Havertz off with 20 minutes left. Give Ziyech 10 minutes at the end. Settle for a second consecutive goalless draw. Flip the narrative on its head. By the end of a grim match it was clear Frank Lampard had no interest in another defensive aberration from his leaky Chelsea side. He will not apologise for setting out to contain United. Attacking cohesion can wait: for a manager accused of failing to focus on shape and resilience during his time at Chelsea, a shutout inspired by Thiago Silva’s serenity in central defence represented another step forward. Both sides played as though they were spooked by visions of a defensive calamity on a slick, treacherous surface. The handbrake was on, as Arsène Wenger would say. Chelsea wanted to suffocate, United wanted errors and wonky defending from the visitors. The result was a stalemate for 45 minutes, notable mainly for loose touches, misplaced passes and a host of gifted attackers waiting in vain for a defensive midfielder to give them the ball. It seemed fitting the half ended with Havertz picking up a booking after a frustrated tug of a red shirt. Perhaps he just wanted to get involved, to make his presence felt, to remind the world he does exist. Otherwise the opening period passed him by, although at least he could console himself with the knowledge the same was true for United’s creators, with Bruno Fernandes searching in vain for space. Nobody wanted to break the structure. Chelsea set the tone with their system, bringing to mind José Mourinho’s jibe that they always go to a back-five when results are indifferent. With Mason Mount dropping to the bench, César Azpilicueta came in to provide an extra defensive bolt, sweeping behind Reece James on the right, leaving Marcus Rashford so deprived of service for long spells that the United forward probably had time to log into his Twitter account to embarrass a Tory MP. Had Lampard channelled his inner José? Conscious no Chelsea manager in the history of the Premier League has conceded at a higher rate than him, had he set out to kill the spectacle? Maybe – or perhaps he knew United, back to 4-2-3-1 after defeating Paris Saint-Germain with a back three, like teams who attack them. The risk for Lampard was that ceding the initiative risked negating the effectiveness of his attack. Chelsea controlled the ball but lacked menace. United bided their time, waiting for the errors. Édouard Mendy almost obliged, screwing a pass just wide of his own goal as Lampard congratulated himself on including Petr Cech in his Premier League squad to provide emergency goalkeeping cover – you know, just in case. Mendy redeemed himself with a couple of fine saves before the interval. The second came from a curling effort from Juan Mata, the first after United had managed to catch Chelsea cold. It came from a sudden spurt of pressing from United, exposing slackness from Jorginho and Thiago Silva, resulting in a loss of possession that would have led to Rashford scoring but for Mendy saving with his feet. At the other end Werner waited in vain for a chance to stretch his legs and run beyond Harry Maguire. Bar a few surges from Havertz in the second half, Chelsea were pallid in the final third. Yet they were happier with the draw. United made the attacking changes, introducing Paul Pogba and Edinson Cavani, but there was no change of shape from Lampard when he brought Tammy Abraham and Mount on. His priorities were clear.
