0||Arsenal v Leicester City: Premier League – live!9 mins: Lacazette is tripped, 23 yards from goal or so, and Xhaka will fancy his chances of influencing play again. 7 mins: I’m not sure anyone touched the ball after Lacazette flicked it on, so it must have been disallowed for Xhaka influencing play by standing in front of the goalkeeper. 4 mins: Goal! Bit it’s disallowed! Arsenal win a corner, flick it on at the near post, and it goes in at the far! There were three Arsenal players offside when it was flicked goalwards, and at least one of them in Schmeichel’s path, so the question was what the goal would get disallowed for rather than whether it would get disallowed at all. 3 mins: Good spot, this: 2 mins: Shot! Leono hits a limp clearance straight to Madison, who tries to lift the ball into the empty net from 40 yards or so, but it floats just wide. 1 min: Peeeeeeep! Leicester get the game started! The players come out! While we wait for kick-off, here’s Brendan Rodgers on Jamie Vardy: He’s trained the last couple of days and looked good, so that’s means he’ll be a possibility from the bench. With so many games ahead we didn’t want to take a risk, but I’m sure he’ll play a part. And here’s Mikel Arteta on Leicester: I think they are a very complete side, and tricky to deal with, because they are really good on the ball in positional play, but they are really good in transition as well. They can go high press, they can defend really deep as they did against City. I think they’ve come a long way, they’ve improved a lot as a team and it will be really tough tonight. I’m very much looking forward to this game, but while I waited for Sky’s expensive pay-per-view service to kick in I discovered that Groundhog Day is on Dave and I have a bit of a thing about it, and now I’m going to miss the end. I’m so annoyed I’m going to refuse to make the obvious joke about Leicester’s trips to Arsenal. Three changes for Arsenal, who bring in David Luiz, Alexandre Lacazette and, for a first league start since moving to the club, Thomas Partey. Two changes for Leicester, who bring in Christian Fuchs and James Maddison and leave out Ayoze Perez and Kelechi Iheanacho. The big news, though, is that Jamie Vardy is back in the squad but not in the starting line-up, restricted as he is to the bench. The team sheets have been handed in, and the key names tonight are these ones: Arsenal: Leno, Bellerin, Luiz, Gabriel, Tierney, Ceballos, Xhaka, Thomas, Saka, Lacazette, Aubameyang. Subs: Runarsson, Maitland-Niles, Pepe, Mustafi, Elneny, Willock, Nketiah. Leicester: Schmeichel, Fofana, Evans, Fuchs, Castagne, Tielemans, Mendy, Justin, Praet, Maddison, Barnes. Subs: Morgan, Vardy, Albrighton, Ward, Iheanacho, Under, Choudhury. Referee: Craig Pawson. Leicester haven’t won at Arsenal in any competition since 1973, and most recently lost to them in the Carabao Cup a month (and two days) ago. That strikes me as statistically unlikely. I mean, that is a seriously rubbish record, a history so dismal there is no sensible explanation except witchcraft. Arsenal haven’t lost a home league game in October in 32 matches since 2002, which also smells suspiciously like witchcraft. So though the teams start the game tied on nine points, the Gunners have history and some kind of magical protection charm in their favour. In addition, the Foxes have lost their last two league matches, at home to West Ham and Aston Villa, which isn’t encouraging, though they did win their last away game at Manchester City, which is. At stake today is a place in the top four, which will be enjoyed by whoever wins the game, if indeed anyone does. Welcome! Kick-off: 7.15pm GMT
1||Outsider Nuts Well brings big success to Ann Hamilton's small stableThe romance of jump racing was on full show here as the plucky, prolific but nevertheless unsung Nuts Well battled his way to victory in the Old Roan Chase for the tiny Northumberland stable of Ann Hamilton. This was the biggest success in the long career of the 73-year-old Hamilton, who still schools horses over fences at her base in the village of Capheaton, about 20 miles north-west of Newcastle. “It means the world to us,” Hamilton said, “because he’s been so good to us and we just thought he couldn’t do it, with all that weight on his back. We thought we didn’t have a chance, so to beat the top trainers is amazing. “We thought he might struggle in this ground. He’s really taken us by surprise.” That thought will have been shared by almost everyone who had a bet on the race, as Nuts Well was returned at odds of 18-1. Though he has improved since Danny McMenamin became his regular jockey, a series of wins at Wetherby, Musselburgh and Kelso cut little ice with punters when weighing up a major handicap like this, in which the opposition was trained by the likes of Paul Nicholls, Colin Tizzard and Jonjo O’Neill. After a short chat with reporters, Hamilton insisted on rushing off to attend to her horse, leaving her husband, Ian, to fill in the blanks. The pair are sheep and cattle farmers, he explained, and she has enjoyed training five or six horses on the side since about 1980. There have been some fallow spells, like the six consecutive seasons in the 1990s when their stable had not a single winner. But it was worth it for well-remembered days like the one in April 2003, when Divet Hill won the Fox Hunters over the Grand National fences, despite his jockey’s breeches splitting at the rear as they cleared The Chair. “It’s always been a lucky place for us, Aintree,” Ian reflected. “Absolutely brilliant.” But he was not tempted by the thought of trying Nuts Well over the famous green fences here, in a race like the Topham in the spring. “He’s not very big, you know. We wouldn’t put him over the big ‘uns.” Finding the right target for Nuts Well might now be the biggest problem facing the Hamiltons’ training operation, as opportunities are scarce for highly rated animals and he will be just outside the top 20 in Britain after this. It is an unusual sort of problem for a stable whose staff amounts to “two great girls” who help out in their lunch breaks. How will the couple celebrate this notable victory? “Go to bed early, I suppose. I’ve got cattle to feed when I get back, Ann’ll have six horses to see to. Then we might have a drink.” Robbie Power, who was unseated from Vision Des Flos during the Old Roan, hopes to be back in action this week, despite initial fears that he might have suffered serious injury. “I’m fine,” he reported. “I’ve just got a bit of soft-tissue damage in my knee, but it feels all right. I’ve got plenty of movement in it, just plenty of bruising. Hopefully, it will be fine in a couple of days or so.”
2||Coronavirus live: daily infections exceed 50,000 in France; global cases reach new recordFrance registered 52,010 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, following a record 45,422 on Saturday, the health ministry said in a statement on Sunday. It also said that 116 people had died from coronavirus infection over the past 24 hours, compared to from 137 on Saturday, taking the total confirmed death toll to 34,761. The new cases brought the total to 1,138,507, putting France now ahead of Argentina and Spain to become the country with the world’s fifth highest number of cases, after the US, India, Brazil and Russia. Turkish Airlines will be putting foreign national pilots on unpaid leave to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on its finances, Bloomberg reported on Sunday. Turkey’s national carrier informed some of its foreign crew staff by email that they are to go on leave from 1 November, and that the decision would be reviewed after six months. It wasn’t immediately clear how many pilots will be affected, and whether Turkish nationals would escape the cost saving measure. A spokesman for Turk Hava Yollari AO, as the airline is officially known, declined to comment. The company reported a loss of 2.23bn liras ($280m) in the second quarter, with passenger numbers down by almost two thirds this year. Israel will begin human trials for a potential Covid-19 vaccine developed by a research institute overseen by the Defence Ministry on 1 November after receiving regulatory approval. The Israel Institute for Biological Research (IIBR) began animal trials for its “BriLife” vaccine in March. The health ministry and an oversight committee have now given the green light to take it to the next stage. Eighty volunteers aged between 18 and 55 will be monitored for three weeks to see if virus antibodies develop, the ministry said in a statement. A second phase, expected to begin in December, will involve 960 people over the age of 18, Reuters reports. Should those succeed, a third, large-scale phase with 30,000 volunteers is scheduled for April or May 2021. If successful, the vaccine may then be approved for mass use. The vaccine, the ministry said, has already tested well on a number of animal models and the IIBR has produced more than 25,000 doses for the first and second phases of the clinical trials. “Our final goal is 15 million rations for the residents of the State of Israel and for our close neighbours,” said IIBR director Shmuel Shapira. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc, Johnson &amp; Johnson, AstraZeneca Plc and Moderna. Israel, with a population of 9 million, has begun easing a second nationwide coronavirus lockdown after a steady decline in the rate of daily infections. The country saw 692 new cases on Saturday - down from a peak of more than 9,000 several weeks ago. It has reported 2,372 deaths from the pandemic. The US saw its highest ever number of new coronavirus cases in the past two days, keeping the pandemic a top election issue as Vice president Mike Pence travels the country to campaign despite close aides testing positive. The US reported 79,852 new infections on Saturday, close to the previous day’s record of 84,244 new cases, as we reported earlier. Hospitalisations are also rising and have hit a two-month high and deaths are trending upwards, according to a Reuters tally. So far in October, 29 states have set records for increases in new cases, including five considered key in the 3 November presidential election: Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Hospitals are strained in several states including North Dakota, which is the hardest hit based on recent new cases per capita, according to Reuters. The city of El Paso in Texas is asking residents to stay at home for the next two weeks and the wider El Paso County closed its parks and recreational facilities for 14 days. Over the last three weeks, the number of hospitalised Covid-19 patients in the El Paso area has tripled to a record 786, according to state data. “If we continue on this trend, we risk detrimental effects to our entire healthcare system,” the city’s public health director, Angela Mora, said in a statement. “For the sake of those hospitalised and the frontline healthcare workers working tirelessly each day to care for them, we ask you to please stay home for two weeks and eliminate your interactions with those outside your household until we can flatten the curve.” The Czech government will almost certainly have to tighten its anti-coronavirus measures again as current curbs have not halted a surge in infections, prime minister Andrej Babis said on Sunday. Cases are up across Europe, but the Czech Republic has recorded the sharpest rises in infections on the continent in recent weeks, Reuters reports. The government on Wednesday ordered most shops and services to close and sought to limit movement to essential trips only. “The measures which we have taken, aren’t working yet,” Babis said in a video message on his Facebook page. “The next week will be the key one, and unless a miracle happens, we won’t have any other choice than to tighten our measures further,” he said. Babis said that he wanted Christmas to be celebrated as normal, but that he could not promise anything for now. “I don’t know what will happen with the virus. I don’t know,” he said. The total number of coronavirus-related deaths doubled to more than 2,000 over the last two weeks. The Philippines’ coronavirus tally surpassed 370,000 on Sunday with 2,223 new confirmed infections, while the death toll edged nearer to the 7,000-mark. The department of health said confirmed cases now stand at 370,028 in total, of which 35,015 or nine percent are active cases. Of these currently ill patients, 82% experience mild symptoms, 11.3% have no symptoms, 2.4% are severe cases, while 4.2% are in critical condition, the latest report detailed. The department clarified, however, that 16 laboratories were not able to submit their case reports on time and were not yet included in the latest count. The Philippines is now joining countries such as the United States, the UK, France, Saudi Arabia and Finland in starting to train specialist sniffer dogs to identify Covid-19 carriers, CNN Philippines reports. “Based on the study from other countries, the accuracy rate of Covid-19 detection dogs is 95 to 97%,” said Ryia Tabares, a representative of Universal K-9 Training and Services Inc, the company working to replicate the same efforts in the country. His colleage Gerry Tabares said the company is currently training at least 12 dogs to detect the virus by sniffing. Gerry said while such a task isn’t limited to certain kinds of dogs, their students are of the Belgian Malinois, Labrador, and German Shepherd breeds. “Those are the current breeds that we are training right now. So far, we are successful,” Gerry said. “As you can see in the demonstration, they can really detect the face masks of Covid-19 infected patients.” The UK recorded 19,790 new coronavirus infections and 151 deaths on Sunday, official data showed. New cases dipped from Saturday’s 23,012, and the number of deaths within 28 days of a positive test was also down slightly from 174 the previous day. The Welsh government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. Health minister Vaughan Gething told The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday that the restriction, which has seen aisles cordoned off and plastic sheeting placed over products, had been applied differently in stores across Wales. Guidance previously published by the Welsh government said certain sections of supermarkets selling electrical goods, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares, among others products, must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public” during the lockdown. More than 50,000 people have signed a petition submitted to the Welsh Parliament calling for the ban to be immediately reversed. Supermarkets have been told they must only sell essential items to discourage people from spending more time than necessary in shops and be fair to retailers selling non-essential items only who had to shut shop. The ban on selling non-essential items was announced in the Senedd on Thursday after Conservative MS Russell George said it was “unfair” to force independent clothing and hardware retailers to shut while similar goods were on sale in major supermarkets. Gething told the BBC the Welsh government had worked with supermarkets on the ban and discussed which items were affected by it. “It’s also about reducing the opportunity for contacts. That’s what we’re really trying to do – we’re asking people to stay at home to stay lives, that really is right back where we are,” he said. The Welsh Retail Consortium called for the ban to be “dropped quickly” and warned it could result in the “safe flow of customers” being undermined due to changes in store layouts, the PA reports. Italy reported a new daily record of 21,273 coronavirus cases with 128 deaths, health ministry figures showed on Sunday, up from the 19,644 new infections reported on Saturday. Earlier, the Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, announced a package of new restrictions to combat the pandemic. Hello everyone, I’ll be bringing you the latest key developments in all things Covid-19 for the next few hours. As ever, don’t hesitate to get in touch if you have relevant updates or comments to share, either via Twitter @JedySays or via email. I won’t always be able to respond, but I read everything. That’s it from me this Sunday - my colleague Jedidajah Otte will take over shortly. Here’s a summary of events so far today: •The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. •An official from China’s Xinjiang health commission said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. •The United States saw 83,718 new cases reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the reord 83,757 infections reported on Friday. •The prime minister of Italy Giuseppe Conte announced a raft of new restrictions and warned that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. •Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. He said: “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic.” •The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas in the United States said it was “extremely disappointed” after the Trump administration pulled out of a deal offering the Christmas legends early access to a Covid-19 vaccine in exchange for promoting it. Earlier reports from Kashgar in the Chinese province of Xinjiang described flights being cancelled in and out of the region, with 15 new cases across the country and 405 asymptomatic patients under observation. Now an official from Xinjiang health commission has said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. The parents of a 17-year-old girl who was found on Saturday to have the virus but showed no symptoms worked there, an official from Xinjiang health commission told a press briefing. Kashgar launched a testing programme on Saturday night covering the region’s 4.75 million people. As of Sunday afternoon, more than 2.84 million people had been tested and the rest would be covered by Tuesday, the city government said in a statement. Four towns in the Kashgar region were identified as “high-risk” areas, according to a statement from Kashgar city authority on Sunday night, and stringent controls such as travel restrictions are expected. 1,104 new cases of Covid-19 have been diagnosed in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 42,681. Public Health Wales said five further deaths had been reported, with the total rising to 1,777. The Welsh government has imposed a 17-day “firebreak” lockdown which started on Friday in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boiko Borisov, has become the latest political figure to test positive for the new coronavirus. “After two PCR tests from today I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page, adding that he had mild symptoms and would quarantine at home. Borisov, 61, self-isolated on Friday evening when a deputy minister of regional development he had been in contact with five days before tested positive for the virus. Bulgaria, a country of under 7 million people, weathered the first wave of the coronavirus relatively well, but the number of cases and hospitalisations surged over the past weeks, reaching a total of over 37,500 cases and 1,084 deaths on Sunday. On Thursday, the government made masks mandatory in crowded outdoor spaces, in addition to all inside public areas and transport in a bid to curb the number of infections that threaten to break the country’s severely understaffed medical system. The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard on Sunday showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. AFP reports that the WHO’s complete figures for Saturday showed that 465,319 cases were confirmed to the UN health agency during the day, topping the 449,720 recorded on Friday and the 437,247 logged on Thursday. The WHO has warned that some countries are on a “dangerous track”, with too many witnessing an exponential increase in cases. According to the WHO’s figures, there have been more than 42.3 million confirmed cases of the respiratory disease, while nearly 1.15 million people have lost their lives, including 6,570 on Saturday. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. In total, more than 9m cases have now been registered in the region. “We are at a critical juncture in this pandemic, particularly in the northern hemisphere,” WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Friday. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track.” Qatar has signed an agreement with drugmaker Moderna Inc to buy its potential Covid-19 vaccine as soon as it is approved and released for global use, state news agency QNA reported on Sunday. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc , Johnson &amp; Johnson and Moderna. “Negotiating early and securing a number of agreements enhances our chances of getting sufficient quantities of the vaccine early,” Reuters quoted Abdullatif al-Khal, chair of a national Covid-19 health group, as saying. He did not say how many doses Doha was requesting. Earlier this month, al-Khal said Qatar signed an agreement with Pfizer and BioNTech to supply Qatar with their vaccines. Moderna said last month it was on track to produce 20m doses of its vaccine by the end of the year, while maintaining its goal of readying 500 million to 1 billion doses in 2021. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in the United States: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). Hospitals in the Swiss city of Geneva on Sunday issued a call for medically trained volunteers and recently retired staff to help tackle a record number of Coronavirus patients anticipated in the coming days. AFP reported that Geneva University Hospitals (HUG) said the number of coronavirus patients was expected to be “far higher” than at the peak of the pandemic’s first wave in March. According to the latest figures released Friday by the Swiss health ministry, 5,057 new cases of the respiratory disease were registered in Geneva over the previous 14 days - an incidence of 1,012.5 per 100,000 people. Cases, hospitalisations and deaths in Switzerland have doubled from one week to the next throughout October. The government is expected to decide Wednesday on new measures to control the spread of the virus. “It is highly likely that the peak of 550 hospitalised Covid-positive patients that we recorded during the first wave will be greatly exceeded in the coming days,” said HUG director-general Bertrand Levrat. “We anticipate that the number of beds and professionals needed to treat Covid and non-Covid patients will be far higher than what we experienced this spring.” •This post was corrected at 3:25pm. A previous version said that Geneva is Switzerland’s capital. Still in the UK, NHS chiefs have denied claims that thousands of frail, elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic, Denis Campbell reports: NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts.” The newspaper claimed that the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. You can read the story in full here: In the UK, the Royal Mail has announced that around 33,000 temporary jobs will be available this year over the Christmas period - over 10,000 more than its usual seasonal average. The postal service typically employs between 15,000 and 23,000 extra staff between October and January to help sort the additional Christmas volumes of parcels, cards and letters. Royal Mail says that such a high number of workers is needed this year because of elevated parcel volumes due to an increase in online shopping caused by the coronavirus crisis. The United States came close to setting a single-day record of coronavirus cases in the latest figures, having already done so 24 hours earlier. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Read more on that story here: In Italy, Conte also said that taking strict measures now would allow for a relaxation before Christmas. “We think that we will suffer a bit this month but by gritting our teeth with these restrictions, we’ll be able to breathe again in December,” he said. Italy’s prime minister has now given his press conference (see earlier post) announcing new restrictive measures and warning that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. Giuseppe Conte’s government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums will stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been strongly advised not to leave their homes unless for work, health or education purposes. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the new decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the new measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. Still in Spain, Sánchez said that his government will use the state of emergency to impose an 11pm-6am nationwide curfew, except in the Canary Islands. The prime minister says that Spain’s 19 regional leaders will have authority to set different hours for the curfew as long as they are stricter, close regional borders to travel and limit gatherings to six people who don’t live together. “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic,” Sánchez said after meeting with his Cabinet. The leader added that he will seek the endorsement of the Parliament this week to extend the state of emergency for six months, until May. Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency (see earlier post) in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. The Socialist leader told the nation in a televised address that the extraordinary measure will go into effect on Sunday, AP reported. Sánchez had called a cabinet meeting to prepare the measure, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. The National Institute for Public Health reported 10,203 confirmed cases of Covid-19. The daily case count in the country has risen steeply since the beginning of September. This is the first time the figure has been above 10,000. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Here’s a clip of Anthony Fauci’s interview with Andrew Marr which we reported on earlier. Here’s a summary of the key developments of the last few hours. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections. •In Italy, the government was reported to have agreed a raft of new measures to combat the spread of the virus, with prime minister Giuseppe Conte due to make a statement at 1.30pm local time. •In Poland’s capital, Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus. •In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. He also said the government was reviewing the length of the 14-day isolation period for travellers coming to the UK from abroad. A second firebreak lockdown could be required in Wales by January or February next year, Wales’ deputy minister for economy and transport has said. Lee Waters said the Welsh government was trying to “flatten the curve” of the second wave of Covid-19 but could not stop the virus from spreading entirely. Waters told BBC Wales’ Sunday Supplement: “This is not the last lockdown we’re likely to see. I think the projections in the papers we’ve published on our worst-case scenarios shows it’s likely we’re going to need to have another firebreak in January or February. “It’s important that we can show that we are being rational, we’re being evidence-based and we are being transparent. We are trying our best to do that.” Earlier, Welsh health minister Vaughan Gething told the BBC’s Andrew Marr show that the Cardiff government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items. “We’re reviewing with supermarkets the understanding and the clarity and the policy because there’s been different application in different parts,” he said. Waters echoed those remarks, saying: “We’re going to sit down with the supermarkets to review how this has gone over the weekend. “We’re not reviewing the requirement for supermarkets not to sell non-essential, we’re going to review how it’s working in practice because clearly there are some bumps.” The government in Italy has now agreed on measures (see 10:01am) to limit the spread of coronavirus, reports in Italy suggested. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is due to make a statement at 1:30pm local time. Reuters said that measures agreed between Conte’s government and regional authorities ordered bars and restaurants to close by 6pm and shut public gyms, cinemas and swimming pools. The decree encourages people not to go out and to limit contacts at home with anyone outside their immediate family, but does not impose a mandatory nationwide curfew or lockdown and allows shops and most businesses to remain open. However, service in bars and restaurants will be subject to a series of controls to limit contagion, and cinemas, theatres, gaming halls and discotheques will be closed. The decree also directs that up to three-quarters of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in school buildings. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah rejected on Sunday a proposal by prime minister Muhyiddin Yassin for him to declare a state of emergency in response to the coronavirus crisis, saying that he did not see the need. Critics say Muhyiddin’s request for emergency rule, which would include suspending parliament, is an attempt by the premier to stay in power amid a leadership challenge. Malaysia is experiencing a resurgence in virus infections and on Saturday saw its biggest daily jump in cases with 1,228 new cases, Reuters reported. The palace said Muhyiddin made the request for emergency rule to deal with the coronavirus pandemic, but that the government has been handling the crisis well. “Al-Sultan Abdullah is of the opinion that there is no need at the moment for His Majesty to declare an emergency in the country or in any part of the country of Malaysia,” the palace said in a statement. “His Majesty is confident in the ability of the government under the leadership of the prime minister to continue to implement policies and enforcement efforts to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic.” The constitution gives the king the right to decide if an emergency should be declared, based on threats to security, economy or public order. Muhyiddin has been in a precarious position since he took office in March with a two-seat majority. Uncertainties deepened after opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim said last month he had the parliamentary majority to form a new government. In Poland’s capital Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus, a police spokesman said. Police said demonstrators had attacked policemen, throwing stones, glass bottles and fire crackers during the demonstrations. Police used tear gas on several occasions during the protests in Warsaw in which people demanded that new restrictions be repealed. “We have 278 detainees … We were dealing with a clear manifestation of aggression, these people came to fight us,” Warsaw police spokesman Sylwester Marczak told reporters on Sunday, according to Reuters. The demonstrations also broke a ban on gatherings of more than five people, which came into effect on Saturday as part of new measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus. Despite the ban on gatherings, Poland also separately continued to see demonstrations on Saturday against a ruling on Thursday by the Constitutional Tribunal that imposes a near-total ban on abortion in the Catholic country. Poland is seeing a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases, with new infections on Friday hitting a daily record of 13,632. New curbs imposed on Saturday include a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. Schools will remain open for children up to third grade, with older students moving to distance learning. Older people can leave their homes only in special cases. The health ministry reported 87 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, taking the total death toll from Covid-19 to 4,438. The country recorded 11,742 new cases on Sunday, with total infections approaching 253,700. France’s new Covid-19 contact-tracing app needs to be downloaded by at least 20% of the population to be effective but is far from reaching that level for now, the minister for digital affairs said on Sunday. On 22 October, France relaunched its “StopCovid” tracing app and renamed it “Tous Anti-Covid” (all against Covid), which has since seen an additional 1.2m downloads for a total number of about 4m. “For the application to be efficient, about 20% of the population, or 15 to 20 million people, need to download it,” digital affairs minister Cedric O said on FranceInfo radio, according to Reuters. He said similar apps were working well in Britain, Germany and Canada but gave no examples of successful contact tracing in France with the app. Many in France have been reluctant to download the app over privacy concerns, despite the government’s reassurances that the data will not be used for any other purpose than stopping the pandemic. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. AP reported that Sánchez’s government said on Saturday night that a majority of Spain’s regional leaders have agreed to a new state of emergency and the meeting on Sunday was to study its terms. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain’s government has already declared two state of emergencies during the pandemic. Health minister Salvador Illa has said his agency and regional health officials are studying how to apply nightly curfewssimilar to the curfews already in place in France’s major cities. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. Spain on Friday reported almost 20,000 new daily cases and a further 231 deaths, taking the country’s death toll in the pandemic to 34,752. In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. The total number of cases rose to 59,247 in the country of 10 million, with 35 new deaths taking the total to 1,425, Reuters reports. Although coronavirus cases have been rising sharply since late August, Hungary’s nationalist Prime Minister Viktor Orban is seeking to avoid a repeat of the spring lockdown that sent the economy crashing by 13.6% in the second quarter. Hungarian schools are operating as normal, and apart from closing borders to foreigners, the government has not imposed significant limitations on events. Orban’s cabinet chief Gergely Gulyas said on Thursday that the government planned no new restrictions to curb the spread of the virus. In Italy, the government has been accused of “playing with fire” ahead of the announcement of new Covid-19 restrictions that will heavily penalise the hospitality industry. Hospitality workers will protest outside parliament on Sunday as ministers debate measures that could include the closure of bars and restaurants from 6pm. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is expected to announce the restrictions, which might also include the closure of gyms and swimming pools, on Sunday afternoon. People will be “strongly advised” not to travel beyond their home towns unless strictly necessary, according to a draft of the decree. The plan to close restaurants and bars from 6pm has been hotly contested by regional administrations. “We ask that they close us down completely and give us the famous financial support that Conte keeps talking about,” said Paolo Bianchini, a restaurant owner in the Lazio town of Viterbo and spokesperson for MIO, the hospitality movement organising the protest. “It’s useless staying open at all, and being left to have an agonising death – our companies are dying. There will be civil war as people no longer have money – [the government] is playing with fire.” There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the whole Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme right group, Forza Nuova, also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew also in place since Friday. Italy registered 19,644 new coronavirus infections and 151 more fatalities on Saturday. The virus is rapidly spreading in Lombardy, Campania and Lazio. There are 1,128 people currently in intensive care with Covid-19 across the country, more than double the figure of two weeks ago. Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in the US, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behaviour,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. In Ireland, the Irish Independent reports that any move towards a third national lockdown would be heavily resisted by ministers with the government coalition. The newspaper reports that “senior Fine Gael ministers have insisted everything must be done to avoid the need to impose the highest level of Covid-19 restrictions for a third time”. It quotes one minister as saying that Taoiseach Micheál Martin “needs to be careful with this rush for a third lockdown, the people might not buy it”. You can read the full story here. Here’s the latest edition of the Guardian’s tracker of coronavirus cases and deaths around the world. The US continues to have the highest number of total cases and deaths, and cases and deaths in the last fortnight. In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. Speaking in response to an article by Tory MP Bernard Jenkin and an interview in which he said the programme should be led by “a very senior military person”, he says she has done a “very good job” and that the programme has “come on so much”. Another of Ridge’s interviewees, shadow mental health minister Rosena Allin-Khan, says that Harding’s position is “untenable”. Lewis also says that reports that the government is looking at cutting the 14-day isolation period for travellers returning to the UK from abroad are accurate. But he says that “we’re not ready to make a final decision or announcement on that yet” and the decision will be “scientifically led”. He denies an accompanying claim that business leaders will be exempt and says that any changes “will apply to everybody”. In Indonesia, the health ministry has reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths. The total number of infections now stands at 389,712, with 13,299 – on both counts, the highest totals in south-east Asia. The government of Indonesia’s capital city Jakarta said in a statement earlier on Sunday that it will extend mass social restriction measures introduced to curb the spread of the virus until 8 November. Meanwhile, the Jakarta Post reported that more than 100 inmates at a prison on the island of Bali had tested positive. There have been 11,000 cases in total in Bali, which has seen its economy devastated by the sharp decline in tourism. • This post was amended at 8.37am to correct the total infection count. Good morning from London, where I’m picking up from Helen Davidson. You can reach me on Twitter or email with any comments, tips or suggestions. If you’re looking for some Sunday morning reading, you could start with Robin McKie’s report for the Observer on fears in the scientific community that the early adoption of an only moderately effective coronavirus vaccine could hinder attempts to find a better one: Or take a look this piece, also by colleagues at the Observer, about the danger that a sense of arbitrary restrictions could contribute to ‘Covid fatigue’ in the UK: I’ll be handing over to my colleagues in London shortly. Here is a quick round up of the most recent developments: Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. US vice-president Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus. Pence and his wife tested negative, his office said. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for Covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup horse race. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as police clashed with far-right protesters in Rome. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases and 229 deaths on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired teargas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Authorities said 229 people had died in the last 24 hours, bringing the official death toll to 26,050. AP: Just weeks after India fully opened up from a harsh lockdown and began to modestly turn a corner by cutting new coronavirus infections by near half, a Hindu festival season is raising fears that a fresh surge could spoil the hard-won gains. Nearly 1 billion Indians will soon celebrate Diwali, the Hindu festival of light, and the country’s biggest. Socializing is key part of the most highly anticipated event of the year, with malls and markets buzzing with shoppers. It also traditionally brings in a massive increase in consumer spending across India. Even though the government is expecting the festival to help resuscitate the ailing economy, it is also worried about people packing together, foregoing social distancing and masks. Such concerns prompted Prime Minister Narendra Modi to address the nation in a televised speech earlier this week, warning people of “any laxity” during the festive season that “could strain India’s health system.” India is second to the United States with the largest coronavirus outbreak. Last month, the country hit a peak of nearly 100,000 cases in a single day, but since then daily infections have fallen by about half and deaths by about a third. Some experts say the decline in cases suggests the virus may have finally reached a plateau but others question the testing methods. India’s testing rate has remained constant but it is relying heavily on antigen tests, which are faster but less accurate than traditional RT-PCR tests. Even as the reasons behind the decline are not fully clear, India is still clocking more than 50,000 cases a day, making any new surge all the more important. These fears stem largely from India’s initial success story — until it wasn’t. In June, the southern coastal state of Kerala was cheered for flattening the curve, generating worldwide appreciation, even from the United Nations. But in a stunning reversal, it now fares as the second-worst state in active coronavirus cases in the country. Health Minister Harsh Vardhan blamed “gross negligence” during the 10-day Onam festival celebrations in late August for Kerala’s virus surge. Since then, reported infections there have jumped by five times, far outpacing the nationwide trend. Kerala’s story has alarmed health experts who fear similar problems in the runup to Diwali that could reverse the gains. “If we don’t avoid socializing during the upcoming festival season, I fear we will be back to where we started,” said Dr. T. Jacob John, a retired virologist. “There is a significant risk ahead of us.” More than 1,000 test results have come back from the northern suburbs of Melbourne, finding no new cases of the virus. It’s significant because the area is the site of a current outbreak which prompted premier Dan Andrews to delay announcing reopening dates for the city’s retail and hospitality sector. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 are understood to be included in the 1,135 tests returned today. 1400 tests conducted taken today are in the labs and testing will proceed throughout the evening, the health department said. “This testing enables us to get a very clear picture of how many cases there are and ensure there is a plan in place for everyone who tests positive along with the close contacts,” said Jeroen Weimar, the state’s head of testing and community engagement. “There will at times no doubt be delays as more people come forward, but we are so appreciative of everyone making the effort, particularly during these colder spring days.” Tasmania will on Monday reopen to much of mainland Australia, with the island state’s government insisting it is well prepared to handle any coronavirus cases. The state was the first Australian jurisdiction to close its borders in March and hasn’t recorded a case in more than 70 days. It will open to low-risk regions Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia, the Northern Territory and ACT, plus New Zealand. It remains closed to Victoria and is slated to open to NSW on 2 November, with a firm call on that date to be made this week. All arrivals at airports and sea ports will be health screened and anyone with virus symptoms will be tested and ordered into quarantine until their result is known. “While it’s exiting to be able to see restrictions ease and life getting to a Covid-normal, we also need to remember there is always a risk of coronavirus in our community,” health minister Sarah Courtney said. She said “extensive work” had been put into the state’s contact tracing systems and aged care preparedness. Ms Courtney said social distancing and personal hygiene were critical in the weeks ahead. “It’s important that we continue this vigilance so our healthcare workers remain safe and we have capacity in our hospitals,” she said. Tasmania has more than 200 ventilators and is planning to acquire another 100. A rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccines, scientists have said. Scientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Read more here: The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 11,176 to 429,181, data from the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases showed on Sunday. The reported death toll rose by 29 to 10,032, the tally showed. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup “in light of the ongoing situation around government restrictions”. “While we are very disappointed not to be able to welcome our members and racegoers to Cup Week, we understand the government’s commitment to keeping our community safe. We also recognise the need for certainty and clarity for our patrons, being only six days out from Derby Day,” said VRC chair Amanda Elliott. “We are still in discussions regarding the potential return to the track for a small number of owners, as is currently permitted in regional Victoria,” Mrs Elliott said. “We will play our part in supporting Victoria’s emergence from this pandemic as Melbourne moves closer to a normal environment over summer.” The VRC will run an interactive Cup website for people still wanting to enjoy the festivities of Australia’s famous race day. The testing of entire cities whenever there is a new outbreak in China is overkill, the country’s chief epidemiologist has said. About 11 million people were recently tested in just five days in Qingdao, after 12 new cases were linked to a hospital. But the testing regime found no new cases, and Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist with China Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, told China Newsweek the transmission would have been confined to the hospital. “Qingdao has the determination to [test everyone], but it’s overkill,” Wu said. Mainland China has avoided seeing more massive outbreaks since it got control of the original Wuhan epidemic, even as new clusters have emerged in cities and provinces as populous as Beijing, Qingdao, and Jilin. As well as swift lockdowns, strict contact tracing, and travel restrictions, authorities in each case also embarked on ambitious drives to test every single resident. Wu said while citywide testing may be reassuring to officials and residents, “the social cost was too big and unnecessary”. A harrowing report from CNN on the rise of child trafficking in India during the pandemic. In recent years, India has strengthened its lawson child labor, but in the past six months - with Covid-19 taking a toll on the economy - that work has started to unravel. “Children have never faced such crisis,” said 2014 Nobel Peace Prize winner Kailash Satyarthi, whose organization Bachpan Bachao Andolan (Save the Childhood Movement) works to protect vulnerable children. “This is not simply the health crisis or economic crisis. This is the crisis of justice, of humanity, of childhood, of the future of an entire generation.” When India went into a strict lockdown in March, schools and workplaces closed. Millions of children were deprived of the midday meal they used to receive at school and many people lost their jobs.Traffickers have exploited the situation by targeting desperate families, activists said. See the full report here. Still in Australia, the country’s prime minister, treasurer and health minister have again criticised the Labor government in Victoria for the continuation of lockdown measures in Victoria. In a joint statement they said the decision to keep some businesses closed was a “profound disappointment”, and called on the Victorian government to utilise mirror tracing and restriction measures used by the neighbouring state of New South Wales. At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave. Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening. This is a profound disappointment. Of course, Victorians do not want to face another lockdown and of course they don’t want all of this to have been for nothing. That is why ensuring the state government’s capability to deal with outbreaks through their public health response is so essential. This is what you need for Victoria to open up safely and stay safely open. Borders and closures are not indicators of public health success. They are the opposite. The Australian state of Western Australia has reported three new cases recorded on Saturday. The one male and two females all aged in their 20s had all returned to Perth from overseas. WA is monitoring 57 active cases remaining from its total of 760. Brazil has registered 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours and 26,979 new cases, the health ministry said on Saturday. The South American nation has now registered 156,903 total coronavirus deaths and 4,817,898 total confirmed cases. The diagnosis of Pence’s chief of staff has been confirmed by their office. “Vice-president Pence and Mrs Pence both tested negative for Covid-19 today, and remain in good health,” said Devin O’Malley, a Pence spokesman, on Saturday, adding that Donald Trump’s running mate would maintain his schedule “in accordance with the CDC guidelines for essential personnel”. Full report here. Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus, Bloomberg is reporting. The diagnosis of Marc Short, the closest advisor to the US vice president, follows that of another senior staffer Marty Obst earlier on Saturday. Pence delivered a campaign speech in Florida on Saturday evening. Bloomberg reported he was aware of Obst’s positive test result prior to departing, and that Obst was not seen on the plane with him. Despite being a close contact of Short, Pence is not quarantining and is maintaining he schedule as an “essential employee”. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. The Jakarta Post reports today on a growing cluster inside the notorious prison, detected after complaints of symptoms by some inmates prompted mass testing earlier this week. Of 106 positive test results so far, 84 are men, the Post reported. They have been moved to an isolated block of the prison, it said. “[The number of confirmed cases] might still be increasing because we are still waiting for more test results,” said I Putu Surya Dharma, spokesman for the law and human rights ministry’s Bali office. The prison is under lockdown and receiving no visitors or new prisoners. Bali has recorded more than 11,000 cases of Covid-19 during the pandemic, which has also devastated the island’s economy which depends almost entirely on tourism. Indonesia has recorded more than 380,000 cases. Here is our full report on the latest from Victoria, Australia, where the country’s largest outbreak and which sparked one of the world’s strictest lockdowns, is being brought under control. From Calla Wahlquist: Daniel Andrews has delayed an announcement about easing coronavirus restrictions in Melbourne pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs, prompting criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. In a heated press conference, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. Read more: From the wire services in Europe: Italy saw a second night of street protests against curfews as it reported another daily record on Saturday. After clashes in the southern city of Naples on Friday night, police again faced off against dozens of masked protestors in the centre of Rome after the far-right Forza Nuova group called for a protest against the curfews. Some 200 masked militants belonging to the neo-fascist group hurled projectiles at police and set rubbish bins alight in the second night of street protests. Police arrested seven protesters and reported two officers injured, according to the Repubblica daily. The government is planning further restrictions to contain a resurgence of the pandemic, and prime minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a repeat of the blanket lockdown earlier in the year. But a number of regions - including Campania, the area around Naples, Lazio around Rome, and Lombardy - have imposed overnight curfews. The northern region of Piedmont and Sicily in the south will follow next week and other regions are expected to match them. The central government is expected to announce more measures soon. Earlier, health ministry data showed 19,644 new Covid cases and 151 dead as the disease surged in areas like Lombardy, Milan, Campania and Lazio. Conte pledged to speed up help for businesses suffering in the crisis but said the weeks ahead would be very difficult. “We cannot lower our guard,” he added. According to a draft decree circulated on Saturday, public gyms and swimming pools may be closed and bars and restaurants told to shut from 6 p.m., while people will be encouraged not to travel outside their home districts. Like many authorities across Europe, the Italian government is desperate not to close down the economy completely but is facing growing public anger at renewed restrictions being imposed to limit public gatherings. With public health services coming under strain, authorities have reopened temporary intensive care facilities built during the first phase. Despite this, Italy’s top public health body warned on Friday services were approaching crisis point. Mainland China reported 15 new cases on Saturday, all imported from other countries. There are 405 asymptomatic patients currently under observation, including a teenage girl in Kashgar. The city has imposed travel restrictions while health authorities test the population. The South China Morning Post cited an unnamed official, saying residents are allowed to leave the city if they have a negative test result. Overnight there was a bit of confusion among Kashgar residents and visitors, as flights in and out of the Xinjiang region city were suddenly cancelled, and police authorities posted and then deleted a social media message reminding people to wear masks. “Everyone wear your masks properly and pay attention to personal safety. Don’t believe or spread rumours to avoid unnecessary panic. All is subject to official notification,” the Weibo post said. Videos shared online also appeared to show traffic banking up at checkpoints. Xinjiang health authorities announced on Saturday night that an asymptomatic case had been found during a routine screening in Shufu county, and the patient - a 17-year-old woman - had been transferred to hospital. The case would be the first inside Xinjiang since mid-August, when an outbreak sparked a “wartime state” of lockdown in the capital Urumqi. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Saturday 6,025 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 431 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 886,800 and the death toll to 88,743. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours, surpassing last Sunday’s record of 871 cases. The country has recorded at least 700 daily cases for eight consecutive days. The health ministry said more than 72% of the new cases were in the state of Sabah, the centre of the current spike in cases. Much of the blame for the current surge has been focused on the East Malaysian state, after people spent two weeks campaigning for an upcoming election before returning to other parts of the country, the Straits Times reported. At around the same time there were outbreaks in Sabah’s detention centres for illegal migrants. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. Citing an email from a NHS Trust chief to his staff, the report said a national vaccination program rollout was being accelerated, with healthcare workers prioritised. Writing to staff earlier this month, the head of a hospital NHS Trust in Warwickshire said they and other NHS organisations nationally had been told “to be prepared to start a Covid-19 vaccine program in early December”. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff priorities prior to Christmas,” the email said, adding that the vaccine was expected to be given in two doses 28 days apart. The Mail also reported that the UK hopes to fast track production if a vaccine is ready before the end of December. •This post was edited at 10:31am to remove an extraneous reference to European medical approvals. Hello, this is Helen Davidson here to take you through the next few hours of global updates. Thanks to Calla for everything so far. First, a quick look around the world for the latest top line developments, with more to follow: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. With that, I’ll hand over to Helen Davidson who will take you through the day. The press conference in Victoria has become a series of reporters putting agree/disagree statements to the premier, and Daniel Andrews rejecting the premise of the question and saying, on repeat: “That is not a question, that’s a statement.” I won’t repeat them here, because there isn’t a lot of information to be gleaned. The gist: reporters are attempting to get Andrews to comment on the frustration felt by business owners, and the broader community, that the roadmap is not being followed and that the end of the lockdown has not been announced on the day the announcement was promised. Andrews is getting frustrated, challenging the premise of questions, and then repeating the line of the day: we have to wait until the test results come back. However the date of opening up has shifted forward. Andrews said he will have “more to say tomorrow and Tuesday” and “we will be opening up before the weekend”. And, after 80 minutes, the press conference is over. A clarification from the premier: Just going back to a question James asked. I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt. November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening, have opening up before then, by on that day, in fact, earlier than then. We had intended to be able to make announcements today, but it’s just not appropriate while we wait for these test results, to be assuming we know what the results are. We don’t know how many positive cases, we don’t know whether they are going to be linked, but we’re still well on track to announcements and begin the process of opening up before the first. Reporter: Why didn’t you say that an hour ago, as directly as that? Andrews, with a deep sigh: Well ... James, I’m sorry if I have not been as clear as I tried to be, it was a very long night and a very early morning and I have been trying to find an opportunity to come back to the podium, as your question indicated to me I perhaps have not been as clear as I should have been. The Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, was asked if it was awkward that his advice was that Victoria could not yet announce details of a reopening, when the former Victorian health minister, the Australian health minister, the NSW premier and the WHO were suggesting it could be reopened. Sutton said: Amongst that list of individuals and organisations, none of them are in the tent. All of the data we have come up with all the understanding we have of each and every case, who the close contacts are, how they are linked, the specific complexities of each household, they are of a united view that as frustrating as this is, this is an appropriate 24-hour period to go through. Reporter: Did you mislead Victorians? Andrews: I did not. A reporter asked Andrews: “You said in your opening remarks that this is not a setback. People when they woke up this morning believed it would be at worst on November one but you are not committing to that so we have gone backwards today.” Andrews: I don’t believe we have. In any event, we have no choice but to wait for these results and they will be here well before November 1. Some results will come through later today and some will come through on Monday, well into the evening. On that basis we will be able to call it and be confident that these are linked cases, not a large number of mystery cases which would speak to the fact that it was much more widespread than we believe it is. Again, we have asked these people to come forward and be tested for a very good reason. They have done that and the lab does take time. It is not a matter of workflow, the test just takes time. We’ll get those tests done as quickly as we can and then analyse the results and update you. Is it fair to call it a “cautious pause” when thousands of [businesses] have been closed for months? But they were not to open today. They were opening Tuesday night at the earliest and we still may be able to make that deadline. It is not appropriate for me to pretend I have a test result I do not have. It is not responsible ... I cannot announce things and I cannot speak to the scope of the opening until we get these test results back and we know exactly the enemy we are facing and the challenge we are facing. Andrews said it was not his strategy that every outbreak should result in a new lockdown, but said Victoria has “an opportunity to essentially get ahead of this virus”. Asked if Melbourne was “just lucky” to already be under lockdown when this outbreak occurred, Andrews said: I don’t think that is right at all. What we would have to do for a long period of time is manage and live with this, but it will be easier, it will be much easier the lower the numbers are at the point you open up. And, as well, the more you know about those cases the more confident you are that you have a public health response around all those people. As it stands now we do not have the complete picture because the labs are processing test. Other tests will be taken through today which will come to us tomorrow. This is nothing more than simply waiting to get the results before ... Put it another way, waiting to get results instead of pretending we know what the results are. We do not and that would not be responsible nor a safe thing to do. And if we are criticised for that, so be it. A reporter said that NSW had been open for months with daily average cases hovering around 10. “If our contact tracing is as good as they are and we have as much faith in the Victorian community as the New SouthWales government has, why can’t we reopen?” Andrews: I don’t accept the conclusions you are drawing at all ... This is a pause, nothing more than that and it is appropriate that we wait to get those results. The reason we have literally hundreds of people locked in homes at the moment is because of the work that contact traces are doing, so I do not accept that criticism at all. Another reporter asked Andrews to acknowledge that “the way the public is feeling must be a rollercoaster. You have mentioned that you understand that people are frustrated, do not think it has gone past frustration today? Today is a different level for the community in terms of what they thought would happen and what has happened.” Andrews said he knew that it was frustrating. Of course people are frustrated and of course everyone would like these rules to come off as quickly as possible but we only get one chance to do this properly and we intend to wait for those results to come back from the laboratory. Once they have we will be able to make further judgment and then we will be able to update people tomorrow and hopefully make some announcements if not tomorrow then Tuesday and then push on from there. Back to Victoria, where this press conference is still going on. Premier Daniel Andrews was asked to respond to his former health minister Jenny Mikakos’ comment that not going ahead with a planned easing of restrictions today was an example of “paralysis in decision making”. Andrews said: I have nothing to say about those comments. Reporter: “She has been a respected member of your government.” Andrews: I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them. That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything. Another reporter asked if it would not have been “less unsettling for Melbournians” if Andrews had stuck to the initial roadmap dates, set out in September, rather than announcing they would be brought forward, then pushing them back again. The reporter called it a “rollercoaster effect”. Andrews: There has not been a rollercoaster. Numbers have come down steadily and we are all about making sure we get them to the lowest level before we open up safely. But what I say to every Victorian is that people have given and done too much for us to ignore the fact that there are thousands of results that have been processed in laboratories as we speak and we need to wait and see those results, we will get them today and tomorrow and hopefully we are able to make, not only announcements but to take the big steps safely around the middle of this week ... We cannot make decisions appropriate to the challenge if we do not have the results and we have not seen them. We don’t know what stories they will tell. Until we get that, which is today, tomorrow and potentially into Tuesday, it is just not safe and responsible for us to say we think we know better. We think that these will all be negative. And if there are some positives they will be linked to known cases. We cannot be certain. What does Andrews think about federal health minister Greg Hunt’s comments, that the only reason you would hold off reopening if you didn’t have faith in the contact tracing system. Andrews says that “is completely wrong”. New South Wales has recorded no new locally-acquired cases for the third consecutive day. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. Some 12,465 tests were conducted in the past 24-hours. Andrews was asked what he would do if this outbreak had occurred after pubs and retail stores were reopened. Would Melbourne be locked down again? Isn’t dealing with outbreaks just the way it’s going to be? Andrews initially didn’t respond, saying he was doing “exactly what we intend to do”. Then he said he would “not necessarily” put the state back into lockdown if an outbreak like this occurred after the state had opened up. But you only get one chance to get it to the lowest point possible and then it will be a management and containment task every day, every week, every month until we get a vaccine. Reporter: So what is the lowest point possible? Andrews: Lowest point possible is difficult to know but the lowest point possible in the northern suburbs will be waiting to see these tests and make sure that they are all linked cases and that there is not some wildfire burning out there that is not visible to us. It is the absolute key. While the Victorian government has been holding its press conference, the former health minister Jenny Mikakos, who resigned last month following the premier’s appearance before the hotel quarantine inquiry and later hit back at premier Daniel Andrews and suggested she had been made a scapegoat, has tweeted that she thinks the easing of restrictions should go ahead. Mikakos said that with the target of less than five cases per day met, and six of the seven new cases connected to known outbreaks, “the set reopening is gradual &amp; safe so any delay is unnecessary”. It’s paralysis in decision-making. The chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, said Mikakos was “entitled to that opinion”. Andrews refused to comment on it, becoming short with reporters. He said: We will not open up today, there has never been a suggestion that we would. We were to make announcements today that would come over the following days. I’d don’t quite know the point you are making. One reporter said Andrews had promised that he would announce an easing of restrictions today every day for the past week, except for yesterday. “You dangled a carrot at Victorians and today it feels like you have produced a stick,” one reporter said. Andrews said he rejected that characterisation. What I would say to you is that I think in this room and across the state there has been a perfectly legitimate request to have targets and dates, and all the way along I have tried to be as clear as I can be that nothing can be guaranteed. Nothing can be guaranteed, except the fact that we will be guided by the data and the science. We have come a long way, we all have in the last thing any of us need to do now is to ignore the fact that there are cases in the northern suburbs, there are results that are pending and we do not have those processed tests. As soon they are and as soon as we can establish that they are cases linked to each other, rather than some much bigger problem, potentially across the northern suburbs, then we will be able to not only announce the next steps, we can confidently take them and rather than that being midnight Tuesday, it may be midnight Wednesday. As soon as we can confirm that we absolutely will. Ducking to the UK for a moment, PA has this report: Officials on the UK government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. There were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” Last week Test and Trace hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. Senior Tory backbencher Sir Bernard Jenkin launched a scathing attack on the performance of the system, saying public consent and co-operation was “breaking down”. Writing in The Sunday Telegraph, he said there was a “vacuum of leadership” at the top of the organisation and called for a change that was “visible and decisive” with a senior military figure being put in charge like they did with the foot and mouth crisis. In response, the Department of Health and Social Care acknowledged there were areas where the service needed to improve, but said people should be “talking it up, not down”, and the leadership had built “the largest diagnostic industry the UK has ever seen”. Weimar rejected the suggestion, made by Australian federal health minister Greg Hunt this morning, that the decision to delay the easing of restrictions was a sign of no confidence in the testing and tracing system, which he manages. Weimar said: I refute that. If you look at the swiftness and comprehensive nature of what we are dealing with, and I think it is right that when we are about to make a momentous decision to ease restrictions, that we have to have confidence that we do not have any active unknown cases in our community. Asked if he recommended the delay to government, Weimar said: When I was asked a question, is there value in seeing more evidence and do you understand every dynamic of the outbreak, my advice was we need at least one more day to make sure we have tracked down so we have another big day ahead of us today and I want to see the results from today. They will come out through the day tomorrow and that is what I have asked for. Weimar said there were five public health teams targeting the close contacts of known cases and of the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school communities. Those teams are knocking on the doors of known contacts and encouraging them to get a test. People who refuse to get a test have been ordered to quarantine for longer. We’ll be asking to test them and the people they were with because they are most directly associated with the cases we know about. And that is how we identified three or four of the cases we saw yesterday through the close contact group. Weimar said public health teams contacted 250 close contacts yesterday to get those door-to-door tests, and have a list of 60 people to contact today. We are very interested in the close contacts because we want to establish if there are any positive cases in that group because they are the ones most likely to, if we’re going to find any more cases, that is the area where we are most likely to find them. The purpose of the wider community testing approach ... [is] we want to understand if there are any other index cases out there or any other links that have not been established. And that is why the wider test program is so important. There are now 20 households that are quarantined in alternative accomodation, the rest are quarantined at home. Weimar said he needed several thousand people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne to get a Covid-19 test today. We saw a fantastic response yesterday with 3,500 people getting tested. I need to see a similar number coming out today that we have got enough depth of understanding about any cases that might be out there. We want to be confident that we understand these chains of transmission and that it doesn’t jeopardise any other activity we want to do in the state. Victoria’s commander of testing and community engagement, Jeroen Weimar, says almost 2,500 tests were conducted in the northern suburbs of Melbourne yesterday. He said there had been a “strong community response”. Testing numbers are up 60% on last week, and he urged anyone in the northern suburbs with any symptoms, and anyone connected with the two schools even without symptoms, to get tested. We are now also really following up the close contacts. We tested, again, four close contacts yesterday who were associated, potentially, with three schools. I am pleased to say this, close contacts of all tested negative twice. And that means we are no longer regarding Dallas Brooks Primary School, Ilium College and Sirius College as part of this outbreak. They are part of no chain of transmission that we have identified between households we are focusing on these three schools, and these three schools are now disassociated ... That means many hundreds of families, many hundreds of people now associated with those three schools are now free to continue on as before. We also tested 250 close contacts, primary and secondary contacts of this cluster yesterday by visiting them at home. A lot of underground activity over the last two days to reach those people at home, to test them and their household members, all those results are coming in overnight. We have some of those results in already and more results are coming in during the course of this morning. So far we have identified one positive contact out of that come out of those close contacts. He added: We have also identified a link to the Regis MacLeod aged care facility with two staff members there testing positive. They are associated with this cluster in the northern metro area that we have been working on. We tested all staff and residents of that facility yesterday, all 108 and all of those results have come back negative. We will continue to watch that facility very closely of the coming days and we will speak about that later if necessary. This continues to be a very complex and rapidly developing case. We now have 11 households [and] chains of transmission between those households. There has been significant progress in the last 24hours as we have identified two new households as part of that 11, and some of the linkages that sit between them. We also have five children at East Preston Islamic College were tested positive. They are well and have all been a part of the initial close contact circle. So this has not spread out, the case any further. Weimar said they had set up a special testing station at Croxton Specialist school, in partnership with the Royal Children’s Hospital specialist paediatric team, to help test its 120 students. We now have 17 [testing] sites across the northern suburbs that are ready to go. They will be open for business and will be ready for you and open today. It’s very important that we establish if there are any remaining positive cases in the community so we can ensure that you are safely isolated and get the treatment you need and protect your family and friends from any further transmission. We are confident that we understand how this work but there is more work to do. Andrews did announce some changes for regional Victoria, which is already several steps ahead of Melbourne in terms of easing of restrictions. From 11.59pm on Tuesday: Gyms in regional Victoria will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with space rules applying. A maximum of 20 people, again with spacing rules, will be allowed to attend a religious service with one faith leader. Outdoor funerals will be allowed to have 50 attendees. Indoor non-contact community sport for people under the age of 18 will be allowed. Indoor swimming pools will be open for all ages, to a maximum of 20 people. Greater Shepparton, which had a coronavirus outbreak earlier this month, will be brought back in line with the rest of regional Victoria from midnight tonight. Daniel Andrews said they had found “linkages” and “chains of transmission” between new cases in the northern suburbs. He also said hundreds who were under self-isolation orders have now been allowed to leave their home after testing negative. The system is working, the processes are working, we just have to wait until we get the results. It is no good doing targeted testing if you then don’t wait to see what the results of those tests are. I do hope to make definitive announcements about opening up metropolitan Melbourne in a couple of days’ time. We will keep people updated today, tomorrow, and those test results will come back and hopefully what they will show us is not just some additional cases and there are bound to be a few in that mix, but that those cases are linked, and that we know that there is a chain of transmission and we have our arms around those people and they are not spreading it to anybody else. He added: If they are random, if they are not linked to each other, if they are mysteries, that will be a real cause for concern. We are hopeful, more than that in fact, we are confident that we have found many linkages. There may be others, there may be other cases that come forward as a result of those tests that are in the labs right now. Andrews said he was not in a position to announce an easing of restrictions today, as promised for several weeks, because they are awaiting at least 1,000 Covid-19 test results from contacts of the outbreak in northern Melbourne. He said: We had hoped today to be able to announce that metropolitan Melbourne would take significant steps, not from today but from mid-week, round retail, hospitality and a whole range of other, important next steps. We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs. We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and they will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there are, whether there is more virus there than we think. Ultimately, if we can link these cases together, if we can link different outbreaks, then we have confidence that we have contained it and we can move forward. This is not a setback. It is simply waiting and being led by the data, being led by the science, and following public health advice. That is what has seen these numbers go from thousands of active cases to now, 100 active cases. That is the approach that has seen us go from 700 plus cases per day to seven cases. He said he hoped to be in a position to make an announcement in “a couple of days” and said he knew the delay would be frustrating. Andrews says there are now 100 active cases in Victoria, that’s seven new cases since yesterday. Eight of those active cases are in healthcare workers, four are in aged care. There are seven people in hospital, none in ICU. 12,894 tests were conducted yesterday. Back on the UK’s test and trace system quickly. PA reports: Contacts of people infected with coronavirus may have to self-isolate for as little as seven days amid concerns in Whitehall about the levels of public compliance with the Test and Trace system. Officials on the Government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. The move — which would not apply to those who test positive for the disease - comes amid growing dissatisfaction with the performance of the system from ministers and MPs. Boris Johnson was said to have become “disillusioned” with statistics provided by the service after they proved to be wrong, according to The Sunday Telegraph. At the same time, there were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” It comes after Test and Trace - headed by the Conservative peer Baroness Harding - last week hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, says the only reason the Victorian government would hold off opening up would be if the state did not have confidence in its contact tracing system. He made the comments just before the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is due to announce (or not announce) a change in restrictions. Andrews is due to begin speaking in a few minutes. After months of increasing tension between the two levels of government – and with the state premier due to front the media shortly – Hunt said the case levels in Victoria were low enough to justify an easing of restrictions. At a press conference in Canberra this morning, Hunt was asked what his reaction would be if the Victorian state government did not announce a significant easing of restrictions today. He said: I think many people would be deeply disappointed given the mental health impacts, given the health impacts, given the profound consequences for people who have invested their life savings. We’ve reached the time when Victoria said that they were looking to move forwards, their own timeframe, their own timetable. We always said that there’s a commonwealth definition of 10 cases, according to the chief medical officer, a rolling average. It’s below five cases, on the rolling average, which is the Victorian government’s own definition. The only reason they wouldn’t open up is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system. We have confidence that the Victorian contact tracing system has improved significantly. It could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine depending on the type required, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews, the minister for industry and science, said CSL would be able to immediately start making a vaccine if a protein-based candidate proved to be safe and effective. However, she said “significant work” would be required if it was another type known as an mRNA vaccine. Pressed during an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program to give a timeframe to get production up and running if it was an mRNA vaccine, Andrews said: I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe. But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range. Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades. In the United Kingdom, a senior conservative MP has called for Baroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the UK government’s test and trace program, to be removed and replaced. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, he said: Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace. You can read more on this story here. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, has urged the Victorian government to ease restrictions to bring the state in line with neighbouring New South Wales. Hunt, whose electorate is in Victoria, was speaking in Canberra ahead of Victorian premier Daniel Andrews’s announcement. He urged the state: ... to take the next step to opening up safely, and we hope and commend to Victoria that the commonwealth will support them in moving to those next levels of reduced restrictions, in line with New South Wales. We have seen how a strong testing, tracing and isolation system can allow a state to manage through the challenges of this. [There have been] over 400,000 cases a day for the last four days, consecutively, globally. In Australia, seven states and territories, zero community cases, yesterday. One state, with seven. And that means we are in a strong position, and there should be no barrier to Victoria taking those steps in line with New South Wales. And they have improved their systems and we want to commend and acknowledge that improvement. Obviously there is more to go, but they have significantly improved to a level where, in our view, they are capable of managing small case numbers, because if we do not do that, then we see the risks to mental health and health which have been so sadly evident in the numbers. But all up, it is a day of great hope. Moreland City Council, which covers an area of Melbourne’s northern suburbs, this morning sent an alert to residents warning that coronavirus cases had been identified in the suburbs of Fawkner, Preston, West Heidelberg, Dallas, Roxburgh Park and Broadmeadows. Anyone who lives or works in that area is urged to gets tested if they experience even mild symptoms. The council alert also urged anyone connected to the East Preston Islamic College and the Corxton school in Northcote to get a test even if they had no symptoms. Fifteen testing sites have been set up in the area. It added that Sirius College (Meadow Fair campus), Ilim College, and Dallas Brooks primary school “have also been identified as potential risk sites. Anyone from these school communities who is a close contact or who is experiencing symptoms needs to get tested and stay home”. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and health minister Martin Foley, will give a press conference at 10.30am Melbourne time (so in 30 minutes). A reminder that according to the roadmap released back in September – which has since been significantly re-written – Melbourne was due to get the following freedoms from tomorrow if the rolling 14-day average had fallen below five and there were no more than three “mystery cases” in that period. As of today, the rolling 14-day average in metropolitan Melbourne is 4.6, and there were nine cases with an unknown source in the 14 days to 22 October. So, according to that roadmap, there would from tomorrow be no restrictions on reasons to leave your home, no travel limit (Melbournians are currently not allowed more than 25km from their home without a permit), up to five visitors from another nominated household allowed in your home, and a reopening of retail stores and hospitality for outdoor seated service. Let’s wait to see what’s actually announced. Good morning, Welcome to our ongoing live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic. France reported a record 45,422 cases in one day on Sunday and 138 new deaths. The country has now recorded 1.08 million cases. Italy has also set a new daily record, with 19,644 cases, and Luxembourg has also recorded a record rise, with 862 new cases. The United Kingdom recorded 23,012 new cases and 174 deaths, as anti-lockdown protests were held in London. In Australia, the focus is on Melbourne where the premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to make an announcement on the easing of restriction. On Friday, he said there would be “significant” changes. On Saturday, he backtracked and said “I just want to caution people from banking that tomorrow I’ll be making a whole series of detailed announcements about opening up.” The Victorian government has reportedly been briefing that changes will be delayed. The reason for the change is an outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs, including a number of cases connected to the East Preston Islamic College. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday and seven on Saturday, up from one on Friday. Almost 10,000 tests have been conducted in the area and hundreds are under self-isolation orders. Andrews has said that they will need to see those tests results, and see whether new cases can be connected to known outbreaks, before the changes are finalised. Importantly for Victorians the rolling 14-day average has now dropped below five cases per day – the milestone set back in September for easing restrictions – but that might not be enough. Andrews has said decisions will be made on where the cases are and whether they are linked, not on numbers alone. Let’s crack on. You can follow me on Twitter at @callapilla or email me at Calla.Wahlquist@theguardian.com
3||White House chief of staff says 'we're not going to control pandemic', after Pence staffers test positive – liveMike Pence, who as vice president is technically the president of the Senate, is coming under criticism from Democrats for planning to come into the chamber to preside over the vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s confirmation to the Supreme Court. At a rally in Florida yesterday, Pence said “I wouldn’t miss that vote for the world”. Pence’s appearance would be symbolic as he does not need to be physically present in the Senate for the confirmation to go through. Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer denounced Pence’s plan to attend the vote tomorrow, saying it sets “a terrible, terrible example for the American public”. “It is clear to me that their closing message is that they’re going to personally deliver Covid to as many people as possible,” Brian Schatz, a Democratic senator for Hawaii, told a reporter. At least five people close to Pence, including his chief of staff, have tested positive for Covid-19. A White House official said Sunday that Pence and his wife have tested negative for the virus. His office said that the vice president does not plan to quarantine. Guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) say a person should quarantine for 14 days if they were in close contact with a person who tested positive, even if they themselves do not have symptoms or tested negative. Pence, who is head of the White House’s coronavirus task force, has said that he can bypass CDC guidelines because he is an essential worker – a claim that has been questioned by health experts. Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York state, is having a field day over the comments of the White House chief of staff Mark Meadows this morning. In a rare moment of transparency, Meadows admitted to a Sunday political talk show that the Trump administration had no intention of containing coronavirus, saying: “We’re not going to control the pandemic”. Cuomo said that thinking was tantamount to giving in to the virus. “They surrendered without firing a shot. It was the great American surrender,” he said on Sunday, as reported by the Daily News. The New York governor said that the Trump administration’s approach to Covid was summed up from the start by such capitulation. “They have believed from the beginning that they can’t control the virus,” he said. By contrast, Cuomo prides himself on having wrestled coronavirus to the ground. After a bad start to the pandemic, which saw New York City become the world’s top hotspot, the rate of infection has been reduced to one of the lowest in the country through an aggressive program of testing and contact tracing. There have been a total of almost 500,000 confirmed cases in the state, and 25,730 deaths. About 120,000 New Yorkers are being tested every day. “What we learned in New York was, if you put up a fight you will have won. Because New York won,” Cuomo said. After the Senate voted to move forward with the final vote to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court, Mitch McConnell spoke on the Senate floor, celebrating the lasting influence of the vote for posterity. “By tomorrow night, we’ll have a new member of the United States Supreme Court,” he told the chamber. McConnell acknowledged that this election could change the tide in Washington but said that not much could be done to change the nature of the court “for a long time to come”. One Capitol Hill reporter noted that it appears the bruising on McConnell’s face and hands that were seen on Friday appeared to have gotten better. Apparently, getting three judges onto the Supreme Court in four years can do wonders to one’s health. The Senate just made a 51-48 vote to move forward with the final vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s nomination to the Supreme Court. Republicans overrode a Democratic filibuster with today’s vote, and the final vote for her confirmation will take place tomorrow night. With the Republican majority in the Senate, Barrett’s nomination is pretty much a guarantee, despite weeks of criticism from Democrats about a Supreme Court nomination weeks before the presidential election. The NFL has fined the Tennessee Titans $350,000 for violating protocols leading to the league’s first Covid-19 outbreak during the season, multiple outlets are reporting. The Titans had 24 people, including 13 players, test positive for the coronavirus between 24 September and 11 October. The outbreak led the NFL to postpone two Tennessee games and the rescheduling of a game against Pittsburgh from 4 October to today and the second against Buffalo from 11 October to 13 October. The league and its players association sent officials, including infectious disease experts, to Nashville where they reviewed video and interviewed players, coaches and other personnel. ESPN reports the NFL informed the Titans last week that their review had concluded and the organization would face a potential fine. Individuals would not be disciplined and there was no discussion of forfeiture of draft picks. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). The US Senate has started day two of a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. More from Richard Luscombe… Joe Biden’s deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield, was grilled on NBC’s Meet the Press about the Democrat nominee’s “light physical footprint”. To the backdrop of a graphic comparing Biden’s appearances since September in four key battleground states – North Carolina, Arizona, Florida and Pennsylvania – to Trump’s (the president leads 19-14), host Chuck Todd wanted to know why Biden was concentrating heavily on Georgia instead of more northerly swing states. The answer: Biden is “focused on maintaining as many paths to 270 electoral votes as we possibly can.” Bedingfield also pointed out that at a scheduled appearance in Warm Springs, Georgia, on Tuesday, Biden would deliver his closing arguments at a place “which obviously has historical significance in this country”. Warm Springs is the resort town where the 32nd president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, built his Little White House, a cottage he used while suffering from polio in the 1930s. “Vice-President Biden has visited all of these battleground states multiple times,” Bedingfield said. “He was in Pennsylvania yesterday, doing two events, along with Dr [Jill] Biden. So no, we have been very aggressively campaigning. “Here’s the difference between what we’re doing and what Donald Trump is doing, we’re doing it safely.” Bedingfield noted that the president’s rallies feature large, mostly maskless crowds with no social distancing. A new CBS poll, meanwhile, showed Biden tied with Trump in Georgia and holding narrow leads in other southern battlegrounds, including Florida and North Carolina. Todd also pressed Bedingfield on Biden’s comments at last week’s final debate about the oil industry. Why, he wondered, would oil workers in Texas or elsewhere support a candidate who supports a transition away from the industry at a risk to their jobs? “There is only one person in this country who Joe Biden thinks should lose his job and it’s Donald Trump,” she said. “Joe Biden … is not going to end the fossil fuel industry, he’s going to end subsidies for the oil industry. He believes your taxpayer dollars should go to education. Donald Trump believes they should go to Exxon. That’s a conversation we’re willing to have any day.” A CBS News/YouGov poll of three southern battleground states finds Joe Biden in a dead heat with Donald Trump in Georgia with slight edges in Florida (by two points) and North Carolina (by four). Some other key findings from CBS News: • Early voters in each told us they favored Joe Biden, but those who have not yet voted favor Donald Trump, setting up a key turnout test running now through Election Day for both parties. • Very different views on the coronavirus outbreak still shape the race in all these states. In all, most Biden voters are very concerned about getting it, and Trump’s voters, by comparison, are far less concerned. Biden also gets better marks overall on how he would handle the outbreak. • Biden voters are more likely to say the outbreak and a candidate’s personal character are major factors in their vote. For Trump voters, the economy and immigration are the biggest factors. • In splits among key demographic groups, Biden currently leads among White women with college degrees in Florida and North Carolina; and across all three states it’s shifts from 2016 that are helping Biden. In Georgia, White voters without college degrees – both men and women – tend to like how Trump handles himself personally and dislike Biden’s approach. Biden is cutting into Trump’s 2016 margins with seniors in Florida and Georgia, cutting Trump’s 2016 advantage in half. In North Carolina Biden has a two-point edge with seniors. Last week Trump was forced to play defense when he staged a prime-time rally in Georgia, which no Republican presidential candidate has lost since George HW Bush in 1992 – a far cry from his original designs on expanding the map into Democratic-leaning states. After Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said there were some senators he could not and did not want to help, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Joe Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. In fact senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have recently sought to put daylight between themselves and the unpopular president as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour; McSally dodged attempts to make her express support for Trump during a campaign debate; and Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on key policy issues. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election in Nebraska but McSally faces defeat in Arizona and Cornyn is in an unexpectedly tight race in Texas. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday. “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeated statements that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” McDaniel also said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Calmer seas returned to CNN’s State of the Union studio following the tempest of the Mark Meadows interview. House speaker Nancy Pelosi told host Jake Tapper she remains “hopeful” of a coronavirus relief bill perhaps this week, despite Republicans “moving the goalposts”. A week ago, Pelosi insisted only 48 hours remained for Democrats and Republicans to strike an agreement that would bring relief before election day. That didn’t happen, but Pelosi said they are still open to talking. “We’re ready. We can change some words in the bill, should they come back with some modifications,” Pelosi said, claiming her side was still waiting for answers over some of the differences. “Why would we even be talking to each other if we didn’t believe that we could reach an agreement? So again, it could happen this week, but that’s up to Mitch [McConnell, the Senate majority leader] as to whether it would happen in the Senate and go to the president’s desk.” Republicans in Congress have been trying to negotiate downwards the $2.2tn Democrats are proposing, and saw their $500bn bill blocked this week. Donald Trump, meanwhile, has said he’s open to more. “It only takes more money,” Pelosi said, referring to a key aim of the relief bill, namely the safe reopening of schools. “That is for separation, for ventilation, for technology, for more teachers and the rest. Children learning, parents earning. Education is another policy piece where we have some disagreement, otherwise we can negotiate. “We’re waiting. Every time they say we move the goalposts, that means they’re projecting what they did, but let’s just be hopeful. We’re nine days before an election. We’re trying to unify the country and one way to do it is to come together to crush the virus, so that we can open our economy, open our schools and feed 17 million children who are food insecure in our country.” The speaker said she sent questions to McConnell on Friday, and is expecting answers Monday. “In our bill, science dictates what we do,” she said. “We can lower the incidence of the virus in certain areas, open schools, open businesses and the rest. If we don’t, we’re just giving money to the president to spend any way he wants, and that has not been in furtherance of crushing the virus.” Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behavior,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. White House chief of staff Mark Meadows has just made one of the most revealing comments to emerge from Trump’s inner circle about the president’s historic mishandling of the coronavirus crisis. On a Sunday political talk show, Meadows admitted that the federal government was not focusing on trying to control the pandemic. “We’re not going to control the pandemic,” he told Jake Tapper on CNN’s State of the Union. “We are going to control the fact that we get a vaccine, therapeutics and other mitigation.” Tapper pressed Meadows to explain why the administration was not going to control Covid-19, given the massive surge that is pummeling the Midwest and mountain states. He replied: “Because it is a contagious virus.” Meadows’ statement would be astonishing at any time during the pandemic. It gives an unusually candid insight into the mindset of a White House that from the outset has played down its role in marshalling a federal effort to bring the virus under control. The remark was all the more astounding given it’s timing. Marc Short, chief of staff to vice president Mike Pence, has just tested positive for coronavirus, as have three other VP staff and an adviser. Yet Pence continues to travel the US, unmasked, holding campaign events, the White House avoiding the recommendation to quarantine set out by the administration’s own public health agency, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, by calling the vice-president an “essential worker”. Pence is in charge of the White House coronavirus task force, which a key member, Anthony Fauci, said on Friday has seen its meetings “diminish” while President Trump has not attended in “several months”. Around the country, confirmed cases are on a steep upward curve, with Friday and Saturday recording the highest levels since the pandemic began. Hospitalisations and deaths have also begun to rise. In a heated exchange with Tapper, Meadows repeatedly sidestepped the administration’s responsibility for this surge in numbers just nine days before the presidential election. He kept on stressing the role of therapeutics and a future vaccine in “mitigating” the number of deaths, while implying the federal government had no responsibility for the rampant spread of the virus. Tapper asked why the vice-president continued to travel to campaign events without wearing a mask, despite having been exposed via his closest staff. Meadows tried to redirect the blame to China as the source of the virus, but Tapper continued to challenge him. “Would you agree this is very serious, people need to take precautions?” Tapper asked. “I agree it is very serious, but we continue to test more and more so the cases will go up,” Meadows replied. In fact, the number of new confirmed cases is rising significantly faster than the quantity of testing. Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff, is currently conducting a fiery interview with Jake Tapper of CNN, voices raised about the White House’s attitude to coronavirus mitigation measures and campaigning instead of steering efforts to combat the pandemic. It’s not going well. More soon. In the meantime, here’s the White House pool report: It’s a brisk, rainy fall day at the White House. White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows spoke to reporters briefly in the driveway after a Fox News interview. He was asked about VP Pence chief of staff Marc Short’s positive coronavirus diagnosis, and was very brief in his remarks. He said only: “We wish him well – he’s been quarantining these last few days…” Another reporter shouted: “Why is Pence traveling – that seems insane?” And another asked: “Should anyone who is in close contact with the vice-president be quarantining?” Meadows ignored the questions. We’re expecting a 10.30pm Trump departure, traveling to New Hampshire and Maine. He is scheduled to be back at the White House for a Halloween event at 6.15pm. This pooler was tested for coronavirus and is awaiting results. The Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards the group put up in Times Square. The billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, showing apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president in cases involving allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing among other things their first amendment rights of free speech. In a legal response released on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson wrote: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticize freely”. Sanderson cited supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting on 20 March, as the pandemic gathered terrible speed, New York reeled and Kushner attacked Governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”, Sanderson wrote. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” Sanderson also said “This isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian, that seems unlikely. Ivanka Trump’s “father has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Barring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? More from the Associated Press: “A day after the US set a daily record for new confirmed coronavirus infections, it came very close to doing it again. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Close to 8.6m Americans have contracted the coronavirus since the pandemic began, and about 225,000 have died. Both statistics are the world’s highest. India has more than 7.8m infections but its daily numbers have been declining. US health officials have feared the surge of infections to come with colder weather and people spending more time indoors, especially as many flout guidelines to protect themselves and others such as mask-wearing and social distancing. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington currently forecasts that the country’s death toll could exceed 318,000 by 1 January.” …and welcome to another day on the campaign trail, nine days out from election day now, with Joe Biden holding his polling leads, Donald Trump campaigning hard at rallies which do not adhere to Covid-19 mitigation measures and Mike Pence… seeing multiple members of his team, including chief of staff Marc Short, test positive for the coronavirus. The VP is not altering his schedule: This while Covid case numbers are shooting to record levels nationally and in many states, and as one study predicts a death toll of 500,000 by February. As the AP reports, “Oklahoma, Illinois, New Mexico and Michigan were among states announcing new record highs in daily confirmed cases on Saturday, a day after a nationwide daily record of more than 83,000 reported infections, according to Johns Hopkins University. “Dr Joneigh Khaldun, Michigan’s chief medical executive, said it’s ‘now more important than ever that people take this seriously.’ The 3,338 new Covid-19 cases in her state topped the old record by more than 1,300. Michigan is of course a swing state, fought over by Trump and Biden – who is more than seven points up there. Kamala Harris, Biden’s running mate, will be in the state today. The same Johns Hopkins count now puts the caseload at 8.5m and the death toll at more than 224,000. Trump had a four-state campaign day on Saturday, voting in Florida before staging rallies in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin. Today he’s speaking in New Hampshire – where the fivethirtyeight.com average puts Biden more than 11 points ahead. Trump has a habit of speaking in places where it might not seem worth the bother – he is also having to campaign in states, such as Georgia, where no Republican president would usually have to tread. More to come, of course. In the meantime, here’s David Smith with hopeful news for Democrats:
4||'Could do better': top Australian economists grade the 2020 budgetAustralia’s leading economists have struggled to grade this month’s budget. Challenged by the Economic Society of Australia and The Conversation to rate it on a scale of A to F when judged by its stated aims of rebuilding the economy and creating jobs, none of the 43 economists who responded gave it the lowest grades of E or F. But most who gave it a pass were unhappy. Financial markets expert Kevin Davis praised “the willingness of a conservative government to adopt needed large deficit spending at variance with its ideology”. Economic modeller and former Reserve Bank board member Warwick McKibbin said he would give it an A for scale. But Davis said tax cuts “to the better-off employed” weren’t the best way of achieving desired outcomes, and McKibbin said the composition could have been much better designed. “There was an opportunity to invest in green infrastructure as part of a fiscal response and a climate/energy policy response that would have longer-term economic and environmental payoffs,” McKibbin said. “For spending support, transfers to low-income households rather than income tax cuts would have given a bigger bang for the buck. Greater support of childcare would support incomes and labour supply.” Bob Breunig said the design of the childcare benefit created a well-documented income cliff for second earners making it difficult for them to work more hours. It was a known problem and would have been easy to fix. Hard hats instead of soft skills The Grattan Institute’s Danielle Wood said it was “absolutely the right call to change course on fiscal strategy and recognise the need for sizeable stimulus, so marks for that”. But the budget “very much bet the house on a private sector-led recovery”. Where it had spent money directly, it mostly went to “hard-hat” professions such as infrastructure, construction, manufacturing, defence, utilities and energy. “Some of these sectors haven’t even seen job losses during Covid,” Wood said, “and there is already a healthy pipeline of work for transport infrastructure projects, so why spend your stimulus dollars here?” Renee Fry McKibbin noted that the burden of Covid-19 fell on frontline workers in health, caring industries, hospitality, tourism, arts and education, yet she said the budget focused on sectors “traditionally dominated by men”. Climate change overlooked Wood said the price of those blindspots would be a weaker recovery than otherwise, unemployment higher for longer than it could have been, and women’s economic disadvantage entrenched. Labour market specialist Sue Richardson said relying on incentives such as instant asset write-offs and hiring subsidies was risky because the private sector might not respond in the way that had been hoped. What direct spending there was seemed “intended largely to recreate the economy of the past, rather than invest in the economy of the future”. “The economy of the future will, among other things, need to have much lower greenhouse gas emissions and much greater ability to cope with the unavoidable damage arising from climate change.” How we handle the recovery will either set us on a path towards net-zero emissions or lock us into a fossil fuel system from which it will be hard to escape. Saul Eslake gave the government “great credit for being willing, explicitly, to recalibrate its budget strategy” and run up what (for Australia) were large amounts of debt. On average, a bare pass But he said the measures chosen would be less effective in delivering jobs and recovery than others available including vouchers for spending in sectors hard-hit sectors and spending on social housing and childcare. All but one of the 43 economists who responded to the survey also responded to the pre-budget survey which nominated spending on social housing, education and training and permanently boosting jobseeker as the top budget priorities. Assessing the budget, 16 of the 43 (37%) awarded it either an A or a B. Almost half (49%) awarded it a C, or “bare pass”. Six (14%) gave it a D. Some of the economists who awarded a B said it was really a “B-minus”. One of them, Lata Gangadharan, said when it came to opportunities for women (those worst affected by the downturn) the budget “failed miserably” and would attract a D. James Morley said he might have been “too easy of a marker” by awarding a B, but that it was “possible to lose the forest for the trees when only evaluating the budget on its specifics”. ‘B’ reflects the big picture, not the details The big picture was that deficit-financed stimulus was needed and that the budget provided much more than might have been expected given the previous positions of the treasury and the Morrison government. He said the forward guidance that put off “budget repair” until after the unemployment rate fell below 6% was welcome, even if one could ask why the threshold of 6% number had been chosen. The more one looks at the details, the more one wants to significantly mark down the grade for budget. But I will still give it a “B” because the big picture is on the right track and I will just hope the Treasurer somehow becomes an “A” student in the future. Rana Roy said he would have to grade the budget a C rather than an A or B, “more in sorrow than in anger”. While he approved of the deficits and the tax cuts and the focus on infrastructure, he strongly suspected the measures would not be enough. “For example, in an immediate sense it is likely that the negative impact of tapering and terminating jobkeeper will overpower the positive impact of the new wage subsidies for new hires.” Two of those surveyed awarded the budget a B primarily because it had shown restraint. Tony Makin said too much spending would have pushed up the dollar and drawn resources away from the private sector. Geoffrey Kingston said it was important to avoid “maxing out the national credit card”. Chris Edmond awarded it a C primarily because its assumptions relied on hope. By simply assuming a widespread effective vaccine will be available next year and not otherwise thinking hard about how to beat the pandemic, the government is being very optimistic. Others said it had ignored the one thing recommended by most economists, which was to invest in social housing to make housing affordable and create jobs. A permanent increase to jobseeker would have given a million Australian confidence in the lead-up to Christmas. Higher education, a major export earner with a direct impact on productivity, was being left to shrink. John Quiggin said the budget pursued “cultural/ideological vendettas against perceived enemies like renewable energy and the university sector”. But he said it was still worth a C. The government was right to budget for a large deficit, and deserved continuing credit for JobSeeker and JobKeeper. This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons licence. Read the original article, including economists’ individual grades and responses. Peter Martin is a visiting fellow at the Crawford school of public policy, Australian National University
2||Australia is part of a Black region; it should recognise Kanaky ambition in New CaledoniaKicking the can down the road is a time-honoured solution to deadlocks over statehood and identity: hoping time, consultation and money can end up in agreement. But in New Caledonia, the French territory of 290,000 people in the Melanesian island chain to Australia’s north-east, the road is running out after more than two decades of can-kicking. The time is coming – perhaps has come – for Australia to take a clearer position. On 4 October, the second of three referendums on independence promised after 20 years of peace-building saw a sharpening divide in popular sentiment about staying under the French tricolour. Just over 53% of voters said “non” to independence, down from 56.7% in the first referendum in 2018. The trend suggests that a third referendum expected in 2022 would see the “oui” vote rise from this month’s 46.7% to parity or even a narrow majority. Such a prospect has some observers fearing a return to the communal violence seen in the late 1980s, when indigenous Kanaks sought to follow their Melanesian counterparts in Vanuatu, the Solomons, and Papua New Guinea into independence, and French settlers mounted armed resistance. It culminated in 1988. Kanak militants took French police as political hostages on the small island of Ouvéa; French special forces went in, with significant loss of life. The horror led to a 10-year peacemaking effort, the Matignon accords, signed by French loyalist and Kanak leaders, extended by the 1998 Nouméa accords. This month’s vote saw the territory still largely split along the indigenous-settler divide. The “oui” vote dominated in the northern part of the main island and the Loyalty Islands to the east, where Kanaks are concentrated. The “non” vote prevailed in the main island’s south around Nouméa and a smaller settler enclave. The question is, where to now? Under the accords, a third referendum must be held if requested by at least a third of the New Caledonia congress, its legislature. The earliest request can be in April, for a vote in 2022. The pro-independence Kanak parties have the required numbers and say they will demand it. Loyalists, seeing where the numbers are trending, are starting to baulk at it. Sonia Backès, a conservative loyalist who is president of the southern region, has said it even carries the risk of civil war. Some loyalist elements are now urging new negotiations on some kind of middle way, to avoid holding the third referendum. A more hard-line element wants a vote on scrapping the accord in 2022, bringing the 40,000 more recent settlers onto the local electoral roll and thus outvoting the Kanaks for good. But some compromise is stirring on the Kanak side too. This week, Roch Wamytan, a Kanak who was a signatory to the 1998 accords and is now president of the territory’s congress, floated the idea of independence in association with France. This would perhaps resemble the ties of the northern Pacific states of Palau, Micronesia and Marshall Islands with the United States, which extends defence, funding and social services, while still holding their own United Nations membership. France itself looks ready to adjust. In 2018 president Emmanuel Macron visited New Caledonia before the vote, and expressed pride in the decision to remain with France. This time he stayed away, and afterwards, as noted by Denise Fisher, a former Australian consul-general in Nouméa, just referred to the “success” of the “second democratic rendezvous” as a sign of “confidence in the Republic.” He promised to organise a third referendum if that was requested, and urged the territory’s people to think hard about all scenarios after 2022. The French territories minister, Sebastien Lecornu, appeared set on encouraging flexible thinking when he arrived in New Caledonia this month. “This binary question of a yes or no to independence is not the answer to all the questions raised in society today.” New Caledonia’s region is also stepping into the debate. Vanuatu’s opposition leader and recent foreign minister, Ralph Regenvanu, this week urged more contact with loyalists to convince them New Caledonia can be a viable state. He noted that this camp often cites Vanuatu, a former British-French condominium, as a dire example of independence. “For us, it is quite amusing because we think we have got a very good development model happening here,” Regenvanu told Radio New Zealand. In this context, Australia is looking oddly more pro-French than the French. In a statement on the referendum result, foreign minister Marise Payne said “we recognise the choice made by New Caledonians to remain a part of France”, declaring “Australia values its close relationship with France as a likeminded partner in the Indo-Pacific region. We welcome France’s ongoing commitment to the Pacific, and its significant contribution to regional security and prosperity.” Not a word about the Kanaks and their aspirations. Two things are at play here. China has Australia spooked about the Pacific, to the point where it is open to French duchessing that they are a significant counterweight, through such things as the recently proposed France-India-Australia “axis” and the appointment of a French ambassador for the Indo-Pacific. Both India and Australia are of course big customers for the French arms industry. From a narrow military power-balance perspective, it might seem attractive to keep a significant Western naval power like France watching over a vast stretch of the Pacific, where France has about 80% of its present exclusive economic zone. But it runs counter to the Morrison government’s signature initiative placing Australia in the Pacific “vuvale” (family, in Fijian). The Melanesians are this family’s most numerous people, perhaps outnumbering Australians later this century. They take decolonisation of their Kanak brothers very seriously. We should show that we do too. A more constructive approach would be to join regional leaders like Regenvanu in trying convince loyalists that a new independent state of Kanaky, with continuing French support and encouraged Australian investment in its struggling nickel industry, might not be a bad thing, certainly better than otherwise inevitable conflict. For Australia, it would pre-empt malign influence from elsewhere and show our recognition that we are, as Regenvanu told me earlier this year, “part of a Black region”.
0||'The red card was a joke': Ancelotti fumes over Digne dismissal as Everton slip upCarlo Ancelotti has accused the Premier League referee, Kevin Friend, of being swayed by the furore surrounding Jordan Pickford’s challenge on Virgil van Dijk in the Merseyside derby in his decision to send off Lucas Digne as Everton’s unbeaten start to the season came to an end at Southampton. The Everton manager suggested criticism of Pickford’s tackle, which went unpunished and left the Liverpool defender with a long-term anterior cruciate ligament injury, was an aggravating factor in Digne being given a straight red card in the 2-0 defeat. Ancelotti said the officials’ decision to send Digne off was “a joke” and confirmed Everton would appeal the red card. Asked if he was concerned his players have a discipline issue following successive sending-offs – Richarlison was absent at St Mary’s after being sent off late on against Liverpool – Ancelotti replied: “No, I don’t think so. The red card was a joke, it was not intentional, for sure it was not violent. Maybe it was a yellow [card]. Maybe all this talk all week against Pickford, against Richarlison, affected the decision and if so it’s not right, it’s not fair. “We will appeal, for sure. It was not violent conduct. It could be a yellow card. It was an unfortunate contact and a red card was not fair.” Digne’s sending off, which will result in a three-match ban unless it is overturned by the Football Association, compounded a difficult afternoon as Everton slipped to defeat. The Southampton captain James Ward-Prowse opening the scoring before Che Adams doubled Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side’s advantage after 35 minutes. Four minutes later Stuart Armstrong thought he added a third but Adams was ruled offside in the buildup. “We don’t have to be too disappointed, we are still at the top of the table, which is an unbelievable achievement for us and we have to try to stay there,” Ancelotti added. “It was not a good day, it was not a good performance, we are here to talk about the first defeat and I think we have to forward because of course we don’t like to lose games but in football it happens. It has arrived after a fantastic start. We have to move forward in this game with the belief we made here.”
1||Lewis Hamilton still ambitious after breaking Schumacher's win recordLewis Hamilton believes he can go on to even greater heights having surpassed Michael Schumacher’s record of Formula One race victories after his win at the Portuguese Grand Prix. The British driver took a commanding victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve and is also now within touching distance of Schumacher’s record of seven world championships. Hamilton won in Portimão despite having lost the lead in the opening laps but came back with a masterful display, taking the flag 25 seconds from his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas. The British driver was ultimately in a league of his own in Portugal and enjoyed an emotional celebration of his 92nd win as he finally surpassed Schumacher as the most successful F1 driver across race victories. The world champion praised his Mercedes team, and insisted he and they were eager for more. “I don’t believe in the saying ‘the sky is the limit’,” he said. “It depends how much we want it, how much we want to continue to raise the bar and going by our history together, the way we work, we don’t sit back on our results, we keep working, we keep elevating. Every race feels like the first one. I don’t know how this is possible after all these races but it does.” Hamilton now leads Bottas by 77 points in the world championship. If he is 78 points ahead after the Turkish Grand Prix, which takes place after the next round at Imola, he will secure his seventh title. The Briton has yet to sign a new contract with Mercedes but is clearly motivated to continue. He has enthusiastically embraced the anti-racism cause and has been a driving force in pushing F1 and Mercedes to push for greater diversity. Initiatives which have only left him enthused to continue in F1. “We are having to utilise our position as a business, as a leader in the business for inclusivity, for diversity, there is a lot of work to do, that keeps me inspired,” he said. “It keeps my teammates continuously growing, my fans learning through this process with us all and our sport is slowly changing. It’s a real special time. I definitely wonder, well I am 35 years old. I still feel physically strong but of course you wonder when is it going to tip over and you start losing performance but going by today it is not yet.” Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was third, believes Hamilton will go well past Schumacher’s records. “It’s an incredible achievement 92 victories and he will go to over 100,” he said. “It’s incredible, he looks like he will also get seven world titles as well which is very impressive.”
0||Jacob Murphy rescues point for Newcastle with late leveller at WolvesAfter 80 minutes that felt like a slog deep in midwinter rather than Premier League game No 6, Wolves and Newcastle awoke. Raúl Jiménez’s strike from a poorly cleared Neto free-kick seemed to have made it a third consecutive 1-0 win for Wolves, only for Jacob Murphy to rewrite this script. Steve Bruce’s side had barely moved beyond the centre circle in the second half. Yet after claiming a free-kick to the left of Wolves’s area with three minutes left, up stepped Murphy to curl the equaliser around the wall and past Rui Patrício’s fingertips. If this was a touch unfair on Wolves they have to accept some culpability for taking the match to Newcastle only sporadically. From the XI that schooled Leeds in Monday’s 1-0 win, Nuno Espírito Santo brought in Rúben Neves for João Moutinho. Bruce’s reaction to the 4-1 capitulation to Manchester United was to choose Fabian Schär, Ryan Fraser, Murphy and Miguel Almirón instead of Emil Krafth, Jonjo Shelvey, Isaac Hayden and Joelinton. When in flow Wolves are a medley of gold shirts running to and off the ball and from kick-off they had their visitors chasing them. Daniel Podence, playing off Jiménez, drifted into space at will, one of these moves having him turning for goal and unloading at Karl Darlow, who saved low down. This presaged three more attacking moments from Wolves. First, Neto hit a corner straight into Darlow’s gloves; then Jiménez twice miscued when he should have connected cleanly. It meant Nuno’s men had failed to convert from four opportunities and Newcastle quickly moved from relief to posing their own threat. Callum Wilson raced on to a long ball before Max Kilman’s challenge conceded a corner. This the first of two in quick succession, Ryan Fraser delivering each, and while their hosts were not breached Newcastle had their respect. The fluidity of Wolves’s play is complemented by tenacity, though. It was illustrated when soaking up pressure at Elland Road and was shown here again in a response that once more had Newcastle pinned back as possession was tapped in and around them. Bruce’s side were able to stymie them from moving into the final third yet there was scant sign – the Wilson foray, apart – of Rui Patrício, the Wolves No 1, being threatened. It meant that as the contest passed the half-hour mark entertainment had become as rare a commodity as any actual attempts on goal. When Fraser ran along the right and floated in a cross aimed at Wilson this pattern might have been broken but the ball was too close to Patrício, who gathered with ease. And when Almirón skated through the middle to cause a Wolves’ backpedal the pass might have been weighted perfectly for Allan Saint-Maximin but the No 10’s shot was skewered wide. Finally Podence, at the other end, twisted and turned to leave two Newcastle defenders spectators, the subsequent ball in possessing menace: Jiménez rose and only a well-timed Jamaal Lascelles intervention prevented the Mexican heading at goal. The mood caught on. Tempo was upped, quality elevated. Suddenly Saint-Maximin was doing his own swerve-and-slalom to cut in from the left before letting fly from 20 yards: the ball ricocheted off Willy Boly so Patrício was grateful to save. Still, as the second half began the sides remained in deadlock. And the fare was back to being soporific. After Jiménez again snatched at a shot and Murphy hacked away from under Newcastle’s bar Podence was back in creator mode. This time a dip of the hips took him into yards of clear grass and he teed up Rúben Neves with precision. Yet here the midfielder became the latest to lack composure, spraying the ball wildly over. Podence was undeterred. His feet danced again a little later inside Newcastle’s area and when he shot the ball appeared to hit the arm of Federico Fernández; Nuno appealed on the touchline yet VAR checked and ruled no penalty which seemed odd as numerous similar incidents have been penalised this season. Soon the Newcastle bench were themselves shouting “handball ref” when an Almirón effort at Patrício’s goal pin-balled around the area but this did not interest VAR. When Nuno took off Podence for Adama Traoré on 67 minutes this felt quaint as this removed the best performer. But now came a finish that did at least feature two goals – each of which highlighted what had previously been missing.
0||Kevin McCarra obituaryKevin McCarra, who has died aged 62 of Alzheimer’s disease, was football correspondent for the Guardian from 2002 to 2012 and prior to that a football writer for the Times, Sunday Times and Scotland on Sunday. One of Scotland’s finest sportswriting exports, he was blessed with original thinking, a deep and genuine understanding of football, and an extraordinary talent for phraseology that allowed him to turn what might otherwise have been mundane match reports into works of art. He was born in Glasgow, the youngest of three children, and grew up in Clarkston, on the outskirts of the city. His mother, Adele, was a pharmacist who later went into science teaching, and his father, Joe, was also a teacher. Having attended Holyrood secondary school in Glasgow, Kevin took a degree in Scottish literature at Glasgow University, becoming heavily involved in the Third Eye Centre, a contemporary arts venue. At that stage lecture halls looked to be his natural domain, and after graduation he enrolled for a PhD. However, an invitation from the Third Eye Centre to curate an exhibition about Scottish football was followed by a commission to write a book entitled A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, which was published in 1984. In turn that led to writing work with Scottish Field magazine. Kevin’s deft touch and sharp observations quickly caught the eye of the newly established Scotland on Sunday, which in 1988 took him on as a staff writer – and the PhD was ditched. When the entrepreneur Fergus McCann saved Celtic football club in 1994 Kevin was at the forefront of reporting on the story and shortly afterwards he accepted a move to the Times, initially as Scottish football correspondent but later covering English matches after the direct intervention of the newspaper’s editor prevented a move to the Scotsman. It was at the Times during one particularly raucous European football night at Ibrox that Kevin dictated to the copytaker down the phone that the Rangers manager Walter Smith had “returned to his previous central defensive pairing of Richard Gough and Gordan Petric” – only to find the phrase rendered into “tedious central defensive pairing” when it appeared in the paper the following morning. There was, however, never any prospect of Smith, Petric, Gough or anyone else in the football world becoming angry with Kevin. Similarly, even in such a tribal environment as Glasgow, where support for either half of the Old Firm is generally kept under wraps, he had no fear of revealing his lifelong allegiance to Celtic, as even Rangers fans knew he would not allow that to cloud the judgment in his work. His writing was of sufficiently high quality and balance to render such thoughts redundant. In 2002 he succeeded David Lacey as the main footballing writer at the Guardian, moving with his wife, Susan Stewart, an investment banker, whom he had married in 1986, to Stoke Newington in north London. During his time at the Guardian Kevin was a constant source of support to other journalists, both established and aspiring. Self-deprecating about the scale of his own talent, he felt uncomfortable at receiving so many emails from inquisitive teenagers keen on pursuing a life in the sports media. He regarded his own route as too unorthodox to be helpful and was perhaps unaware that even just a return communication from someone of his standing – which he always gave - would nonetheless be gratefully received. Support was not reserved for the young: in the late 2000s, when Hugh MacDonald, then a sportswriter with the Herald in Glasgow, arrived in London to preview a Champions League tie involving Arsenal, Kevin drove him to the club’s rural pre-match press conference and then back to his hotel. It only emerged later, and by accident, that all of this took place on Kevin’s day off. He also allowed me to stay in his home after being instrumental in arranging some work experience at the Guardian. Many years later a ticking off arrived by email for my use of “plethora” in relation to opportunities missed during a football match. True to the word’s definition, which relates to a larger amount of something than is needed, he reminded me that “teams cannot create too many chances”. If such a note had arrived from any other journalist, ego would have led to annoyance, but from Kevin it produced only a smile. In an industry where cynicism is embedded, he stood out for his kind, gracious and graceful approach. No one had a bad word to say about him, and that spoke volumes. In 2012 his book Celtic: A Biography in Nine Lives was published; he had written several others over the years, mainly about Scottish football and beginning with One Afternoon in Lisbon (co-written with Pat Woods in 1988) about Celtic’s European Cup glory in 1967. In 2012 he left the Guardian to return to Glasgow. Susan gave up her job and spent more and more of her time helping him as his health deteriorated. Season tickets at Partick Thistle and Celtic allowed for plenty of football to be watched, and there were trips, too, to Venice, their favourite city – but nothing like the time for travel that they had planned. He is survived by Susan and his brother, John. • Kevin James McCarra, journalist, born 1 February 1958; died 24 October 2020
5||The Guardian view on the social care crisis: fix a broken systemCoronavirus has yanked back the veil that had obscured the crisis in social care. The unfairness, confusion and humiliation felt by people using the system is out in plain sight. The public intuitively grasps that something needs to be done. When Boris Johnson arrived in Downing Street, he claimed to have a plan to fix a broken system. If a week is a long time in politics, then last July feels like an aeon ago. Mr Johnson’s plan has yet to appear. The worry is that it has been swallowed up by the gaping maw of the pandemic. That is why ministers should listen to the Commons health and social care committee. Last week MPs painted a picture, in England, of an underfunded system, stretched to breaking point, with a low-paid workforce who need more than clapping. The committee said, at a minimum, £7bn extra should be spent by 2023-24 on the system, with roughly 60% of the money used to cover demographic changes and lift pay in line with the national minimum wage. The rest of the cash would be used to introduce a cap on care costs to protect people against catastrophic bills, first suggested by the economist Sir Andrew Dilnot in 2011. This is an “oven-ready” plan. MPs have set aside policy differences to make the offer digestible for the Treasury. Select committees in both the Lords and the Commons had argued for introducing free personal care to help people with daily tasks such as bathing and dressing. Parliamentarians are now more muted in their support for this policy, aware the £5bn price tag would be too large for the chancellor to swallow. The state should be more generous because we are all living longer. The consequent higher demand for long-term care exposes more people to the “lottery” of the system. It is becoming harder to argue, on ethical grounds, that the NHS will treat long-term conditions such as cancer for free while dementia can cost a sufferer the family home or life savings. The system is plainly malfunctioning when the elderly occupy hospital beds because of a shortage of care places. The state is a crucial prop in the English social care system, providing private operators with a subsidy, via councils, that allows them to open their doors to rich and poor alike. Without adequate funding, local-authority-funded places in private care homes dry up. The upshot is, say experts, a growing divide: with only the very poorest and most incapacitated able to access council-funded beds in a shrinking number of care homes while affluent seniors buy spots in Florida-style retirement villages which come with private nursing care. Anger over such divisions may quickly turn into an electoral “grey-quake”. Ministers cannot say they haven’t been warned. Yet a government solution remains elusive. There is little consensus, especially in the ruling Conservative party, on how the “in year” cost of social care should be apportioned between its current and future beneficiaries. Some Tories think government intervention is unpopular and hanker for more market-led solutions. Yet there is already a social care precept on council tax and there has been no revolt in the shires. The state is best positioned to pool risks and insure people against the catastrophic costs because it is impossible to tell who will need long-term care in old age. Other modern democracies like Germany and Japan have introduced levies on older workers. A wealth duty might also be another way of meeting the cost of a national benefit. The select committee’s chair, Jeremy Hunt, was the longest-serving health secretary and the first ever health and social care secretary. In office he did win a significant increase to the NHS budget but he failed to do the same with social care. This was partly because, in the absence of a debate, social care taxes polled badly. But also because George Osborne, when chancellor, ducked the issue and Theresa May blew it up on the campaign trail. Mr Hunt, who lost the chance to lead the Tory party to Mr Johnson, has urged the government to keep its word and mend social care. No one would wish otherwise.
5||The Guardian view on plant-based food: nothing wrong with a veggie burgerThe European parliament has not always had the best press. A peripatetic assembly with a messy remit and a decidedly unenthused voter base has allowed critics to misrepresent, often lazily, its deliberations. Thus were myths such as the ban on bendy bananas born, and we all know where that led in 2016. But things are looking up in Brussels (or is it Strasbourg?) because the parliament has reached an eminently sensible decision in the great battle over whether plant-based products can be labelled as burgers, sausages, escalopes and steaks. On the surface this is a rather arcane debate, so it was remarkable how much coverage last Friday’s vote got in the British media, especially as we are no longer even part of the EU. It is odd that we are now taking a close interest in the parliament while for decades, as a member, we ignored it or mocked its portentous rulings. The parliament was addressing an attempt by the EU’s farmers to have terms such as burger and sausage banned when the contents were made of plant-based alternatives to meat. MEPs decisively rejected the move, delighting the environmental lobby, which argues that a switch away from meat is essential to make the food industry more sustainable. Green MEPs were dining out on veggie burgers on Friday evening, but this was not just a victory for environmentalism. It was really a triumph for logic. Yes, a sausage is usually made of meat, but it doesn’t have to be. The term is synonymous with shape rather than content. Glamorgan sausages, made of cheese, leeks and breadcrumbs, are a traditional Welsh delicacy, and no one challenges their appropriation of the term. Rice burgers are popular in Asia; vegan steaks are now part of the culinary landscape; and while the French would no doubt insist that an escalope should be made of veal, there is nothing inherently misleading about selling a vegan escalope made of Quorn as long as the ingredients are made clear. The terms usefully describe shape, texture and what the product is being substituted for. Farmers groups demanded that “veggie discs” and “veggie tubes” be used instead, but that would only sow confusion and needlessly reduce sales of plant-based products. MEPs seem to be inconsistent in matters of labelling. “Veggie burger” and “vegan sausage” have been allowed, but they have come down hard on dairy substitutes. The European parliament had already banned “almond milk” and “vegan cheese”, and has now extended that to “cheese-like” and “yoghurt-style”. But there is no inconsistency. Cheese, milk and yoghurt are specific products, not generic names. It is right to ban these for plant-based substitutes, just as a hard line should be taken on such oxymorons as meat-free meatballs. Consumers need protection from over-enthusiastic marketing. The two sides should call a truce. Neither the farmers nor the environmentalists have a monopoly of wisdom. Many an allegedly meaty sausage is decidedly lacking in meat, and plenty of plant-based products are heavily processed. Whether they are committed carnivores or vigorous vegans, consumers need to be encouraged to read the ingredients on packs to understand what they are eating and how their food has arrived on their plate. This is about nutrition, not politics.
6||Free school meals: the Tory MPs defending refusal to support campaignFollowing last week’s parliamentary vote against backing Marcus Rashford’s campaign to extend free school meals (FSM) over the holidays to stop children going hungry, the government has faced heavy criticism for refusing to support the footballer’s proposal. However, despite the growing backlash, some Conservatives have spoken in defence of ministers’ continuing refusal to perform a U-turn on the policy: Ben Bradley The Tory MP for Mansfield tweeted on Friday: “At one school in Mansfield 75% of kids have a social worker, 25% of parents are illiterate. Their estate is the centre of the area’s crime. One kid lives in a crack den, another in a brothel. These are the kids that most need our help, extending FSM doesn’t reach these kids.” Responding to a user who replied saying “£20 cash direct to a crack den and brothel really sounds like the way forward with this one”, Bradley tweeted: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did …” Following heavy criticism, Bradley subsequently deleted the tweets, claiming they had been taken out of context. Mark Jenkinson Defending his Conservative colleague after Bradley’s comments were seized on by Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, Workington MP Jenkinson tweeted on Friday: “I know in my constituency that, as tiny a minority as it might be, food parcels are sold or traded for drugs.” He added: “And that’s parcels, not vouchers – which have greater monetary value. As I said, a relatively minuscule number – but we can’t pretend it doesn’t happen. Pretending, to score political points, helps no one.” Paul Holmes The Tory MP for Eastleigh, in Hampshire, posted a statement on his website on Saturday in which he argued it was unfair to paint Wednesday’s vote as a choice between “feeding hungry children and not feeding hungry children”. He argued that “no child should go hungry”, highlighting the £9bn invested in the welfare system, mainly via universal credit, as well as the £63m hardship fund for local councils. But he also sought to point the finger at the opposition, adding: “The hardship that campaigners like Marcus Rashford experienced happened under a Labour government. Furthermore, the Labour party when in government in 2008 specifically rejected proposals to extend free school meals to children during holidays. “This is not a comment on the rights or wrongs of that decision. I highlight it because surely the level of need during the financial crisis was comparable to this pandemic but I didn’t see the same levels of outrage or abuse then as I do today. This includes threats to female colleagues of mine.” Danny Kruger The Tory MP for Devizes, in Wiltshire, wrote in his local paper, the Gazette &amp; Herald, on Sunday: “This is a really important and emotive topic and I understand why so many people are up in arms about it. Many families across the country are struggling to get by. Benefits provide hardly enough money to live on, and for some people they do not provide enough. “The problem is that generous, unconditional, universal benefit entitlements trap people in dependency on the state and rightly enrage people who are working hard for themselves. That’s why I believe in a more flexible, community-led approach to welfare.” Brandon Lewis The Northern Ireland secretary defended the government’s position on Sunday, telling The Andrew Marr Show that the situation had changed since the summer. He said: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed, so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.”
7||Lawyers call for apology from Johnson and Patel for endangering colleaguesThe UK prime minister and the home secretary are accused of endangering the personal safety of lawyers through their abusive attacks on the profession and should apologise, more than 800 former judges and senior legal figures have said in a letter sent to the Guardian. Boris Johnson and Priti Patel are additionally accused in the letter of displaying “hostility” towards lawyers, undermining the rule of law and effectively risking the lives of those working in the justice system. The signatories include three former justices of the UK supreme court, five retired appeal court judges, three former high court judges, the lawyer heads of four Oxford University colleges, more than 80 QCs, 69 law professors from leading English universities, the directors of Liberty and Justice, as well as hundreds of law firm partners, barristers and solicitors. The letter is the largest coordinated response so far to increasingly vehement rhetorical attacks on the legal profession by the two Conservative politicians. In August, the Home Office published a video on Twitter blaming “activist lawyers” for frustrating the department’s efforts to deport people with no right to remain in the UK. The video was later withdrawn. Earlier this month, at the Conservative party conference, Patel broadened her targets, claiming that among those defending the “indefensible” and “broken” immigration appeals system were “do-gooders, lefty lawyers, the Labour party”. In his conference speech, Johnson went further, declaring he would prevent “the whole criminal justice system from being hamstrung by what the home secretary would doubtless – and rightly – call the lefty human rights lawyers, and other do-gooders”. Last week, a man appeared in court charged with carrying out a racist attack on a firm of immigration lawyers in London. Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow, faces six charges including preparing an act of terrorism. He has not yet entered a plea. The roll call of signatures protesting against the vilification of lawyers represents an extraordinary host of prominent legal experts united in a common purpose. Among the former judges are Lords Collins, Dyson and Walker, who recently left the supreme court, as well as onetime appeal court judges Sir Richard Buxton, Sir Anthony Hooper, Sir David Keene, Sir Alan Moses and Sir Stephen Sedley. The letter states: “We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. “Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law, which ministers and lawyers alike are duty-bound to uphold. “We invite both the home secretary and the Prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future.” In support of the letter, former director of public prosecutions Lord Macdonald QC said: “The home secretary may not grasp the indecency of her language, but the prime minister should know better. “Lawyers who represent demonised people are always attacked by populist politicians, but it is demeaning to our country and its institutions that the government itself is now dipping into this disreputable playbook. “It is precisely this sort of ugly authoritarianism that the rule of law is called upon to counter. The entire legal profession is proud of those lawyers who are being so crudely and dangerously vilified.” The former supreme court justice Lord Dyson told the Guardian: “What’s worrying is the inflammatory language used by the home secretary and supported by the prime minister. It was irresponsible and dangerous and quite unjustified to use inflammatory language of the sort. The language is almost the language of a demagogue. “We all now what happens when people in high places and in power resort to language of that kind … They are whipping up emotions without justification. It’s dangerous.” Dinah Rose QC, the president of Magdalen College, University of Oxford, said: “The people at the heart of government whose role it is to ensure that the legal system and the rule of law are respected have either decided to remain silent or their voices are not being listened to. “Where lawyers are abusing the system, they deserve to be criticised, but the problem is that the government’s attack is on any lawyer who is using the system to represent their clients. There’s an attempt to whip up hatred against lawyers for simply doing their job.” In a judgment last week upholding the right for migrants to have access to lawyers, the lord chief justice, Lord Burnett of Maldon, also stated: “It is a matter of regret that a minority of lawyers have lent their professional weight and support to vexatious representations and abusive late [immigration] legal challenges.” A government spokesperson said: “The government rejects the underlying insinuation in this letter and is clear any form of violence is unacceptable. Lawyers play an important role in upholding the law and ensuring people have access to justice. They are however not immune from criticism.”
8||On the US campaign trail: 'We are watching democracy unfold'Lauren Gambino, political correspondent, Washington DC The political year really began for us in Des Moines, Iowa. What felt like every aspiring Democrat in the party was running for the party’s nomination – and then there was Joe Biden, the frontrunner right up until the games actually began. The Iowa caucuses are always a quirky affair: Iowans gather in gyms and churches to support and persuade others to join their candidate – but this year a disastrous and unprecedented reporting meltdown delayed the results for weeks, effectively nullifying the relevance of the whole byzantine affair. And just like that, the wildest campaign season in modern history was under way. Weeks later, Biden staged an incredible comeback to overtake Bernie Sanders, disappointing Republicans who hoped Democrats would nominate a democratic socialist. The primary was cut short by the arrival of the pandemic. Campaign events ground to a halt. Biden’s headquarters moved from Philadelphia to his basement, where his campaign set up a TV studio. The Trump show began, with the president leading extraordinary briefings on coronavirus, during which he famously suggested disinfectants as a potential cure. (He insists it was a joke.) I was one of just a handful of reporters in Wilmington, Delaware, to see Biden deliver his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention. There was no audience, just us. The fireworks display afterwards was a brief reminder of what it used to feel like to be on the campaign trail – but those moments were few and far between. Now I cover the presidential debates from my living room and only travel with Biden when it’s our turn as part of a pool of reporters who follows the candidate. Protests against racial injustice, the death of supreme court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Trump’s coronavirus diagnosis have all threatened to upend the presidential race and yet they haven’t. With days left before the election, Biden continues to hold an advantage over Trump, despite all that has happened over the last 10 months. Whether Trump can again pull off a stunning upset remains to be seen. Four years ago, I waited for Hillary Clinton at the glass-ceilinged Javits Center in New York, surrounded by women and girls in pant suits. (She ultimately never came.) This year, I may be covering the end of this wild election from a hotel room in Wilmington – or, very possibly, my couch. Oliver Laughland, southern bureau chief, New Orleans Covering this election has been one of the most challenging assignments of my career. And it’s not just because I am driving thousands of miles during the pandemic to visit swing states around the country. Presenting our Anywhere But Washington series, with film-maker Tom Silverstone, has been an eye-opening experience taking me to some of the most fascinating but deeply fractured communities in America. From the bitter fight to win the suburbs of Dallas to the retirement communities of central Florida, where political golf-cart rallies often turn nasty, the divisiveness of the Trump era has been plain to see. Pervasive disinformation has also been a disturbing factor in most of our video dispatches. In Georgia I watched first-hand as voting rights activists battled against QAnon conspiracy theories taking root among some voters, and I interviewed a Republican congressional candidate who stormed out as I asked her about the misinformation she was pushing as part of her campaign. But the consequences of Donald Trump’s war on facts were most poignant when I visited the old offices of the Vindicator newspaper in Youngstown, Ohio, which closed in 2019, making the city the largest in America now without a daily paper. It’s a region that Trump promised to deliver for, and there is now almost no one holding him accountable for his failures there. But in every community I’ve gone to, the enthusiasm and passion for politics has been just as evident. Take Ebony Carter, a 25-year-old first-time candidate running in a rural Georgia seat that Democrats have not contested in six years. She’s out canvassing with her de facto campaign manager – her mum – knocking on every door in her area in a bid to flip the district. “Why am I doing this?” she said during a day of campaigning. “Because somebody has to.” Kenya Evelyn, breaking news reporter The presidential race underscores that “Representation Matters” isn’t some meaningless mantra. Rather, it reflects the urgency to authentically capture the pulse of the people most affected by policy. Black Americans are disproportionately affected by three national crises – a coronavirus pandemic, recession, and racial uprising – yet are still most often the people left out of policy, the communities excluded from news coverage, and the perspectives that are most easily stereotyped and overgeneralised. But Black and brown voters are stepping forward to hold parties and politicians – and anyone else who conflates proximity to a community with being for and of that community – more accountable to their vote. As a member of America’s most reliable voting bloc – Black women – I hope to have captured that demand for African American agency with our Black Voting Power series, highlighting the Black men and women at the forefront of the fight for voting rights and calls for institutional change. We’ve reached the point in the 2020 race when everyone from reporters and pundits to politicos now parachutes in to these same neglected communities. But if this election cycle shows us anything, it’s that proximity to a community doesn’t guarantee a commitment to it, and that call for change will ring out well past election day. Ankita Rao, voting rights editor When we launched our voting rights project, The Fight to Vote, last year, the obstacles facing voters already seemed menacing. A supreme court ruling in 2013 had opened the door for states with deeply entrenched racism to enact new policies around elections without checks and balances. Thousands of polling stations closed, often in majority-Black areas, new voter ID laws introduced confusing restrictions, and voter intimidation was rampant. In 2016, when Donald Trump was elected, the impact of these voter suppression tactics were clear. Then 2020 happened, and with it the pandemic and economic devastation. Suddenly the question was not just will all voters have equal access to voting, but will the country be able to pull off an election at all? Congress fought over money for local officials , leaving the presidential election thoroughly underfunded. Trump railed at mail-in voting, one of the few safe ways to vote as Covid-19 cases continued to rise across the country. Voters scrambled to register in states such as Texas where online registration still isn’t allowed. When the election officially started a few weeks ago, with mail-in voting and early voting starting across the country, we were ready for anything. We mapped out scenarios where Trump refused to concede, and where Democrats unleashed an army of lawyers to make sure each vote was counted. We launched a tracker to count mail-in ballots in battleground states, in an attempt to locate and analyse how ballots were being sent, accepted, rejected and counted. We enumerated the active court cases that will decide when and how votes are counted – cases still going on with just days until 3 November. And we prepared ourselves, and our readers, for a reality in which we would not know who the new president was on election day. We are watching democracy unfold in front of our eyes, despite every effort to stop it. A record number of Americans have voted early, most of them Democrats, in an effort to safeguard their choice and their health. States such as Texas, where politicians have tried to make it as difficult to vote as possible, are seeing record turnout, with new voters casting ballots for the first time. Does this mean the people’s will has succeeded over voter suppression? Definitely not. But after months of scrutinising an election process that’s often taken for granted, it’s a sign that our country values the right to vote above all, and will fight to protect it.
3||A political populism far removed from Donald TrumpAndy Beckett presents an entirely negative picture of populism (This is a moment of truth for rightwing populists – but don’t celebrate yet, 23 October). There are many unfortunate examples in our present age of how destructive populist movements can be. However, he appears unaware of earlier and more positive episodes of populism, in particular the founding of the People’s party in 1891 in the US. This became a significant political party, gaining 8% of the popular vote when it fielded a candidate in the 1892 presidential election. The origins of the People’s party, also known as the Populist party, lay in the exploitation of sharecroppers and tenant farmers by business monopolies and the banking elite. These agrarian workers had been plunged into debt, after taking on loans to fund investments in new farming equipment, when they were hit by droughts and falling crop prices, together with extortionate loan terms and interest rates. The Populist party agitated for massive political reforms, which included the recognition of unions, regulation of the railway industry, the direct election of senators, progressive income tax, and women’s suffrage. These ideas were considered radical at the time, and still are! The current problem with populism is that most of it is not genuine, but is either generated by cynical groups with a hidden interest, or is hijacked by unscrupulous politicians for ulterior purposes. However, there still are populist movements that serve a higher purpose. Be careful not to diss populism per se, as it has a distinguished pedigree. It is the pseudo-populists who need to be challenged and brought to heel. Dr Stephen Blomfield Sheffield • Andy Beckett’s piece on populism was a brilliant discussion of one of the most pressing questions of our time. I only have one small quibble. He says we should remember that populists do sometimes “get re-elected”. But that’s not the point. Populism is democracy’s ugly sister. It flourishes when the primordial democratic promise of political equality is negated by a dysfunctional political system. The answer is the maximum possible diffusion of power. It’s not an accident that federal systems are less likely to be infected by the populist virus than centralised ones. A radical overhaul of our dysfunctional political system is the only way out of the populist trap. David Marquand Penarth, South Glamorgan • I disagree that the “predictable and cautious politics” of the 1990s and 2000s provoked an outburst of populism. It was because these political periods were unstable that there was a backlash. The administrations of John Major and Tony Blair produced boom and bust, two massive recessions with widespread unemployment and widening inequality. The Blair government was still essentially Thatcherite even though it tried to fiddle around the edges to make things a bit better for the least affluent. The inevitable crunch came in 2007 precisely because banking and housing remained unreformed. Then came David Cameron, George Osborne and austerity. Populism is the muddled reaction against 40 years of Thatcherism. David Redshaw Gravesend, Kent • David Runciman highlights the need for politicians with experience and judgment when faced with a crisis like the Covid-19 pandemic (Boris Johnson is learning that in politics you cannot simply ‘follow the science’, 24 October). The problem is that our pluralist democratic system is not designed to produce politicians with the wisdom and practical experience to use facts in a relevant way, but only ones that can gain resonance at the ballot box. Both Boris Johnson and Donald Trump exemplify the deficiency. Derek Heptinstall Westgate-on-Sea, Kent
2||Feeling the heat over Arctic sea iceThe delayed freeze in the Laptev Sea is consistent with the entire Arctic Ocean, which is set for the slowest recovery in the extent of sea ice this autumn, if the current daily trend continues (Alarm as Arctic sea ice not yet freezing at latest date on record, 22 October). This follows on from this summer having the second lowest minimum since 1979, with the early decades significantly above the annual trends during the last few years. Other feedback mechanisms are now starting to take hold of global heating, as current atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations are well beyond the normal Quaternary levels over the last 800,000 years – usually 170 to 280 parts per million, between ice age maximums and interglacial stages, compared with a still accelerating anthropogenic 410 ppm, coupled with the impact from a significant rise in methane and other warming gases. This is why mitigation policies are all we have left. Extinction Rebellion would be better off insulating homes, running public transport cooperatives and campaigning for major economic reforms to pay for this. Starting with taxing carbon intensity, abolishing non-dom tax status and establishing an overseas tax liability for British citizens like the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) does for US citizens wherever they are living. Even in Monaco where too many of our honoured tax exiles live. David Nowell Fellow of the Geological Society, New Barnet, Hertfordshire • Late Arctic ice formation should surprise nobody. Rising temperatures melt ice so less solar energy is reflected and darker surfaces absorb more heat. Trapped greenhouse gases escape, causing more warming and more ice to melt while fires and dying vegetation worsen matters further. Even if net emissions from human activities somehow became negligible, this positive feedback will accelerate heating. Many ideas essential to combat expected heating would make sense even if temperatures were static, fell or if a major food crop failed. Examples include restoring fish stocks, less waste, alternatives to fossil fuels, silviculture, regenerative agriculture and combining conservation with careful use. Instead if adopting such win-win policies, decades have been wasted bickering about who was right. Future generations will find this very difficult to forgive. Iain Climie Whitchurch, Hampshire
9||Ministers must end their attacks on lawyersThe undersigned are practising barristers (some working for central and local government), solicitors, legal academics and retired judges. We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law which ministers and lawyers alike are duty bound to uphold. We invite both the home secretary and the prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future. Lawrence Collins Retired justice of the supreme court, John Dyson Retired justice of the supreme court and former master of the rolls, Robert Walker Retired justice of the supreme court, Richard Buxton Retired lord justice of appeal, Anthony Hooper Retired lord justice of appeal, David Keene Retired lord justice of appeal, Alan Moses Retired lord justice of appeal, Stephen Sedley Retired lord justice of appeal, Theodore Huckle Former counsel general for Wales, Ken Macdonald Former director of public prosecutions, and warden of Wadham College, University of Oxford, Helen Mountfield Principal of Mansfield College, University of Oxford and 791 others
7||Is Rishi Sunak just Osborne in disguise?Reviewing Exit Management by Naomi Booth, Nina Allan writes: “In a genre … traditionally … dominated by men, it is particularly gratifying to read a London novel written by a woman” (Review, 23 October). Has she never heard of Maureen Duffy’s London novels, or, in this century, Zadie Smith and the late Andrea Levy? John Wilson London • I was delighted to read that “guising” is still practised in Scotland (Be ready for digital Christmas, says Scotland’s public health adviser, 22 October), but it is not entirely synonymous with trick or treat. Guising traditionally involved some effort by the participants, eg singing a song or telling jokes, rather than just turning up – an approach that would doubtless win the approval of many government ministers today. Elaine Rowland Chester • It’s a bit rich for Bernard Jenkin, a member of the party that frequently accuses its opponents of political opportunism, to say they have “misunderstood the mood of the country” re free school meals (Report, 25 October). Where is Charles Dickens when we need him? David Marcer Gloucester • Is it just me? If I close my eyes when Rishi Sunak is speaking, I hear the voice of ex-chancellor George Osborne. Derek Beaumont Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire • Re Durham student experiences (Letters, 21 October), when I was there in the 70s at a formal dinner, I cut off the nose of the cheese. The way they all started harrumphing, you’d have thought I’d said: “Bollocks to the Queen.” Ian Garner Keighley, West Yorkshire
6||Scores of councils in England activate half-term food schemesMore councils in England are offering food support for struggling families over the half-term holiday amid public discomfort over the government’s refusal to offer help and growing support for the footballer Marcus Rashford’s campaign At least 78 councils had announced by Sunday evening that they would be activating half-term food schemes, either by offering food vouchers or providing extra financial and logistical support to local food banks and charities. The majority of councils offering help were Labour-run, including Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham, Newcastle, Bristol, Leeds and a number of London boroughs, with a small but growing number of Conservative-run councils breaking ranks over the issue. Tory-run Staffordshire county council, which covers the education secretary Gavin Williamson’s South Staffordshire constituency, said it would provide half-term help to up to 18,000 children, joining Hillingdon – in Boris Johnson’s constituency – Medway, and Kensington &amp; Chelsea, all Conservative-run. Staffordshire’s cabinet member for children and young people, Mark Sutton, said: “We know that times are hard for many families at the moment, with increased pressures on household budgets, so we wanted to help those in greater need to ensure that children can get a decent meal through the holiday.” However, a handful of Conservative-run councils said they would not be offering any help over half-term beyond any existing local safety net schemes either because they did not have the money or because it was not their role to provide food support. Walsall council’s Tory leader, Mike Bird, said: “Unfortunately, I have to be the gatekeeper for Walsall council because we have not got the money … When you keep going to a well and taking water it will run dry.” Jonathan Nunn, Tory leader of Northampton council, said: “We’ve considered it as a council but the costs would be prohibitive for the council to fund it… We don’t currently have a plan to lobby the government so that will probably stay as it is. We’re happy for others to step in and help those who need that help.” Others appeared ideologically opposed to the council stepping in. Responding on Friday on Twitter to a resident who said it was shameful for the government to pay consultants £7,000 a day but not feed poor children, the Tory leader of Rushmoor council, David Clifford, replied: “The shame is the day government rather than parents feed their children – if I were in need I would go to our food bank – it works extremely well and not run by government.” The issue appeared to be dividing municipal Conservatives: opposition councillors in Sutton urged the Liberal Democrat-controlled council to provide meals over half-term for children who received them at school, and the Conservative party branch in North Tyneside praising its local Labour-run council for taking similar action. Conservative-run Hampshire county council said that although it oversaw schools and children’s services, responsibility for helping families in hardship over half-term was the responsibility of district councils in its area. Tory-run Kent also said it would not offer extra support. Wandsworth, which is Conservative-controlled, was questioned by a local charity for restricting its half-term help package to children receiving social work support. Wandsworth food bank tweeted: “So far this scheme only helps children with a social worker. It doesn’t help all the 5,700+ Wandsworth children who receive free school meals.”
2||Belarus 'people’s ultimatum' protest met with violent crackdownBelarusian riot police launched another violent crackdown in Minsk on Sunday evening, throwing stun grenades into crowds of peaceful protesters, chasing people through courtyards and making arrests as they attempted to curtail the 11th consecutive Sunday of protest in the country. At least 100,000 people marched through the centre of the Belarusian capital earlier in the day to give what they called a “people’s ultimatum” to Alexander Lukashenko: step down, or face a nationwide strike that could cripple the economy. Long columns of protesters, wrapped in the red-white traditional Belarusian flag that has become the symbol of the protests, streamed through the city centre, shouting “resign!” and “strike!” As usual, authorities cut off mobile internet across central Minsk, closed metro stations and placed cordons of riot police at key sites. Military and riot control vehicles were positioned throughout the centre and officers in balaclavas and wielding shields stood at almost every intersection, but they did not attack the crowds until the evening. The current wave of discontent was prompted by Lukashenko declaring an overwhelming victory in August presidential elections that were widely believed to be rigged, and then cracking down ruthlessly on those who came out to protest. In the first big rallies in August in response to the crackdown, euphoria and disbelief combined to create a heady excitement that Lukashenko’s days were surely numbered. The authoritarian leader, who has been in charge for 26 years, has since made it clear he does not intend to give up power without a fight. A number of opposition leaders have been forced out of the country or arrested over the past two months, and authorities have threatened to use live ammunition on protesters.The crowds on Sunday were still largely buoyant though, with several bands of drummers providing a thudding musical accompaniment and many people flashing victory signs. Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, who stood against Lukashenko after her husband was imprisoned, was able to act as a lightning rod for protest voters but was forced to flee to neighbouring Lithuania the day after the vote, having been given just 10% in the official tally. Tikhanovskaya has declared herself the legitimately elected leader from Vilnius, and has said she wants to oversee a transition period before arranging a new, free election. “Today at 23:59 the term of the people’s ultimatum will expire, and if the demands are not met, Belarusians will start a national strike,” she said in statement on Sunday. Few in Minsk expect the strike to be successful, however. Strikes in August and September drew some support from workers at big factories but were soon crushed. “I support the strike, but of course I’ll still go to work,” said Sergei, a 29-year-old sales assistant who was draped in a red-and-white flag at the protest on Sunday. “We need to get rid of Lukashenko, but I also need to keep my income.” Whether or not the strike is a success, it is clear that Lukashenko has lost legitimacy among huge swaths of the population, and he appears to have little chance of regaining it. A counter-rally in central Minsk in his support was planned for Sunday but called off late in the week, ostensibly to avoid the risk of clashes with the opposition protesters. Most people felt the real reason was a fear that embarrassingly few people would show up. Lukashenko does retain the loyalty of his security forces, however, and if the strike does not work, the question will be whether the protest movement, which has so far remained almost entirely peaceful, will radicalise or whether it will die down as a result of fatigue and the onset of winter. The renewed violence from authorities on Sunday evening may serve to galvanise the weary protest movement again. The incumbent president has promised, alongside the threats, to launch a constitutional reform process. He even paid a visit to the KGB prison in Minsk this month for so-called negotiations with political prisoners in an attempt to win over part of the opposition. Many have dismissed the initiative as too little too late, but how events will play out remains uncertain. “It’s impossible to predict what will happen in a few months. We don’t know what will happen with the economy, we don’t know where Russia will stand, and we don’t know how far Lukashenko will go with concessions,” said the Minsk-based political analyst Artyom Shraibman. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, called Lukashenko on Saturday, one of the only conversations the Belarusian leader has had with a western politician since his controversial re-election. According to a description of the call published by Lukashenko’s team, the two men discussed “the internal political situations in both Belarus and the US”. The EU has placed sanctions on many in the Belarusian regime since the protests began, and Lukashenko has turned to Vladimir Putin for support. The Russian president is known to dislike Lukashenko but appears to have decided that propping him up is better than allowing a change of power to come from the street. The head of Russia’s spy agency, Sergei Naryshkin, flew to Minsk last week in one of many high-profile Russian visits.
10||Norman Thrower obituaryMy father-in-law, Norman Thrower, who has died aged 100, was professor emeritus in the department of geography at the University of California, Los Angeles. From relatively humble beginnings, Norman became one of the world’s most famous cartographers. In 1957, Norman joined the geography department at UCLA, where he authored, co-authored and edited 11 books, and more than 150 other contributions on cartography and associated geographical discoveries. He served his profession, UCLA and the state of California in many capacities, including as president of the Sir Francis Drake Commission (1975-81), which organised celebrations for the quadricentennial of Drake’s landing in California in 1579. Born in Crowthorne, Berkshire, to Daisy (nee Bayley) and Gordon Thrower, a chef at Broadmoor psychiatric hospital, Norman failed his 11-plus and did not go to secondary school. After winning drawing competitions and attending art school at the University of Reading, he joined the British army aged 21. His artillery division was redeployed to India, where he trained as a cartographer at the Survey of India to draw topographic maps in support of the war effort in Europe. The maps were based on aerial photographs taken over Europe then flown to India, with the return flights bringing back the completed maps. This covered the period of Operation Crossbow, one of the goals of which was to identify V-1 launch ramps using binocular imaging, including in northern France before D-day. The experience played a crucial part in Norman’s post-military career and the development of new mapping techniques introduced in his PhD for illustrating the three-dimensionality of the surface. Norman first met Betty Martin, an officer in the US Army Nurse Corps, in 1945 when her boat docked in London, though they had been pen pals for a number of years. Norman and Betty married in 1947 and, later that year, arrived in Charlottesville, Virginia, living in veterans’ housing while Norman did a BSc and an MSc in geography at the University of Virginia, where he was influenced by Erwin Raisz, an internationally renowned cartographer. With their first two daughters, they then moved to the University of Wisconsin, Madison, where Norman gained his PhD. A final move, to California in 1957, saw the birth of their third daughter. His best known book is Maps and Man (1972), now Maps and Civilization: Cartography in Culture and Society (1999). Later works focused on advances in 17th- and 18th-century cartography by Edmund Halley and Samuel Pepys. And, finally, an editing of A Buccaneer’s Atlas: Basil Ringrose’s South Seas Waggoner, with Derek Howse (1992), a compilation of captured maps of Spain’s Pacific ports whose value to the British crown saved many buccaneers from hanging. Betty died in 1997. Norman is survived by his daughters, Page, Anne and Mary, and five grandchildren.
2||Hopes rise for approval of coronavirus vaccine by end of this yearHopes are rising that a coronavirus vaccine will be approved by the end of the year, with healthcare workers receiving their first dose in early 2021. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US’s leading expert in infectious diseases, said on Sunday it should be known by the end of November or early December if a vaccine was safe and effective. The Irish government added to the growing optimism that a vaccine would soon be available. “I’m increasingly optimistic, as is government, that we will see a vaccine approved in the next couple of months and that in the first half or first quarter of next year it’ll be possible to start vaccinating those most at risk,” Leo Varadkar, Ireland’s deputy prime minister, who is also a doctor, told RTE radio on Sunday. Fauci’s remarks came after a report that the NHS in the UK is preparing to start immunising frontline staff with a vaccine within weeks. The Mail on Sunday published a memo by Glen Burley, the chief executive of a group of hospitals in the Midlands, in which he said NHS care providers had been told to be prepared to start a Covid-19 staff vaccine programme in early December. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff prioritised prior to Christmas,” according to Burley’s message, which was sent earlier this month, the paper reported. However, well-placed NHS sources said that, while hospitals were preparing plans to help roll out any vaccine that is approved, the timescale Burley set out is premature and overly ambitious. “There is no progress at all [on when a vaccine will arrive], no date, no national steer [from NHS England bosses] and only frustration,” said a senior official at one of the major NHS trusts that has been handed a key role in the drive to distribute whichever vaccine is the first to be approved. Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, told MPs and peers that a vaccine would not be available in the UK until the spring. Fauci was asked on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show if Donald Trump’s claims that a Covid-19 vaccine, while not a guarantee, would be coming by the end of the year were true. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” he replied. “The question is, once you have a safe and effective vaccine, or more than one, how can you get it to the people who need it as quickly as possible? “The amount of doses that will be available in December will not certainly be enough to vaccinate everybody. You’ll have to wait several months into 2021.” Healthcare workers are likely to be given priority access to any vaccine, as well as people whose underlying health means they are considered at increased risk of complications if they get Covid-19. “That could start by the end of this year, the beginning of January, February, March of next year. When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be in to the second or third quarter”, Fauci added. A vaccine being developed between scientists and doctors at Oxford University and the drug company AztraZeneca, which is in phase 3 trials, is considered the likeliest candidate to be used first. On Friday, Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, set out a similar timetable to that of Fauci and Varadkar. A vaccine could be available in early 2021, with enough supplies being produced to let many Germans be immunised within six or seven months, he said. Germany’s health ministry plans to create 60 special vaccination centres to ensure the vaccines can be stored at the proper temperature and has asked the country’s 16 federal states to provide addresses for the storage premises by 10 November, the newspaper Bild reported.
11||Ewart Hood obituaryMy father, Ewart Hood, who has died aged 71, was an NHS psychologist and a kind and quietly brilliant man. The son of the Rev John Hood, a Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Peggy (nee Ewart), he was born in Edinburgh and brought up in Perthshire with his brother, Allan. He attended Morrison’s academy in Crieff before studying psychology at Edinburgh University, graduating in 1971. He qualified as a clinical psychologist at the University of Birmingham in 1973. He went on to practise first at Stanley Royd hospital, in Wakefield, where he met his future wife, Denise Robinson, another psychologist. They married in 1979. Ewart was an early advocate of supporting people with mental health problems to live in the community, rather than in institutions. He was never afraid to speak up against injustice - including blowing the whistle about poor practice he witnessed early in his career. In 1978 he moved to Llanederyn health centre, Cardiff, to be senior clinical psychologist in a new practice and one of the first of its kind, based within the general practice department of Cardiff University Medical School. In the 1980s Ewart and Denise, now with two children, moved to Newcastle where Ewart worked part time while caring for us, and my mother went back to work full-time. He worked at St Nicholas (psychiatric) hospital, then as a senior clinical psychologist at the Newcastle district psychology department, working with outpatients from and within GP practices in the west end of Newcastle. Later he became a consultant clinical psychologist at Freeman hospital, Newcastle. He disliked formal teaching but was a popular supervisor on the Newcastle doctorate course for clinical psychology from 1990 to 2004. He was never too busy to take on a trainee. His clients in Newcastle included refugees from conflict in Rwanda and the Congo. When they were too afraid to use an interpreter, he would switch into French. Ewart loved music. As a young child, he learned to play the church organ, sometimes standing in for the organist at Sunday services. As an adult, he played the piano and guitar and sang in the university choir, the Newcastle Anti-Apartheid choir and later the North East Socialist Singers. Ewart retired in 2004. He learned to upholster and to bake bread, as well as taking long-distance cycling trips, tending an allotment and supporting his family. He is survived by Denise and by his children, Peter and me, and by three grandchildren, Elsa, Naomi and Bill, and Allan.
12||Letter: Deirdre Le Faye obituaryIt might encourage some readers to know that Deirdre Le Faye’s great achievement in the field of Jane Austen studies was achieved despite the fact that she had to leave school at 16, her family not being able to afford any higher education, and that she had to earn a living with a full-time job as a British Museum administrator. More daunting is the fact that she had a photographic memory and powers of total recall. She once told me she had reviewed a book by an American scholar and noted more than 200 factual errors. Before she turned to Jane Austen, Deirdre Le Faye did major research work on early child-rearing practices for Hugh Jolly, the paediatrician. Sadly he died before he was able to write it up, as did his doctor wife. So there is a valuable cache of clearly annotated and referenced material ready for a medical historian to write a valuable book on the subject. I can direct them to the material.
12||Forward poetry prize goes to ‘audacious, erotically charged’ The Air YearBritish poets have won all of this year’s Forward prizes for poetry, with Caroline Bird’s “audacious and erotically charged” The Air Year taking best collection, Will Harris’s RENDANG winning best debut, and Malika Booker winning for best single poem. Bird’s sixth collection The Air Year, named for the first 12 months of a relationship before the “paper” anniversary, was announced as the winner of the £10,000 prize in an online ceremony Sunday afternoon. A playwright, and published poet since the age of 15, Bird saw off competition from the acclaimed Native American-Latinx Natalie Diaz and the award-winning Pascale Petit. “It hasn’t sunk in yet, it is very weird,” Bird said of her win. “Obviously, it feels amazing. But it is also unsettling, as I write poetry imagining no one will ever read it. I read it now and I find it quite upsetting, even though some of the poems are funny and lively. You wouldn’t want to watch a video of yourself in distress, and it feels like that. But I guess that is a good sign in some ways, that I don’t want to ever read it again.” Chair of judges, the critic and cultural historian Alexandra Harris described Bird’s poems as “trapeze ropes made with words, swinging us up and out into the unknown”. “A lot of contemporary writing demands sympathy in a rather worthy fashion. She won’t do that,” she added. “The Air Year is the opposite of sentimental, it is brimming with humour.” Written in “a time of complete uncertainty” in her life, Bird set herself the challenge of writing poems starting from a single opening line that she would not change, leading to humorous and often melancholic poems that begin “Nancy found an entire torpedo in the forest”, in Nancy and the Torpedo, or “The 18th-century bawd who sells her daughter’s / virginity / to an Earl. The tired CIA operative who says ‘just do / it’ / and half a village dies”, in her poem about endings, The Final Episode. “At that time in my life, I felt like a cartoon character running in mid-air, only not falling because I hadn’t looked down. Romantically, emotionally, mentally, I did not know what I was doing or where I was going, in all areas of my life. And the poems, as they came out, seemed to want me to land safely,” Bird said. One of the most acclaimed debuts in recent years, Will Harris won the £5,000 Felix Dennis prize for best first collection with RENDANG, which explores his Chinese-Indonesian and British heritage, family ties, language and borders. RENDANG was praised by judges as containing “acute intelligence and mobile grace”. Previous nominee Booker, co-founder of the influencial collective Malika’s Poetry Kitchen, won the £1,000 prize for best single poem with The Little Miracles, documenting her experience of caring for her mother in the aftermath of a stroke: “Since I found mother collapsed on the kitchen / floor, we siblings have become blindfolded mules / harnessed to carts filled with strain, lumbering / through a relentless storm.” Booker had previously refused to write about her mother’s illness but was moved by medical research to “be more present during [visits] with my mother, scrutinising our time together by tuning in as a daughter, which has led to more meaningful and precious interactions, culminating in this poem of witness capturing the reality of my family’s emotional upheaval.” Judges praised The Little Miracles for its “warmth, frustration and humour”. The three poets were selected from 205 collections and 208 single poems submitted. “What we were looking for in the end were collections that could keep growing as the world changed,” said Alexandra Harris. “The best poetry we were reading found ways to connect the unknowable with the ordinary.” Past winners of the Forward prizes include three of the UK’s poet laureates – Carol Ann Duffy, Simon Armitage and Ted Hughes – as well as Seamus Heaney and Claudia Rankine.
1||Tao Geoghegan Hart's shock Giro d'Italia win 'the stuff of comic books'Tao Geoghegan Hart has spoken of the “bizarre” feeling of becoming the fifth Briton to win a Grand Tour with victory in the Giro d’Italia for Team Ineos Grenadiers, whose general manager hailed the win “the stuff of comic books”. The 25-year-old pulled on the pink jersey for the first time on the final podium in Milan after a dramatic closing weekend of the race, which saw he and Team Sunweb’s Jai Hindley – two riders not considered contenders at the outset – starting the last stage level on time, an unprecedented situation in a Grand Tour. Speaking to Eurosport after his victory, Geoghegan Hart said: “It’s bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. “I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is something completely different to that and I think it’s going to take a long time to sink in. “My DS [directeur sportif] told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point.” Hindley, who finished 39 seconds back in second, said: “Of course it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super-proud of the team and how I rode. “It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three weeks I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race to be honest. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies.” Ineos general manager Sir Dave Brailsford spoke of the way Geoghegan Hart’s situation in the team changed following Geraint Thomas’s enforced withdrawal after stage three following a heavy crash: “He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being: ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said: ‘I can do this.’ “The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really. Geoghegan Hart was ahead of Hindley at every time check throughout the final 15.7km time trial, clocking a time of 18 min 19.40secs to confirm his remarkable win. Asked about his future following such a high-profile victory, he said: “I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. “I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated, wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races.” Geoghegan Hart follows Sir Bradley Wiggins, Chris Froome, Thomas and Simon Yates in winning one of the big three stage races on the calendar, delivering Britain’s 11th Grand Tour victory since Wiggins won the Tour de France in 2012, and second in the Giro after Froome won in 2018. Hindley’s Sunweb teammate Wilco Kelderman rounded off the podium, finishing 1min 29sec behind the victor.
1||GB's Tao Geoghegan Hart sensationally claims Giro d'Italia glory after time trialIn the end, Tao Geoghegan Hart’s 39-second victory in the Giro d’Italia ahead of the overnight leader, Australian Jai Hindley, was not the tightest the race has ever seen. That honour remains with the Canadian Ryder Hesjedal’s win by 16sec in 2012. But none of the three Grand Tours has ever gone into its final day so tightly poised, with less than a second dividing Hindley and Geoghegan Hart as they prepared to start Sunday’s brief closing time trial into Milan, after more than 85 hours and over 2,000 miles of racing. On paper, Geoghegan Hart was expected to have the upper hand, and so it proved over the pancake flat course through the Milanese suburbs to the majestic Piazzo Duomo. The 25-year-old Londoner gained time gradually but inexorably on the diminutive Australian, visibly churning a far larger gear as Hindley opted to pedal a smaller ratio with a higher cadence but less power. At the only time check with five kilometres remaining the Londoner had a 22sec lead, meaning the race would be won if he avoided a crash or a puncture. After he negotiated the final corner on slippery wet cobblestones with the utmost care, he became the first rider ever to win the Giro without having worn the pink jersey until the end of the final stage. “My directeur sportif said I was 10sec up and he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew that we were in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the final kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down in a 15km time trial.” Hindley had started 3min after Geoghegan Hart, rode the final kilometre with the look of a man who knew he had lost but when the race had left Palermo 22 days earlier, neither he nor his nemesis had expected to end the race with overall victory in their sights. Geoghegan Hart made his own luck in the final few days, but a curious combination of circumstances set him up for his final assault on the pink jersey. Ineos’s original Giro leader, the defending champion, Richard Carapaz, was drafted into the Tour de France at the last minute due to Geraint Thomas being short of form. Thomas was sent to the Giro as leader instead, but when he crashed on the stage to Mount Etna and broke his pelvis, that left Ineos leaderless. Initially the team focused on stage wins, with Filippo Ganna adding a road race stage to his initial time trial win, and then Jhonatan Narváez of Ecuador, before Geoghegan Hart opened his account on the mountain stage to Piancavallo at the end of the second week. That set up a final few days in which the race boiled down to a duel between Ineos and Sunweb, with Hindley emerging as the German team’s strongest climber ahead of his nominal leader Wilco Kelderman of the Netherlands. Geoghegan Hart’s searing sprint win at Piancavallo, after Sunweb had looked to have taken control, pointed to the young Briton as the rider in form as the race’s biggest climbs hove into view. With the support of his Australian teammate Rohan Dennis he took the fight to Kelderman and Hindley on the majestic climb of the Stelvio Pass last Thursday, before dislodging the Dutchman and moving level with Hindley after winning Saturday’s stage to the Alpine ski resort of Sestriere. That set up Sunday’s pulsating final. Like the Tour de France, won by the 21-year-old Slovenian Tadej Pogacar, this race marked a passing of the generations. The main Italian hopeful, Vincenzo Nibali, never truly made an impression and finished seventh, while another near veteran, the Dane Jakob Fuglsang, also showed little. In contrast, the 22-year-old Portuguese João Almeida led for 15 of the 21 stages before fading in the final few days to finish fourth, while at 24 and 25 respectively Hindley and Geoghegan Hart now have the future ahead of them. The Giro will also be remembered for the resurgence of the Frenchman Arnaud Démare, winner of four sprint stages, and for the effect that coronavirus had on the race. Positive tests for Covid deprived the Giro of two big favourites, Simon Yates of Great Britain and Steven Kruijswijk of the Netherlands, resulting in a more open race that gave space to the young hopefuls. On Sunday, the early pace was set by Ganna; the world time trial champion was viewed as the inevitable winner beforehand, and his blisteringly fast time of 17min 16sec gave him four stage wins in the race, and landed Ineos their seventh stage win, making this the British team’s most successful Grand Tour ever, as well as their 11th Grand Tour title. For a team which had been deprived of its leader as day four, it was quite a turnaround.
13||Ervine Glenny obituaryMy former colleague Ervine Glenny, who has died aged 97, was a materials engineer who, through his research and subsequent management of engineers at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), helped to pioneer the advent of jet engines and the use of carbon fibre composites to lighten aircraft and other structures. He was born in Belfast, the son of Elizabeth (nee Ervine), a housewife, and Robert Glenny, a police constable. He was named Robert, but was always known by his middle name, Ervine. He was educated at Methodist college, Belfast, and won a bursary to study chemical engineering at Queen’s University in the city, where he met his wife to be, Joan Reid, who was taking the same course. He began his research in 1947 with the National Gas Turbine Establishment (NGTE), which had just been formed from Power Jets, the company created by Frank Whittle, who invented the concept of gas turbines which form the basis of jet engines. By exploring the high temperature properties of materials suitable for gas turbines, Robert was able to contribute to their commercialisation and moved with NGTE to Farnborough, Hampshire, in 1955 to be close to the RAE, which specialised in all aspects of aircraft design. In 1970, Ervine moved to the NPL in Teddington, south-west London, to become superintendent of the materials application division and in 1973 he moved back to Farnborough to become head of the materials department at RAE. Ervine’s advice was always sound and well balanced and his encouragement and support of all his engineers enabled innovations to be pursued and commercialised. These included high strength, lightweight carbon fibres and he encouraged Bill Watt and other colleagues to continue developing their invention and its application initially to aircraft but then to other forms of transport. Upon his retirement from RAE, Ervine acted as a project monitor and assessor for the Department of Trade and Industry. One Sunday in 2003, Ervine and I travelled to Stansted airport to attend a project meeting in Prague. When Ervine showed his passport at the airline counter, the official said: “I am very sorry, Dr Glenny, but you have insufficient validity left on your passport so we cannot fly you to Prague.” In reply, Ervine uttered, without hesitation: “I am going to home to rejoin my 80th birthday party.” This quiet, unassuming person helped, in his own way, to make transport lighter and more energy efficient, a legacy from which we are all benefiting. Joan died in 2017. Ervine is survived by his children, Helen and Michael, and grandson, Jon.
1||Giro d'Italia: Geoghegan Hart seals shock win after time-trial – as it happenedAll the latest reaction to Geoghegan Hart’s victory: And with that, I’ll be off. Bye! Ladies and gentlemen, I give you Tao Geoghegan Hart. If you haven’t already read William Fotheringham’s piece on the man who became our champion, now’s your chance: Jai Hindley, who started the day in pink and ended it in second place, has a chat: Of course it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super proud of the team and how I rode. It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three week’s I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race to be honest. We can be super proud of what we accomplished. I’d just like to thank the guys on the team, the whole team, everyone involved. It’s a massive operation to get here and to be on the podium in Milan. A lot of effort and time has gone into it and I really appreciate what the team has done to get me here. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies. All of today’s key numbers: Stage 21 1. Filippo Ganna (IT) Ineos Grenadiers 17:16 2. Victor Campenaerts (BEL) NTT Pro Cycling Team +32 3. Rohan Dennis (AUS) Ineos Grenadiers “ 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +41 5 Miles Scotson (AUS) Groupama - FDJ “ 6. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team +44 7. Chad Haga (USA) Team Sunweb “ 8. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +46 9. Kamil Gradek (POL) CCC Team +47 10. Jan Tratnik (SLO) Bahrain - McLaren “ 11. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +55 12. Martijn Tusveld (NED) Team Sunweb +58 13. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) Ineos Grenadiers “ 14. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal +1:03 15. Maciej Bodnar (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +1:04 Overall leaders 1. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers 85:40:21 2. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb +39 3. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +1:29 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck-Quick-Step +2:57 5. Pello Bilbao (ESP) Bahrain-McLaren +3:09 6. Jakob Fuglsang (DEN) Astana Pro Team +7:02 7. Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Trek - Segafredo +8:15 8. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe +8:42 9. Fausto Masnada (ITA) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +9:57 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (AUT) Bahrain - McLaren +11:05 11. Domenico Pozzovivo (ITA) NTT Pro Cycling Team +11:52 12. Rafal Majka (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +20:31 13. Sergio Samitier (ESP) Movistar Team +35:29 14. James Knox (GBR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +37:41 15. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +38:10 16. Aurélien Paret-Peintre AG2R La Mondiale +45:04 (FRA) 17. Larry Warbasse (USA) AG2R La Mondiale +53:25 18. Ben Swift (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers +57:36 19. Antonio Pedrero (ESP) Movistar Team +59:36 20. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team +1:02:57 King of the Mountains 1. Ruben Guerreiro (POR) EF Pro Cycling 234 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 157 3. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal 122 4. Rohan Dennis (AUS) INEOS Grenadiers 119 5. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team 71 6. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb “ 7. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb 55 8. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 48 9. Jonathan Castroviejo (ESP) INEOS Grenadiers 45 10. Einer Rubio (COL) Movistar Team 44 Points leaders 1. Arnaud Démare (FRA) Groupama - FDJ 233 2. Peter Sagan (SVK) BORA - hansgrohe 184 3. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step 108 4. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 87 5. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team 78 6. Andrea Vendrame (ITA) AG2R La Mondiale “ 7. Diego Ulissi (ITA) UAE Team Emirates 77 8. Simon Pellaud (SUI) Androni Giocattoli - 70 Sidermec 9. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 66 10. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe 61 11. Here are the final standings in the overall classification: One thing has gone flat today: the Prosecco that is being given to the winners. Two bottles have so far been presented, and neither really did any spraying at all despite some enthusiastic shaking. Dave Brailsford has a chat about his team’s latest success: When we started out Geraint was the leader. What happened here was Filippo [Ganna] set the scene. Coming here with a rainbow band, first day, got the TT sorted, got the pink jersey. Then a massive disappointment with Geraint going home. Then when Filippo won that road stage in the hills, everyone was like, ‘Wow, that is incredible.’ It inspired everybody. It opened the race up. Everybody race the stages, give everybody an opportunity, and I think Tao liked that. He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said, ‘I can do this.’ The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really. What I like about it is, we’ve done the training, we’ve done the defensive style of riding, and we’ve won a lot doing that, but it’s not much fun, really, compared to this, is it? What the guys have done here, all the team here has raced, and at the end of the day it’s all about racing. We’re the Grenadiers now. A lot of people have contributed to this victory. I can’t think about this without thinking about Nico [Portal]. Everybody in this team has supported him along the way and they deserve a lot of credit for that. Here’s a report on today’s action: Our champion gives his first interview, and is asked how he feels to have won this thing: Bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is someting completely different to that and I think ti’s going to take a long time to sink in. My DS told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point. Is this the start of a long and great career? I don’t know and I don’t really care. I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated. Wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races. Everyone’s always nice about people who have just won stuff, but there is such genuine warmth being expressed for Tao Geoghegan Hart both by people at the race and others at home. “Shades of Lemond and Fignon here,” writes Guy Hornsby. “I feel for Jai Hindley, who’s been incredible all race, but Tao has been relentless this last week. A Tour won by a wafer-thin margin, but they don’t call it the Race of Truth for nothing when the clock is on. What a story.” Let’s not forget about Filippo Ganna, who has completed a clean sweep of the time trials on this year’s Giro by an astonishing 32sec margin. He and Tao Geoghegan Hart pose for photographs in front of the duomo, quite the one-two for Ineos Grenadiers. Jai Hindley’s race is over, and he has finished second! His has been a phenomenal race, but not quite enough for glory. What a moment for Tao Geoghegan Hart, Grand Tour champion! Tao Geoghegan Hart crosses the finish line in 18min 14sec, the 13th best time of the day, but he will surely now win the 2020 Giro d’Italia! Up to 24sec now, with Geoghegan Hart just 1.5km from the finish line. Neither of the overall top two are threatening to win the stage, but the Londoner is doing exactly what was required of him today. Into the last 3km for Tao Geoghegan Hart, and his overall lead is still expanding. Up to about 20sec now. Geoghegan Hart has a 17sec lead now, with just 4km to go, very nearly a conclusive lead. Hindley crosses the line at the 10.3km mark, and he’s well down on our leader, Filippo Ganna, who is not going to be shifted off that bar stool any time soon. Tao Geoghegan Hart is 10sec ahead! With 6.3km to go, he seems to be on his way here! Joao Almeida crosses the line in 17min 57sec, enough for fourth place (for now) on the day, and I think in overall classification as well. We won’t really know who is in the box seat here until both riders have passed the 10.3km marker. Tao Geoghegan Hart is about 1km away from it as I type. And so, to the race leader (just). Jai Hindley, clad almost entirely in rosa, never mind the maglia, is the last on the road! Tao Geoghegan Hart is on his bike and on the road! We are 20 minutes away from the end of this year’s Giro. What’s it to be? Wilco Kelderman, Friday’s maglia rosa holder, is on his way. Just two to go now! Nobody for some time has made any dent in the top three either at the 10.3km marker (Ganna, Haga and Campenaerts the top three there) or at the finish (Ganna, Campenaerts and Dennis). When riders launch themselves down the ramp organisers are playing some genuinely godawful Europop, which I suppose is one way of encouraging them to go as fast as they can. “I‘m sure its more comfortable that the saddle on his bike!” says Andrew Benton of Ganna’s bar stool, and this I’m sure is true. “Best saddle for me was the one on my Raleigh roadster sit-up-and-beg bike, wide and comfy and with a big curly spring at the front to ensure it soaked up the bumps.” Vincenzo Nibali is on his way, along with Jakob Fuglsang and Joao Almeida. There are only four riders still waiting. The crunch is coming. “Though an urban contre la montre is hardly likely to win over new fans, this Giro has been spectacular,” says Gary Naylor. “The riders may not be the very best, but competition has been fierce and fair. And Italy? Just wow.” There’s been great drama and great scenery, to be sure. Perhaps a bit more to come (drama, at least). I’m not sure I’ve seen this bettered. Filippo Ganna certainly deserves better than a bar stool. They really could have given the leader a more comfortable place to sit. Into the top 10 we go! Fausto Masnada of Deceuninck-Quick Step is the first second (sorry, counting error) of them on this bike, a man whose name it is impossible to read, think or say without having to fight the urge to insert a Que in the middle. Domenico Pozzovivo, the 37-year-old Italian, has just got under way. He’s 11th in the overall standings, so we now move from one to three minutes between riders as we head into the top 10. Rohan Dennis crosses the line in 17min 48sec, 32sec slower than the leader but good enough, for now, for third. If Ganna wins this stage, it would be the seventh stage win for Ineos Grenadiers on this year’s Giro. They have never previously won more than six on any Grand Tour. They also have a very good chance to win the whole thing in the shape of Tao Geoghegan Hart, which would make this a very good day indeed for them. We should know precisely how the chips have fallen within the hour. Rohan Dennis, the Australian who came second in the time trial on stage 14, is on his way, and has just been timed 20 seconds behind Ganna at the split. Ganna also won the individual time trial on the first stage of the Giro, and the individual time trial that formed Stage 14, and the individual time trial title at the world championships last month. To say he has been dominant in this particular discipline of late would be to understate what’s been going on. He also won stage five on this year’s Giro, a hilly 225km, just to prove he’s not a one-trick pony. Filippo Ganna crosses the line in a time faster than anyone else to have tried the course by a margin of over half a minute! He was clocked at 17min 16sec, 32sec faster than Campenaerts. It is very cloudy in Lombardy this afternoon, and the downside of having a finish line outside the cathedral is that most of the stage is spent on a variety of unexciting A-roads on the approach to central Milan. There is, in short, a lot of grey about. Filippo Gana mashes the rest at the split! His time after 10.3km is 20sec faster than Haga’s, and Campenaerts’ spell in the leader’s seat is surely about to end. We get an official time at 10.3km, to judge how well a rider’s doing while they’re still a while from the finish line. Chad Haga was the fastest so far over 10km, crossing that line a second before Campanaerts, but by the end he was 12 seconds behind and sits fourth. Victor Campanaerts is the clubhouse leader, but Filippo Ganna is on his way and will have him in his sights. Ganna is not only Italian but local, raised on the shores of Lake Maggiore, and you can tell people are excited about him because he is being followed by two motorbikes, three cars and a helicopter. Well then. The last day of the Giro d’Italia, and it’s more poised than Grace Kelly at a tea party. Or something. Tao Geoghegan Hart, the Londoner with a name that’s not as exotic as it looks, is level at the top of the standings with Jai Hindley but is reckoned to be a better time triallist. Both have completed the first 20 stages in an official time of 85 hours, 22 minutes and seven seconds. So who will end up as champion? Time will tell, what little of it is taken by the 15.7km route into Milan, ending at the Piazza del Duomo. Firstly, then, welcome! Secondly, here’s some information that may come in useful, starting with the route profile: Here’s the top 10 in the general classification as it stood this morning: 1. Jai Hindley (Aus) Sunweb 85” 22’ 07s 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers = 3. Wilco Kelderman (Ned) Sunweb +1m32s 4. Bilbao Pello (Es) Bahrain-McLaren +2m51s 5. Joao Almeida (Por) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +3m14s 6. Jakob Fuglsang (Den) Astana +6m 32s 7. Vincenzo Nibali (It) Trek-Segafredo +7m46s 8. Patrick Konrad (Aut) Bora-Hansgrohe +8m05s 9. Fausto Masnada (It) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +9m24s 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (Aut) Bahrain McLaren +10m08s The first rider got going at 1.40pm (12.40pm GMT), but it’ll take a while to get to the leaders. Here then are the start times for those last 10 riders (in local time, so subtract one for BMT): 3.45pm Hermann Pernsteiner 3.48pm Fausto Masnada 3.51pm Patrick Konrad 3.54pm Vincenzo Nibali 3.57pm Jakob Fuglsang 4.00pm Joao Almeida 4.03pm Pello Bilbao 4.06pm Wilco Kelderman 4.09pm Tao Geoghegan Hart 4.12pm Jai Hindley And here’s William Fotheringham’s report on yesterday’s action, which also tees up today’s: Tao Geoghegan Hart is on the threshold of Giro d’Italia victory going into Sunday’s time trial stage into Milan. After winning Saturday’s mountain stage at the Sestriere ski resort, the 25-year-old, London-born Scot is level on time with the new race leader, Jai Hindley of Australia, an unprecedentedly tight and tense situation after more than 85 hours of racing. No Grand Tour has been this close going into the final day, but Geoghegan Hart is a stronger time triallist; a single second’s advantage would suffice, meaning that he will be expected to give Great Britain its second Giro d’Italia win in three years after Chris Froome’s last-ditch victory in 2018. For a rider who had expected to support either Richard Carapaz or Geraint Thomas in an attempt for overall victory, it is an astonishing twist of fortune. Much more here:
13||Bill Fearns obituaryMy father, Bill Fearns, who has died aged 99, was a marine engineer whose long career encompassed designing vessels that were used in the second world war, including the D-day landings. Born in Dundee into a family of eight, to James Fearns, a foundry labourer, and his wife, Jessie (nee Farquharson), a jute spinner, Bill was raised in a tenement. He attended Stobswell school, but left aged 14 to train as a draughtsman in the Robb-Caledon shipyard, gaining qualifications at Dundee Technical Institute at night. At the age of 15 with his brother, Alex, he played bagpipes in the massed bands at the 1936 Hampden Cup final, something he was always proud of. During the war, now a qualified naval architect and therefore in a reserved occupation, in 1941 Bill was seconded to Clydeside, designing U-Boat-hunting corvettes and working on the D-day Mulberry harbours. After the war, he worked on Martin-Baker ejection seats at RAE Farnborough, but in 1948, after marrying Margaret Shand, Bill returned to a booming John Brown’s on Clydeside, working on the Cunard ships Saxonia, Carmania and Franconia. In 1956, he became a surveyor with Lloyd’s Register in Greenock and was transferred in 1960 to Hamburg, West Germany. Bill worked on reparation ships for Israel and was surveyor on the rebuilding of the SS Uganda and SS Nevasa to become educational cruise ships, as well as on the first custom-designed container ships. In 1973 Bill went to Singapore to head its operation replacing expat specialists with native Singaporeans. He enjoyed the occasional round of golf with Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s prime minister. When he returned to Lloyd’s Register in London at the end of the 1970s, shipbuilding was changing dramatically. London’s docklands were closing down and computers were now being used to assist with surveying. After retiring in 1984, he played golf at his home in South Woodham Ferrers, Essex, sang in the local choir and played in several pipe bands, including the Rayleigh British Legion Band. Margaret died in 2015. Bill is survived by his children, Jane and me, and by two grandchildren and a great grandchild.
3||Nearly 60 million Americans cast early vote as record-shattering turnout expectedTheir enthusiasm reflected in post boxes stuffed with mail-in ballots and by hours-long queues at voting sites across the country, by early Sunday almost 60 million Americans had cast a vote in the presidential election, even as the candidates scrambled to deliver their closing message more than a week before election day, 3 November. The vast numbers of early voters in the most consequential election in generations is fuelling what promises to be record-shattering turnout. Not since 1908 have more than 65% of eligible US voters actually exercised that right. Behind the eye-popping headline figures lie clues to why voters are so engaged, so early. Democrats hold a sizeable advantage in the early returns. The reason, analysts believe, is simply Donald Trump, and by extension his handling of the coronavirus pandemic that has infected 8.5 million people and killed 224,000. “The pandemic is part of it, particularly for older voters,” said Dr Larry Sabato, founder and director of the University of Virginia’s Center for Politics. “I’m pushing 70 myself, and it has to be a part of your calculations, we’re kind of vulnerable. “But to me, that doesn’t explain the lines. People really have bought into the understanding that if this isn’t the most important election we’ve ever had, it’s one of several. People are determined to express themselves and we all know why: Donald Trump. That includes his base: the cult is going to support the cult leader. But there are more, maybe quite a bit more, who want to end this nightmare. And that’s the way people put it. If you don’t like the word I’m sorry – that’s just the way it is.” More than one third of the votes already returned come from the three most populous states, California, Texas and Florida, according to the US Elections project, an independent data analysis by the University of Florida. California is staunchly Democrat, and its 55 electoral college votes are all but a lock for former vice-president Joe Biden. The race for the 38 votes in Texas is closer, but leaning strongly Republican. That leaves the swing state of Florida and its 29 electoral college votes as a glittering prize. So far, from 5.3m mail-in and in-person votes recorded, representing almost 40% of 14 million registered voters, Democrats hold an advantage of more than 7%, or around 400,000 votes. “It is our most mega, mega state,” Sabato said. “I like to put it that way, and there’s no way practically for Trump to get elected without Florida.” The president voted in Florida on Saturday. “If he loses there it will be obvious he’s going to lose,” Sabato said. “If Biden loses Florida, though, it is not the end for him. He has quite a number of other paths. [But] the problem with losing Florida is it is an indication that you’re likely not to do well in other states – we’re talking about Georgia, North Carolina, even parts of the midwest.” The Democrats’ lead in Florida appears to be amplified nationally, at least in the 19 states that release party affiliations with their statistics. In those states, registered Democrats have sent in more than 13m votes to Republicans’ 7.4m, with 6m votes from minor or no party affiliates making up the remainder. Across all states, the University of Florida reports, votes cast early amount to more than 42% of those from the entire 2016 election. In some places the figure is even higher, such as Hays county, Texas, where 73,277 early votes are several hundred more than the total four years ago. Sabato cautioned Republicans not to rely on the tradition of Democrats’ early voting advantages being wiped out when their own supporters turn out on election day. Trump “sure can win in the swing states”, he said, “Trump people who weren’t registered or didn’t vote the last time, they have spent four years identifying them. That’s been the hidden campaign that people haven’t talked about. “But you’re taking a tremendous chance when you put all your chips on the election day vote. Suppose there’s a hurricane barreling toward Florida. Almost certainly there will be really bad weather in at least a couple of swing states, you know, lots of things happen in life, and maybe the spike up in coronavirus will keep a lot of those older Republicans away on the day.” Michael McDonald, a professor of political science who maintains the University of Florida database, told the Guardian’s Fight to Vote project extraordinarily brisk early voting had handed Democrats a clear advantage, noting that the party’s supporters had not only submitted significantly larger numbers of ballot requests, but were also returning them at a higher rate than Republicans. Like Sabato, however, McDonald also urged caution. “The irony here is Democrats are actually doing Republicans a favour,” he said. “It should benefit Republicans who are trying to vote on election day that the Democrats have done them this favour of not standing in line in front of them.”
4||John Kerr's letters to the Queen's private secretary: 'A raw display of devastation'In the cryptic taxonomy of archives, the relationship between Sir John Kerr and the Queen stretches beyond the palace letters and into obscure files scattered throughout the National Archives of Australia and elsewhere. The most surprising of these is a new set of letters between Kerr and Sir Martin Charteris in the National Archives of Australia. From all these archives – in personal letters, Kerr’s rambling handwritten notes, and his unguarded personal reflections – a common theme emerges: the involvement of the palace in every step Kerr took, and every decision he made, regarding the dismissal of Gough Whitlam and its gathering aftermath, including even his own resignation. It is impossible to separate Kerr’s decisions from his intractable view of his “duty” to the monarch and the monarchy, presented to him so clearly in the months before the dismissal by Queen’s private secretary, the unctuous Charteris. Charteris had worked that sense of duty perfectly, most notably in his reassurance to Kerr that whatever decision he was to make, it could only do the monarchy good. Kerr’s decisions were in this sense entirely bounded by considerations of his view of the interests of the Queen and what was best for the monarchy. There was, quite simply, no decision that Kerr would make without what he saw as the imprimatur of the palace. How could it have been otherwise? For Kerr, his duty defined his decisions. Soon after the release of the palace letters, several previously unpublished letters from one of those obscure files were unexpectedly and quietly released by the archives, nine years after I first requested it. This file, carrying the incongruous title “Correspondence between the prime minister and the governor-general on the governor-general’s resignation”, contained several letters between Kerr and Charteris that were not included with the palace letters released by the archives with such fanfare following the high court decision. Apart from anything else, this raises the significant question of how many more of these historic letters lie elsewhere in the archives, imperfectly labelled and unseen, which ought to form part of the broader palace letters collection. The newly released documents consist of several anguished letters, drafted and redrafted by Kerr to Charteris in 1977 in the months before his reluctant resignation, and a single letter from Charteris in reply. They tell a poignant story of personal decline. These letters provide a snapshot of the distressed end of Kerr’s term as governor general, of his deteriorating relationship with the palace, and of his dramatic turn against Malcolm Fraser, as those who had encouraged and cajoled him in the months before the dismissal began to move against him. In the early months after the dismissal, in the afterglow of the successful revival of the reserve powers of the Crown, Kerr describes the view from the government, and “encouraged” by the palace, that he “should, indeed, must stay”. It is essential that he “avoid appearing to concede error” in any way about his dismissal of Whitlam. As Kerr navigates the shifting fortunes in his position, a detailed handwritten note prepared by him in April 1976 reveals the role of “the palace”, Charteris, and Prince Charles, as part of a select group of informal advisers with whom he discussed his future as governor general. Kerr sought advice from Prince Charles, the palace, Sir Robert Menzies, Sir Anthony Mason, prime minister Fraser, and Sir Garfield Barwick. They had all urged him to remain as governor general because, “(1) what I did was the right thing to do and (2) resignation … would leave the impression that I regretted what I did”. Despite the private professions of support and encouragement, as the months pass and the protests against him continue, Kerr perceives a change. Privately, he writes of his growing fear that “the Government, or some of its members, may get tired of defending me … and encourage me to go”. And if they did, Kerr would not go easily. He would not even consider resigning without a new position to go to. In a sign of his faltering judgment as his concern for his position grows, Kerr imagines that Fraser might consider appointing him as Australia’s high commissioner to the United Kingdom. “London might be the best place to spend a few years,” he muses. It is hard to understand how Kerr could have entertained the idea that after such intense political controversy, he could be appointed to a plum diplomatic role by the government he had installed in office just months earlier. In an extraordinary letter to Charteris in late 1976, when his relationship with Fraser is already splintering, Kerr raises the possible use of the reserve powers against the government. Kerr writes that Fraser faces several options for the next election, including a half-Senate election, or an early election for the House of Representatives. He sets out the possibility, raised by some commentators, that “because of my view that the Governor-General has a real discretion”, he ought to consider whether there is a case for invoking the reserve powers to deny Fraser such an early election. Kerr reminds Charteris, with the air of one with a shared understanding, that these powers exist and are available to him. Charteris’s response is emphatic, and quite unlike his benign insistence on the existence of the reserve powers, and even of their possible beneficial use, just the previous year. “I hope that this possibility will not arise, both for your own sake and also I think for the sake of the Crown,” he writes, firmly closing off that discussion. By 1977, Kerr’s behaviour at public events was also becoming a liability. That was the year he landed face-down in the mud at the Tamworth Show as he attempted to place the winning medallion around the prized cow “Lovedale Posh”, all of it captured by a waiting photographer. The front-page images of the governor general pinioned under the cow’s hoof won a Walkley award. There was a memorable repeat performance at the Melbourne Cup later that year when Kerr, in an ill-fitting top hat and tails, struggled to remain upright as he awarded the cup to the owners of the winning horse. It was a sad sight of a public decline (now a much-watched YouTube clip called, “the Governor-General drunk at the Melbourne Cup”). Kerr’s inadvertent burning of the carpet at Victoria’s Government House during a short visit, when he tripped over the heater in the middle of the night and woke to find the carpet smouldering, no doubt also caused ripples of anxiety in vice-regal circles. And so, it is hardly surprising that by 1977 the Queen had joined the list of those who wished the governor general to make an early retirement. In little more than a year he had gone from saving the Queen from embarrassment to being the embodiment of that embarrassment. Kerr’s greatest fear under Whitlam, his removal from office, would now ensue under Malcolm Fraser. Kerr’s forced resignation was, to him, the ultimate betrayal by Fraser, whose political fortunes during the 1975 crisis his unprecedented actions had assured. The newly released cache of letters and drafts to Charteris is a raw display of devastation. In an extraordinarily indiscreet draft letter, Kerr writes that Fraser had never given him the support that “I have been entitled to have”, and that now, “victory achieved”, Fraser is “happy for me to go”. The well-honed vituperation that Kerr once deployed against Whitlam he turns towards Fraser, “a stern, distant, arrogant man determined to rule completely and not able to relax in conversation with me as Mr Whitlam was able to do”. Whitlam is now, apparently, not so bad after all. This is an edited extract from The Palace Letters: The Queen, the governor-general, and the plot to dismiss Gough Whitlam by Jenny Hocking, out 27 October (Scribe, $32.99)
14||'Getting burgers delivered generally sucks': Adam Liaw rates the best and worst food to order inThe unique conditions of 2020 have seen eating habits change across the globe. Alongside the sourdough preppers and physically distanced diners, perhaps the biggest difference of all can be seen in the world of home delivery. For some cities in lockdown the only life on the streets has been thousands of scooters, cyclists and drivers zipping from restaurant to house, feeding families and keeping businesses running. But most food wasn’t made to be sealed in plastic and bounced on the back of a scooter for 20 minutes before it gets to you. Let me take you through a few delivery favourites and their pros and cons in search of the answer to which food reigns supreme in the world of home delivery. Pizza: 6/10 Pizza is the O.G. delivery food, which is why it’s so surprising that it’s not a particularly good one. Steaming a baked product in an insulated bag after it’s cooked is not exactly keeping it in prime condition. The heavily processed chain-store varieties get away with it because you’re not expecting perfection, but the problem is I’m a snob and like my fancy Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana-approved pizza to arrive as it would fresh from its wood-fired oven. The saving grace is that pizza reheats exceptionally well. After I’ve placed my order I turn my oven on as hot as it goes. When the pizza arrives, it goes straight on to a tray and into the oven for a couple of minutes to bring it back to its original glory. This method works for chain-store pizzas, too (though their original glory isn’t quite as glorious). Lasagne: 8/10 Why there hasn’t been a family-sized lasagne delivery service that has taken the world by storm and become some kind of billion-dollar tech unicorn through this Covid period is quite beyond me. Pasta is *OK* for delivery but it really is better freshly prepared. The exceptions, however, are the “al forno” baked varieties of which lasagne is the undisputed king. It might be a little time-consuming to make at home, but it can be prepared relatively easily and in bulk in restaurants. Combine this with its excellent deliverability and it’s a wonder why Italian restaurants haven’t pivoted to this sooner. Fine dining: 🤷🏻♂️/10 With restaurants severely restricted in what they can serve, many fine-dining establishments have pivoted to home delivery. Some do it well, others not so well, so it’s hard to give this one a score. While it’s good to see many restaurants giving it a go, I can’t help but feel that fine dining is more about the experience than the food alone. A bit like watching Hamilton on the telly, it might be OK as a novelty but it really isn’t the same as being there. Burgers: 3/10 The major burger chains have all jumped on the home-delivery wagon as a source of revenue, but getting burgers delivered generally sucks. The fries are irredeemable, any semblance of freshness has wilted to mush, and the sauces and meat juices have soaked into the bun, destroying any integrity it may once have had. If you must send for burgers, try to keep them as simple as possible. A simple cheeseburger – the smaller the better – will roughly approximate a White Castle-style steam-grilled slider after the trauma of delivery. Load up on these and leave the fancy burgers and fried sides for dining in. Sushi: 8/10 Sushi began life as delivery food. It was originally a product of packing fish in rice for weeks long road transport by horse and cart. The fermentation of the rice preserved the fish, and that souring is mimicked by the vinegared rice used in modern sushi. Even the nigiri sushi that we see whizzing around on conveyor belts these days was originally sold door-to-door by a man named Hanaya Yohei who in the 1800s wandered the streets of what is today Tokyo’s Ginza district selling rice balls he moulded by hand and topped with pieces of raw fish. Sushi’s delivery credentials are well established, but its main benefit is that it’s served at room temperature, meaning that the insulation and transportation process doesn’t generate excess heat or steam. Rolls are likely to fare better than nigiri, as balancing fish on top of rice is not a process designed to survive transport across these mean streets. Chinese/Thai: 3/10 – 7/10 You might think it’s strange that I’m lumping these together, but there’s such a variety of Chinese cuisines that even keeping those into one category is weird enough, so you may as well throw the stir-fried Thai takeaways in there as well. My issue with these is twofold. I’m no fan of the “pick your meat and sauce” Thai-ish takeaways at the best of times, so how they’re delivered doesn’t matter much to me. But one thing the various Chinese and Thai cuisines have in common is that they thrive on variety and the juxtaposition between the different characteristics and textures of dishes, and that’s something that delivery doesn’t do justice. A braised dish might arrive in good condition, but a crisp-fried fish or chicken won’t. Soup will need to be reheated, and stir-fried dishes will lose much of their wok hei. It won’t stop me ordering good Chinese or Thai food for delivery, but having it in a restaurant will be so much better. Curry: 9/10 Getting slow-braised dishes from the subcontinent delivered is perhaps even better than cooking them yourself. There’s little difference between the delivery version and fresh in the restaurant for most of the wet dishes, but anything from the tandoor will suffer from the journey. I reheat breads like naan and paratha on a hot, dry grill pan after they arrive, and can confirm it’s a step worth doing. Dumplings: 10/10 If I had to pick a favourite food to order in it would be dumplings. Dumplings are the *chef’s kiss* of home delivery foods, and they’ve been hiding in plain sight the whole time. While many of us have missed the joys of circulating yum cha trolleys over the past few months, if you think about it getting delivery is kind of the same thing except the trolley is a scooter and it travels a greater distance. Re-steam them if you want them piping hot, or even just give them a zap in the microwave. Steamed foods thrive in the steamy environment of packaging and home delivery, so break out the lazy susan and teapot and gird your loins for yum cha at home.
15||Bush and koalas found to be threatened by 'gratuitous' NSW land-clearing planTens of thousands of hectares of bush could be at risk under a New South Wales government proposal to allow rural landholders to clear up to 25 metres of land from their property’s fence line, analysis by WWF-Australia shows. The NSW government announced this month it planned to amend its Rural Fires Act to allow clearing without an approval on rural property boundaries to reduce bushfire risk. The proposal, which was not one of the 76 recommendations from the NSW bushfire inquiry, prompted alarm it could lead to broad-scale clearing of endangered forest and habitat and was called “anti-science” by the independent MLC Justin Field. WWF-Australia used spatial data to examine how much forest could be exposed under the proposed changes in four local government areas: Clarence Valley, Port Stephens, Shoalhaven and Wollondilly. It found if all rural property holders cleared to the maximum extent, 44,293ha of forest could be at risk in those four council areas, 32,609ha of that in Clarence Valley. The analysis found 12,000ha of at-risk forest in those regions was high quality koala habitat unless the state government imposed conditions to protect it. Martin Taylor, a conservation scientist at WWF-Australia, said there would be landholders who would not clear their land if the proposal passed the state parliament. “But this is what is at risk of being cleared if they go ahead and do it,” he said. “It’s gratuitous. You’re fragmenting forests even more than they are already. Particularly for koalas, it makes it harder for them to get around.” NSW laws already allow property owners to clear trees within 10 metres of a house or other building, and shrubs within 50 metres, to mitigate bushfire risk. The proposed rules would allow an additional 25 metres of clearing at the boundary. Property owners are also permitted to clear distances of 15 metres in coastal NSW, 30 metres in central NSW and 40 metres in western NSW to construct or maintain rural infrastructure, such as a fence. The greatest impact of the proposed changes is expected to be in coastal zones that have been most exposed to bushfires. Field expressed concern the government still had not presented any advice it had received from the NSW RFS before announcing the proposed amendments earlier this month. He said the emergency services minister, David Elliott, “has not been willing to explain” how the proposal would reduce bushfire risk, nor why it had been prioritised over the 76 recommendations from the bushfire inquiry report. “My concern is it will be developers that use this,” Field said. “I also worry that it sends the message that this is a constructive way to manage bushfire risk. It sets us up for failure.” The government is likely to introduce the legislation to parliament in November. It has said it would develop a code to take account of endangered species and habitat but it is unclear what this would entail and whether it would be introduced at the same time. Elliott did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia. Field said the government needed to ensure protections were in place for riparian zones, such as creek lines, critically endangered habitats, and threatened species, including the koala. He feared the laws could end up being used for purposes unrelated to bushfire risk. “I’m particularly concerned by coastal rural land that’s held by developers who may have an intention for future rezoning,” he said. “They would be allowed to clear their boundaries whether or not they had a fence, effectively degrading the environmental values of their land – not for bushfire protection but to assist with future rezoning applications.” There are also questions about how the proposed changes would interact with existing land-clearing laws that have caused turmoil inside the government in recent months. The lower house has passed amendments to local land services laws to exempt private rural landholders from having to recognise the expanded definition of koala habitat under the koala state environmental planning policy (Sepp) that nearly split the Coalition. If the changes pass the upper house, they would grandfather the arrangements under the koala Sepp for the five councils that already have approved koala plans of management. But the Environmental Defenders Office said if additional councils completed their own plans in future, the changes would allow private landholders to continue to do code-based land-clearing without an approval. Rachel Walmsley, the EDO’s policy and law reform director, said the deal reached between the Liberal and National parties was “not about clarifying the laws. It’s about weakening. “It is actually preventing koala habitat from being mapped and applicable.” NSW has already recorded huge increases in land-clearing rates as a result of changes to native vegetation laws in 2017.
4||Queensland election: seats to watch as parties play a game of electoral chessLabor’s holds a two-seat majority in Queensland and the most recent polls suggest a close contest on 31 October, with little swing in either direction since the 2017 election. But experts say the statewide polls are of little value in understanding how the larger election night story will play out on Saturday. Queensland is a deeply complex state – where messages in regional areas often run contrary to those used to woo city voters. Rather than a statewide pitch, Labor and the Liberal National party have been engaged in a game of electoral chess, attempting to plot a path to 47 seats. There are 93 electorates in Queensland. The LNP needs to win nine to gain a majority. The state has a large crossbench: three Katter’s Australia party MPs, one Green, one One Nation MP and an independent. The influence of minor parties will shape marginal contests, as well as the makeup of the next parliament. There are more than 20 seats that could flip on Saturday. Here are the ones to watch, and what they mean in the context of a tight election. All roads lead to Townsville Thuringowa (Labor 4.1% v One Nation) Townsville has three marginal seats and both campaigns have spent considerable time in the northern city, where crime and employment have dominated discussion. On face value, the seats of Townsville (Labor’s most marginal seat) and Mundingburra (where MP Coralee O’Rourke is retiring) are closer contests than the western suburbs electorate of Thuringowa. But both parties believe that if Townsville does swing to the LNP, Thuringowa would be the first of the three to fall. One Nation has previously polled well in Thuringowa and the contest has also been targeted by Katter’s Australia Party as a potential gain. Others to watch: Townsville (Labor 0.4%), Mundingburra (Labor 1.1%) LNP attempts to thread the needle Aspley (Labor 1.2%) The seat of Aspley, a suburban electorate in northern Brisbane, fell to Labor in 2017. LNP sources say if they cannot win it back, the party does not have a realistic path to a majority. Aspley has changed hands regularly in the past 20 years and is strategically important to both parties. The area is an LNP stronghold at local government level and the party has chosen a long-term councillor, Amanda Cooper, to run. Similar to Aspley, Gaven on the Gold Coast, won narrowly by Labor last election, is considered a key test of whether the LNP can win back its increasingly dwindling urban support in state politics. Maiwar, the Brisbane western suburbs seat held by the Greens, was identified by the LNP as part of its path to victory, however it is understood the party now considers a gain there unlikely. Others to watch: Gaven (Labor 0.7%), Mansfield (Labor 1.6%), Maiwar (Greens 1.6% v LNP) Will One Nation continue to be a factor? Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation) To win the LNP needs to shift the electoral dynamic in three ways: it needs to win Townsville; it needs to regain a footing in the south-east; it needs to win back low primary support in the regions, particularly those voters who abandoned it for more conservative options. Similarly, Labor cannot maintain a majority if it holds firm in the city but loses too much support in regional areas. In 2017 the expected “One Nation effect” didn’t quite eventuate. The party won only one seat (Mirani) though it did have some impact on the outcome of the election, particularly in central Queensland where the LNP’s primary vote tanked. In Maryborough (a seat the LNP won in the Campbell Newman 2012 landslide), the LNP primary vote was 18% at the last election. Word from the major party camps is the One Nation vote has tempered statewide, but it has always maintained a fervent following in pockets like Maryborough. Similarly in Keppel, in 2017 there was a 15% swing away from the LNP, which was beaten into third by One Nation. Others to watch: Keppel (Labor 3.1% v One Nation), Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation), Mirani (One Nation 4.8% v Labor) Labor could offset regional losses on the city fringe Pumicestone (LNP 0.8%) The former Labor MP John Mikel – now an adjunct professor at the University of Queensland – says that in lieu of reliable public polling on specific seats, one way of taking the temperature of the electorate was to “follow the leaders”. Having spent time in the regions, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk pivoted her campaign to areas of LNP heartland on the Gold and Sunshine coasts where Labor hopes to win seats. Pumicestone – which covers Caboolture and Bribie Island – is the LNP’s most marginal seat and its one-term MP, Simone Wilson, is not recontesting this election. It is the most likely Labor gain, but there are a handful of others on small margins. If the LNP threads the needle elsewhere, it still needs to hold these vulnerable seats. If Labor loses ground in the regions, the city fringe could offset losses and keep the Palaszczuk government in power. Or a mixed bag might deliver a hung parliament. Others to watch: Caloundra (LNP 3.4%), Glass House (LNP 3.4%), Currumbin (LNP 3.3%), Bonney (LNP 1.7%), Theodore (LNP 3.7%) The nightmare scenario for LNP Oodgeroo (LNP 7.2%) The seat of Oodgeroo, based in the city of Redlands south-east of Brisbane, would be a surprise loss for the LNP’s Mark Robinson, a Pentecostal pastor who employs the former Australian Christian Lobby head, Lyle Shelton, in his electorate office. But this week LNP leader Deb Frecklington made the surprise decision to include a whistle-stop in the electorate, rather than visit seats like Mansfield and Aspley the LNP needs to win from Labor. Robinson is being challenged by a high-profile local independent, Claire Richardson, who opposes the controversial Toondah harbour development plan. There are a handful of other seats the LNP need to be foregone conclusions to prevent Labor forming government. If Burdekin and Whitsunday (both on very tight margins) in the north fall to Labor, the LNP could be wiped out above the Tropic of Capricorn. Similarly, Clayfield and Chatsworth in Brisbane, and Burleigh on the Gold Coast, are on relatively small margins. Losing those seats would trigger a Labor landslide. Others to watch: Burdekin (LNP 0.8%), Whitsunday (Ind 0.7%), Burleigh (LNP 4.9%), Chatsworth (LNP 2.9%), Clayfield (LNP 2.4%) Minor parties will shape the next parliament South Brisbane (Labor 3.6% v Greens) And finally, the most keenly anticipated contest of all is in South Brisbane, the most progressive electorate in Queensland and possibly the country. Labor’s former deputy premier Jackie Trad has been written off in this seat, where the Greens vote has surged consistently in recent years. Last time around, Trad benefited from LNP preferences. The LNP’s “Labor last strategy” will make her task of holding the seat more difficult. Increasingly in Brisbane electorates will be three-cornered contests between the LNP, Labor and the Greens. Preference arrangements have made the Greens serious contenders in at least four seats – possibly more – if they can run second on primary votes. These include the CBD seat of McConnell and the inner-north seat of Cooper, vacated by popular minister Kate Jones. The same situation will occur in the north, where Katter’s Australia Party holds three seats. Some of the regional contests involving One Nation, KAP and the majors could be even more complex. In 2017, Nick Dametto won Hinchinbrook with 20.9% of the primary vote. Others to watch: McConnell (Labor 7.9%), Cooper (Labor 10.6%), Hinchinbrook (KAP 7.6% v LNP)
16||Australia's theatres are slowly reopening, but will subscribers return?Judith Hughes, a Melbourne Theatre Company subscriber, sees seven shows a year, organising tickets for a group of 11 women with an average age of 65. She is eager for the company to reopen its doors. “The general feeling among our group is that we’ll do what we can to support the arts and we want to get back in the theatre as long as we can do it safely,” she says. Anecdotally, the sentiment seems shared by theatre audiences across the country. Mitchell Butel, artistic director of the State Theatre Company of South Australia, says demand for its first post-Covid shows, Gaslight and Ripcord, have been “through the roof. We were the first main stage back in the country and we had no seat to sell.” Box office statistics supplied by the Sydney Theatre Company show that 54% of ticket buyers for Wonnangatta, its first post-lockdown show for 2020, were previous ticket-buyers, and 70% of the company’s subscribers surveyed say they expect to renew. But the enthusiasm isn’t necessarily reflected in other data. An Australia Council for the Arts sponsored survey tapped more than 12,000 arts lovers nationwide and 150 arts organisations. It included galleries and museums as well as performing arts groups and was taken three times, in May, July and September. Its September figures for attending cultural events as a whole were more confident than the previous two surveys, but show an understandable short-term caution. Despite a theoretical willingness to engage, only 29% of audience members surveyed were ready to attend an event as soon as permitted, with 29% of those who are residents in states where venues are open having attended a cultural event in the past fortnight. Only 14% were actually buying tickets for live shows and performances. But the production costs of putting on a show remain the same, whether you’re playing to 50 people or 500. This is a crucial factor influencing theatre companies’ programming and projection of box office revenue for 2021. How many tickets can they reasonably expect to sell in a limited audience return? Covid has also disrupted the subscription funding model that a majority of companies rely on. In a normal year, the theatre companies would be in the middle of launch season, with tickets for much of 2021 going on sale for subscribers to buy in packages of several shows at once. The funds brought in during the subscription period would then go into the budget for the following year. STCSA will launch its full 2021 season on 29 October but other companies are holding fire, with plans for limited season launches selling in stages, and with smaller subscription packages for those reluctant to commit long-term in an environment of uncertainty. This isn’t great for the bottom line, and it hasn’t helped that the only money spent from a $250m rescue package for the arts promised by the federal government back in June has gone to the screen industry. Of all the companies, those in Melbourne have dealt with the longest lockdowns and the harshest restrictions. Melbourne Theatre Company’s largest proportion of subscribers – 34% – are between the ages of 50 and 64, an age bracket more at risk from Covid complications. “It’s awfully challenging,” says MTC executive director Virginia Lovett. “At the beginning we went in hard and fast [with cancellations]. People re-booked for September, when we hoped to reopen, but we’ve had to cancel the rest of the year.” In pre-pandemic days, Australia’s not-for-profit performance companies were expected by funding bodies to be as commercially profitable as possible, to build up philanthropy and sponsorship income, and reduce their reliance on subsidies. Federal and state government subsidy more generally varies from theatre to theatre and this funding depends on the legal status of the company. Both STCSA and Queensland Theatre Company are statutory bodies, set up by acts of state legislation, and have greater state support; Melbourne Theatre Company is technically a department of the University of Melbourne, although both it and STC, a public company, receive similar levels of government funding: between 6% and 7%. Many companies emphasise their box office revenue as a sign of this model working. MTC’s 2019 annual report touts box office receipts of $18.1m out of total revenue of $28.3m. For some state theatres, subscriptions represent an average of 50% of box office revenue. For the MTC, it’s 70%. The figures are the result of a campaign over the past few years that saw subscriber numbers grow 40% in 2018 to a high of 22,300, before dropping off last year to 20,315. Lovett is pessimistic about the ability of theatre companies to sustain revenue in a downward-turning market. “The recession will also mean a drop in sponsorship, philanthropy and corporate entertainment,” she says. This, she argues, means that the current government subsidy isn’t sufficient for what the company is expected to deliver during and in the aftermath of a pandemic. “It has to be between 15% and 18%,” she says. “If the governments are serious about us continuing to be a thriving part of the culture and want us to develop new work, be involved in education and touring, the subsidy has to increase.” Lovett says that MTC’s own research shows strong support and loyalty from existing subscribers, many of whom donated the cost of their cancelled tickets to the company. “They want to see good social distancing and we’re looking closely at what other theatres are doing,” says Lovett. “There will be a certain percentage who are very hesitant, but optimistically there is a very high number willing to return.”
4||Decades of neglect: Victoria has built less than 10% of its public housing pledge as waiting list swellsThe Victorian government has built only 57 of the 1,000 new public housing units it pledged by 2022, amid a push to bind the state to a housing target. As the pandemic puts the spotlight on the state’s ailing public housing system, the Greens will this week call for a legislated benchmark to guarantee a much-needed boost to housing stock. It comes as analysis obtained by Guardian Australia suggests there are nearly 30,000 children among the 100,000 people on the state’s ballooning housing waiting list. The waiting list has blown out every quarter since a new registry was created in 2016, yet the state government’s signature 1,000 homes commitment is yet to gather steam. Though the government insists the pledge is on track, figures provided to a parliamentary committee show only 57 of the homes Labor promised to build by late 2022 have been finished. Halfway into Daniel Andrews’s second term, a further 87 homes are under construction and 122 are said to be “about to start construction”. Housing advocates warned in 2018 that the $209m promise – which focuses on the most needy applicants – was already insufficient given Victoria spends less per capita on social housing than any other jurisdiction. Since then, the public housing waiting list has only gotten longer. In the three months to June 2020, an extra 2,161 Victorians were added to rolls, according to estimates by researcher Dr Duncan Rouch. That takes the total number of people waiting for a home to 99,264, includes 29,618 children. The Greens’ housing spokesman, Sam Hibbins, blamed the situation on decades of “neglect by successive state governments”. “The state government hasn’t even built 10% of the public homes it said it would during this term, which means the waiting list will continues to blow out,” he said. “The only way we can solve homelessness is to build more homes, it’s really that simple.” Under a bill the Greens will introduce to parliament this week, the government would be bound to a public housing target, which the party says would work similar to a renewable energy target. It would require the government to construct or purchase an additional 100,000 new public homes by 2030, or 10,000 a year. The benchmark is more ambitious than a proposal from the state’s peak homelessness body, which in May called for the construction of 6,000 units a year. According to government figures, the average waiting time for a “priority access” housing applicant is currently 11.6 months. This fast-tracked list includes people who are homeless, escaping family violence or living with a disability. The Department of Health and Human Services has previously partly blamed the wait figure on the “lack of growth in social housing”. Until very recently, Michael Miletic, 63, was among those on the priority list. The Geelong man had been staying in cheap accommodation during the pandemic. When that came to an end, he was homeless for a month. It was not a new experience. “I’ve been house surfing for years,” Miletic said. “I’ve never had a place to call my own.” While waiting on the public housing list, Miletic slept in his car and would shower at the Geelong Olympic pool. Luckily, he said, his vehicle had a canopy on the back that fits a bed. “I thought, ‘At least I’m not doing it hard on the streets,’” he said. After eight months on the waiting list, Miletic was given a home this month. He knows his wait was shorter than most, and credits the outcome to the assistance he received from the Housing for the Aged Action Group. Across Victoria, there has been a 125% increase in priority applications like Miletic’s since September 2016, according to Rouch’s research. Geelong is the worst-hit regional area, while demand in metropolitan Melbourne was highest in a housing region described as “Western Melbourne”. That area includes the suburbs in and around the nine high-rise towers in Flemington and North Melbourne that were controversially locked down in July at the start of Melbourne’s second wave. Since September 2016, demand has increased by 82% in that region, while applications also surged in north-eastern Melbourne, including Preston (200% increase), the Dandenong area (166%) and the Hume and Moreland area, including Broadmeadows (149%). Since the tower lockdown, the government has allocated $30m to voluntarily relocate families living in Melbourne’s public housing high-rises. And in July, it also committed to build 168 new social housing units as part of a Covid stimulus package. However, controversially, it is also selling off eight public housing estates to developers as part of a “renewal” project that will lead a 10% increase in social housing, which also includes affordable homes leased by non-profits. With the state budget due before the end of the year, Hibbins said forthcoming stimulus should include a massive housing boost. “There hasn’t been the will from governments in the past, but the Covid crisis has now presented us with a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to build back a better future, and access to secure housing for everyone should be the first step,” he said. A state government spokeswoman said Labor was responsible for record investment to support those sleeping rough, or at risk of homelessness, and family violence survivors who need a home. She said the 1,000 homes program “remains on track to be completed by 2022”. Contracts have been signed with builders for nearly all of the 1,000 homes. “We’ve also been invested almost $500m to build, repair and upgrade over 23,000 community and public housing homes across the state,” the spokeswoman said.
4||Australia's biggest companies are being run by a 'directors' club', study findsA major new study of who runs Australia’s biggest companies has confirmed the existence of a “directors’ club” and proves boards are not punished for poor performance, investors say. More than a third of vacancies on the boards of the top 300 listed companies in Australia are filled by directors of other companies in the same group, according to data compiled by proxy advice firm Ownership Matters. The study, which compiled information on every director of an ASX300 company since 2005, also found that the directors of poorly performing groups last almost as long as the directors of top companies. It comes as corporate Australia readies for an annual shareholder meeting season that got off to a torrid start last week when Crown Resorts directors survived a protest vote only due to the intervention of the company’s biggest shareholder, the billionaire James Packer. To combat the lack of consequences faced by directors, they should be forced to run for re-election every year, as happens in the UK, the Ownership Matters co-founder Dean Paatsch said. Currently, most Australian directors only face a shareholder vote once every three years. Non-executive directors are supposed to perform a key role in making capitalism work, by supervising the efforts of company management to grow businesses. Directors of companies in the ASX300 oversee $1.7tn in capital at a cost of around $400m in fees. Ownership Matters analysed the pool of 1,777 executives and 4,143 non-executive directors who have sat on ASX300 boards since 2005. Over that period, 38.5% of director positions among the group were filled by someone who already had a seat on a top 300 board. This ratio peaked at 43.4% in 2006 and currently sits at 36%, Ownership Matters said. The study found representation of women on boards has improved dramatically, rising from just 9.6% in 2005 to a third this year. It also found that once inside the “club”, the professional lifespan of directors soars. Three-quarters of non-executive directors served only once and served for an average of 71 months. However, the 14% who were lucky enough to pick up a second board seat saw their tenure extended to an average of 116 months. “Each additional seat extends a director’s service by at least two years,” and being made chair was worth an average of an extra four years, Ownership Matters said. But the data also shows that the directors of poorly performing companies were only a little more likely to be removed than those of good performers. “The effect is you would lose one more board member every three years,” Paatsch said. He said this was also often due to directors resigning before a company hit the wall, rather than remaining on the board of a struggling business. “Turnover often increases as a result of people managing their careers – jumping ship when they’re most needed,” he said. Nathan Parkin, the co-founder of fund manager Ethical Partners, said the study proved that a relatively small group of directors controlled many of Australia’s top companies. “It really is an invitation-only club,” he told Guardian Australia. It “mostly invites people who are a known quantity, or who are on other boards and known, and that’s a big part of the recruitment process,” he said. “There should be a wider pool of candidates – and there is a wider pool of candidates who are qualified and available.” He said the small pool of directors had positives, including making it easier for them to share information on good governance practices with each other. But it could also result in a culture where boards did not properly interrogate claims made to them by management, he said. Electing all directors annually was “probably a good practice”, he said. “It doesn’t need to lead to director turnover, necessarily, if everyone’s doing a good job.” However, Simon Mawhinney, the managing director of contrarian investor Allan Gray, said he feared there could be “some perverse outcomes” to annual director elections. “One of the big problems we have is this focus on short-termism,” he said. He said this could be a problem if directors endorsed a necessary investment program that took years to pay off. “You run the risk of coming up for re-election in a year and it looks awful,” he said. He said Ownership Matters’ use of share price to measure underperformance was “a little bit blunt” because it did not take account of factors outside the control of boards and management. “If you’re the CEO of an oil or gas company, then for the past five years you’ve presided over awfulness and there’s nothing you can do about that,” he said. “But if you were to sharpen the pen I don’t think the results would change a lot, and that’s concerning. “If people like me held these directors more accountable for capital allocation errors and sought blood when errors were made, that would increase rigour. But instead none of that happens, there’s no accountability.” Louise Davidson, the CEO of the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, which advises super funds on governance issues, said the research showed progress on gender diversity – but “also suggests that there is a real risk of it plateauing unless the director pool continues to grow and becomes more diverse”. “Introducing new voices to the director pool will only strengthen good governance in Australian companies and in turn deliver stronger shareholder returns,” she said. She said ACSI supported annual director elections because they improved accountability. Nicola Wakefield Evans, a non-executive director of Lendlease and Macquarie Group who is the Australian lead for the 30% Club, a group that campaigns for more women on boards, said the increase in representation revealed by the report was “really pleasing”. “Obviously one thing people are interested in is, are we starting to see the clubbiness for women? And I don’t think we are.” She said women were still missing out on board positions because they lacked executive experience companies often look for. “So we do need to focus on that area.” Wakefield Evans said she was “agnostic” on whether boards should face re-election every year. “My own view is that they will come.” She said it meant angry shareholders would be better able to target the directors they blamed for a company’s predicament. Currently “shareholders want to send a message but they ping the wrong directors”, she said. “The only downside is that you then run the risk of losing the whole board, which is a huge amount of corporate memory.”
4||Independent MP to bring bill for federal anti-corruption body as pressure mounts on CoalitionThe Morrison government is expected to come under pressure over its delay in progressing a national anti-corruption commission this week, with an independent MP introducing her own bill and Labor likely to intensify its question time attack. Declaring the government’s pandemic-related excuse “does not cut the mustard at all”, the prominent independent MP Helen Haines told Guardian Australia: “There’s nothing so delicious as a scandal and boy, we’ve had a feast haven’t we?” Haines, the member for the Victorian seat of Indi, will introduce her bill to parliament on Monday morning and is urging the government to allocate time for debate in the near future. Her proposed body, called the Australian federal integrity commission, would allow public hearings when in the public interest and allow any member of the public to make referrals. She said the public understood there were “obvious and serious issues” for an integrity commission to confront, and Covid-19 had not stood in the way of other issues being pushed through parliament. “We have debated and passed numerous bills throughout the pandemic, some rather light bills which are changing the names of departments, right through to more complicated and tricky issues like mobile phones in detention centres, for example – I’m not sure why that had to get rushed into the parliament,” Haines said. “We’ve had the EPBC bill which is highly contentious and was not properly debated at all. That excuse – and I think it is an excuse – it doesn’t hold water at all.” Work on the Coalition’s proposal began in 2018, and officials from the attorney general’s department confirmed last week that the attorney general, Christian Porter, received a draft bill to establish the body in December 2019 – before the pandemic began. The fact the 300-page draft legislation was ready last summer was first revealed by Guardian Australia in January, when Porter said he was waiting “rather than starting the consultation process during the holiday period, which is not an ideal time to start a process of public scrutiny”. Confronted about the further delays during question time last week, Scott Morrison said the government’s watchdog proposal required complex consultation, and the prime minister did not want “one public servant diverted” from managing the public health crisis. But in a clear warning to the government about the public appetite for strong action, Haines said she had even heard feedback from community members sheltered in bushfire evacuation centres last summer – “so incredible is the public’s desire to fix this canker, essentially”. “We’d be talking primarily about the bushfires and about their circumstances, once we’d talked about that and I just sat quietly with people, they would raise it even then. They would say, ‘Helen, you know, it’s important work that needs to be done, we need a federal integrity commission’.” Haines’ bill is expected to be seconded by the independent member for Warringah, Zali Steggall. Haines will also introduce a bill to bring in a code of conduct for parliamentarians. Private members’ bills are rarely debated or voted on in the lower house, given the government has a majority. But Haines has used social media to try to drum up support for a full parliamentary debate on her bill on 3 December. Using the hashtag, #BringOnDebate, Haines has urged members of the public to contact their local MPs “to ensure the government doesn’t shut down debate on this bill”. She has not ruled out seeking to suspend standing orders to bring it on for debate if the government does not accommodate her request – although the numbers may not be there for such a move. Labor’s position is to support a powerful and independent integrity commission. While it does not yet have a formal position on the model advanced by Haines, it is likely to strongly support bringing on debate. Labor is also expected to target the government over the matter during parliamentary question time throughout the course of this week. Signalling his interest in pursuing the issue, the manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, said the government’s failure to produce its own bill reflected “a deliberate decision from Mr Morrison to try to go on a go-slow when it comes to dealing with corruption”. Burke said he did not think anyone could accept government’s claim about the pandemic being a reason for the delay, given that it was already drafted before the Covid-19 crisis began. “All they have to do is print it off on their own computer, walk into the parliament, and table it and the public conversation can start,” he told Sky News on Sunday. Last week in parliament Labor pursued the government over the $30m acquisition of land at Leppington Triangle that was worth $3m – something that is being investigated by the Australian federal police and the infrastructure department. It also chased the government over any lobbying from the former NSW MP Daryl Maguire. On Thursday revelations of Australia Post’s spending on four luxury Cartier watches as reward for senior managers in late 2018 led Morrison to demand the chief executive, Christine Holgate, stand aside pending an investigation. The following day, the chair of the corporate regulator, James Shipton, stood aside pending an investigation into high spending on tax advice. Morrison has left the door open to a broader review of spending by commonwealth entities but has argued his swift action in relation to Australia Post would have sent a clear message to all executives and board members of government agencies. “I think they got it with a rocket,” Morrison said on Friday.
5||As South Australia now knows, local jobs must be a priority in the clean energy transitionFuture historians will no doubt remember 2020 as the year of Covid-19. But according to veteran climate campaigner Bill McKibben, they may also view it as a turning point, the year the world moved decisively towards “the transition everyone knew we needed to make”. McKibben told the recent Global Smart Energy Summit 2020 has been a year of “extraordinary convergence”, from the images of Australia’s bushfires, seen around the world on New Year’s Day – “like something out of Hieronymus Bosch” – to unprecedented developments such as China’s commitment to achieve net zero emissions by 2060, the EU’s pledge to make its Green Deal and Є100bn Just Transition Fund the centrepiece of post-Covid recovery, and the US $15tn divested from fossil fuels. Closer to home, there’s extraordinary convergence between business and state governments on the need to speed up Australia’s energy transition. Tim Reed, president of the Business Council of Australia, wants a “national, bipartisan commitment to net zero emissions by 2050”. Most states have already made this commitment, and South Australia is leading the pack. The state’s energy and mining minister, Dan van Holst Pellekaan, says SA will aim for 100% net renewable generation by 2030. Rapidly expanding wind, solar and battery storage capacity in SA’s Upper Spencer Gulf region will play a key role in achieving that aim. But energy transitions are not just about panels, turbines and targets. They’re processes of social as well as technological change. The people of Port Augusta, Whyalla and Port Pirie know all about this. The Upper Spencer Gulf has become a social laboratory for Australia’s energy transition. The gulf once known as the Iron Triangle was a manufacturing powerhouse. Whyalla had the steelworks, Port Pirie the lead smelter and Port Augusta the coal-fired power plants which drove them. But in 2015, Alinta Energy announced it was closing the power plants and the Leigh Creek coalmine. Less than 12 months later, all three had shut. The closure wasn’t completely unexpected. Local Liz Zyler says she knew the end was coming when her husband, Kym, an electrician who worked at the mine, told her they weren’t buying any more dynamite. “I just realised: coal was finished. They were going to close”. Like many local people, Liz was angry that Alinta promised the plants wouldn’t close before 2030, and then pulled the plug without warning. “They pulled that Band-Aid off real quick” says Liz. For a while, she became severely depressed, and recalls fighting with Kym nearly every day. “Our kids were still at school, and I’d just turned 50”, says Kym. “That’s not a very employable age”. Many of Kym’s older colleagues took a payout. But he and Liz decided the money wasn’t enough. In the end, he got a government job in Adelaide. He still works as an electrician, but only returns to Port Augusta on weekends. Liz had seen the writing on the wall years before. “I started to realise gas, oil and coal were on the way out, and we were going to be stuck with a stranded asset”. In 2012, she joined Repower Port Augusta, a grassroots initiative set up by local people to plan for a future after coal. The push for renewables came from the community. “We had a vote on whether we wanted a gas-fired power station or solar thermal. 4,000 people voted for solar, a quarter of the population of Port Augusta, and that was huge.” Repower Port Augusta won the backing of then Labor premier, Jay Weatherill, and electricians union the CEPU. According to Ben Jewell, CEPU SA branch organiser, renewables were seen as “the next big thing that was going to return the jobs that Leigh Creek and the power station had lost”. But Repower Port Augusta’s bold vision was dealt a body blow in 2019. The planned 150 MW solar thermal plant was scrapped. Despite a $110m federal government loan, Solar Reserve, the company behind the project, announced it could not raise enough bank finance. Other projects have gone ahead – such as the Bungala Solar Farm, on land owned by the Bungala Aboriginal Corporation. The project promised to create 350 jobs during construction but, according to Ben Jewell, few of those went to locals. “We went out there and there were 150 guys employed and 140 of them were backpackers” says Jewell. “This should have been an opportunity for Port Augusta to build their skill base, give the locals transferable skills because it was going to be a renewable energy hub. But that just didn’t happen”. Bungala is just one example of a broad trend our research has identified across renewable energy projects in regional Victoria and NSW: most jobs come in the construction phase, and don’t always go to local workers. Liz says regions and state governments “need to think smarter about the next generation”. With more pre-planning, she and Kim believe Port Augusta’s transition could have been better handled, with more good quality jobs for locals. But despite the problems, there’s no doubt a major transformation is happening in the Upper Spencer Gulf. The 35 turbines of stage 1 of the 126 MW Lincoln Gap windfarm are already operating just outside Port Augusta. Stage 2 (94MW, 24 turbines + 10MW battery storage) is under construction, while the even larger stage 3 is awaiting approval. Other projects, such as the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park, and Energy Connect, an interconnector that will link the gulf to NSW, should begin construction in 2021. These developments foster a sense of pride and purpose, a feeling the gulf is leading a much larger transformation which the whole country will undergo over the coming decades. But the gulf also has valuable lessons for other regions facing transition, such as the Hunter Valley: unless local people see jobs and other benefits for their communities, there’s a danger support will falter, and the legitimacy of Australia’s energy transition will be undermined. • Tom Morton, Climate Justice Research Centre, UTS; research Lisa Lumsden
1||Born for the big stage: how Dustin Martin turned the tide in the AFL grand finalWe always suspected it, but now we know there has never been anyone like him. One Norm Smith medal guarantees a player’s place in the history of the game. Win two of them, and you’re set for life as one of the greats. Win three, and your name is Dustin Martin. If it is true that grand finals do not build character but instead reveal it, then Dusty is the quintessential man for the moment. The Richmond star was born for the big stage. The Tigers have now won three premierships in four seasons, and in each decider Martin was the best player on the park. It is a mind-boggling individual achievement, harder in its essence than winning three Brownlow medals or three Colemans. There is a reason it had never happened before: the perfect storm of aptitude, opportunity and sense of occasion seldom descends on the game. Only three others had previously won two Norm Smith medals – Gary Ayres, Luke Hodge and Andrew McLeod – but now one man stands alone. Parents rarely admit to having a favourite child, but if Martin were to nominate the pick of his three Norm Smiths the smart money would be on the 2020 edition. Against Adelaide in 2017 and Greater Western Sydney last year he was the chief punisher in two spankings; against Geelong on Saturday night he was the difference. Twenty-one possessions (10 contested), four clearances, three tackles and four goals were the sum of his numerical return, but it was his ability to influence the course of the game in key moments that set him apart. Per se, it has been setting him apart for some time now. The highlights reel of the grand final will forever favour Martin’s fourth goal, an astonishing snap late in the fourth term when the game had already been iced. Mere mortals wouldn’t even attempt it; for Martin it is all in a day’s work. “One of the most individually brilliant goals that I’ve ever seen,” teammate Shane Edwards told AFL Media afterwards. “You become a spectator. For about 10 seconds there you’re just thinking, ‘He couldn’t, could he?’, and he does. The occasion, he’s just got a feel for it.” The goal was a wondrous illustration of Martin’s supernatural talents but it was his industry precisely two quarters prior that marked the game’s most pivotal moment. Twenty-one points down deep in the first half, and with Geelong dominating play, Richmond needed something from somewhere. Step forward Martin, who shrugged off Jake Kolodjashnij as if he were an Auskicker before snapping truly for a desperately needed goal. Not only did it cut the margin to 15 points at the long break, but it planted a seed of doubt from which the Cats would never recover. “It was an important goal,” coach Damien Hardwick said. “That’s what great players do. They take their opportunities and they get the job done. That’s why he sits here with his third Norm Smith. The significance of his goals were really important. We looked at the quality of work he’d put in throughout the course of the game, we probably knew his third Norm Smith wasn’t too far away.” And with that third Norm Smith comes the unofficial accolade as the greatest finals footballer in AFL/VFL history. Of course, not all great players get the chance to do what Martin has done. Being exceedingly good is one thing, being in an exceedingly good team is sometimes another. Many a fine footballer has never played in a grand final, let alone three and been the star turn each of them. And that is the lot of the professional. There are no guarantees. If Martin has anything resembling a peer in the modern game, it is Patrick Dangerfield. A Brownlow medalist like Martin, Dangerfield endured 13 seasons and 269 senior games before he got to play in a grand final. The Gabba decider could well be his last. But the reality is nobody really comes close to Martin. Not now. Not as a three-time premiership winner and triple Norm Smith medalist to go with his countless other baubles. Turning 30 in 2021, it is hard to know what else he will achieve. It is debateable he will win another Brownlow but one could argue he is a better player now than in his younger days when his output was measured by disposals. Importantly, his body and mind look to be operating in peak condition. Age, however, does weary them eventually. It was fitting that Martin should be in opposition when the curtains were drawn on Gary Ablett’s career. The comparisons – and the parallels – between the two are stark. Ablett departs the game as one of its finest products, alongside Martin the best of a generation. But one can only wonder – and wonder if Ablett wonders – what might have been had he stayed at Geelong instead of followed the money trail to Gold Coast in his prime. As a one-club man at the fulcrum of his team’s ascent from middling to magnificent, Martin will never have cause to wonder what might have been, whether his God-given talents could have better contributed to individual and team success. To the man himself, the latter is the one that counts. “There’s no way I would have been able to do it without my teammates,” Martin said of his third Norm Smith. “We’re an unbelievable team. It’s not a one-man team, we all do our part. We’re humble and we’re hungry. Success is awesome.” No, Dusty, you are awesome. The pleasure is all ours.
0||Southampton v Everton: Premier League – as it happenedSo there we go. Thanks all for your company and comments – sorry I couldn’t use them all – and enjoy the rest of the weekend. Ta-ra. And here’s our match report. Sad news: Kevin McCarra has died. Here’s our tribute to a football-writing pioneer. Back to the red, here’s Gary Naylor: “I’m an Everton fan and it’s textbook. “Any player who lunges at an opponent in challenging for the ball from the front, from the side or from behind using one or both legs, with excessive force or endangers the safety of an opponent is guilty of serious foul play.” I’m not sure we can call it a lunge; it looked to me like he trod on him in the course of running in the usual manner. Elsewhere, Newcastle seem to have picked six wingers for their trip to Wolves. I’m buzzing to see how they make that boring. “How many times does Digne try to bring someone down without trying to play the ball before it becomes deliberate?” asks Stephen Henderson. Yes, a fair question. But the first attempt is a booking, so maybe two yellows and a one-match ban is the correct outcome here. Fun and games from elsewhere... OK, we’ve just see it again, and I’m actually leaning towards the two Robbies in terms of intent – he probably didn’t do it on purpose – but the law doesn’t require it to be. If it’s strict liability, then it’s a red I guess, but it shouldn’t be. “Robbie is on NBC giving the ‘his hands were in the air’ defence, it’s a yellow card. Rubbish. I am a Everton fan but you are responsible for your studs.” Hands in the air is as close as football gets to a smoking gun. I guess we’ll see it again in a minute. Ward-Prowse says his team didn’t like the idea of a team coming to play them unbeaten, and said that if they can get to the ball first, they’re well organised and have the firepower to score goals. He’s also pleased with his goal – and knows he needs to score more, as the manager is demanding of him – but thinks they should’ve won by more. “Sashes - hope I’m not too late,” says James Bolle. “I’m biased but it’s not been bettered.” Imagine telling Malcolm Shotton he had to go to work in that! “Digne red,” says Arran Ridley. “Digne means worthy in French.” Affaire classée, Lieutenant Columbo. Big picture: Southampton vault up to fifth, three points off the lead; Everton stay top. “Fitting, perhaps, that Everton are decked out in seafoam as they wave goodbye to their unbeaten run,” emails Grant Tennille. Also, since when was foam green? Southampton were excellent, Everton abject. 90+5 min “Six points separate the top fifteen teams,” says Bill Hargreaves, “some of which have a game in hand. The bottom five have had it, in terms of title aspirations. Probably.” It’s great, isn’t it? Before the season, I’d have backed Man City, but having watched them a few times I’m beginning to wonder if this side is finished, and whether Guardiola has the ability or desire to rebuild. So I’d back Liverpool. 90+4 min Alan Smith gives Redmond the man of the match award, which is fair enough, but I’d probably have gone for Ings. 90+2 min Calvert-Lewin leaves a boot in on Vestergaard and is booked. He’s had better days. 90+1 min “Not quite a sash,” says Justin Kavanagh, “but let’s mention the finest Manchester United second strip of all, this three-striped wonder from the 1977 Charity Shield. That game was shown last night on Irish TV and, fool that I am, I watched it through, not remembering that it was a 0-0 draw. Better than their 0-0 draw earlier in the day, mind. There’s a full lockdown in Ireland, in my defence.” Oh my days, that is inspired scheduling! 90 min There’ll be five additional minutes. 90 min “I watched the replay five times,” returns Mike MacKenzie. “It was a deserved red as Digne’s studs raked Water-Peters achilles area (and it was of course from behind). NBC commentators are useless.” That was certainly my reading of it. 89 min Another change for Southamton, Dan N’Lundulu making his Premier League debut by replacing Che Adams. 87 min “I’d certainly agree that the Saints have been good overall last season and this one so far,” says Mike MacKenzie. “But I think it shows the main problem with the PL which is unequal distribution of revenue among teams. A team like Southampton (or Wolves in recent years) can become quite decent but it reaches a plateau. Getting better means buying more expensive players which they can’t afford and then the rich teams come calling for their top players. Better revenue sharing is essential to make the league competitive in the long run.” Yes, I agree with all of that, bar the use of Wolves as an example. It’s tricky, as I don’t believe in making players play anywhere they dom’t want to because their labour belongs to them. The single aspect that’d make the most difference, though, probably isn’t even a financial one, but just reducing the number of subs allowed. 86 min Southampton replace Armstrong, who’s put in a monstrous shift considering, with Diallo. Why we need a stadium announcer to tell us this, I’m not entirely certain. 85 min In fairness to Everton, assuming they lose this, they’ll still be top of the league at full-time. 84 min Lovely from Romeu, lifting insouciantly over the Everton defence, Schuster-style, for the scurrying Ward-Prowse, but he can’t quite catch up with it. 83 min This has been an absolutely comprehensive doing. 81 min “NBC commentator insists Digne red not called for,” tweets Ron Stack, “says a ‘more football-trained eye’ would see it differently.” I don’t know – I’d need to see it again, because doing MBMs, you spend as much time watching fingers and console as the actual game, but it looked bang to rights on first half-glance. I’m not sure who gave that opinion, but I’ve been watching football for 38 years; how many are necessary to be deemed “football-trained”? I daresay the officials have a few years in them too. 80 min Everton finally get Calvert-Lewin on the ball in the box, but he’s double-teamed ad easily unloaded. 78 min Southampton fancy more here and win a corner down the right which Betrand swings in towards the far post, where Vestergaard, 9”4 tall, has somehow got himself in a battle with Gordon, 3”5 tall. But he can only head over the bar. 77 min “Sashed kits,” emails Ed Thorpe. “Can we have a shout-out for this lovely effort from Dulwich Hamlet Women, which is so nice the men sometimes borrow it as a third kit?” A bit Party Rings, but very smart nevertheless. 76 min Calvert-Lewin has barely had a kick, and tearing down the left, he’s easily thwarted by Bednarek. 75 min Digne will miss the away games with Newcastle and Fulham, which sandwich the home game with Manchester United. With Richarlison also absent for the first two of those and Coleman out injured, they’ve got a problem. 73 min Digne insists he didn’t mean it and hoofs something on his way down the tunnel; if only there was some course of dealing to give us an insight into his intention. Dearie me, what a misplacing of noggin that is! Walker-Peters runs away from Digne, who has a hack, misses, raises arms which makes all the difference, then administers a stamp to the achilles. See you in three games mate; absolute later. 71 min “It would be helpful for the neutral if Southampton could decide if they’re going to be woeful or decent,” says Stephen Carr, “as I’m struggling to keep up.” They’ve been good for quite sometime, I’d say, and they’ve been very good tonight. 70 min Bern “bites yer legs” Ard accidentally clatters Walker-Peters, who comes through on his blind side. He’s down briefly, but we’re quickly on with the game. 69 min Everton are pressing now, but still struggling to create. A clincher looks more likely than a livener. 67 min This is it. 65 min I’ve just discovered the Clive Allen played for seven London clubs, if we count his not playing for Arsenal. Can anyone beat that? I also recall the absolutely lush kit he wore for Bordeaux, complete with long shorts. This isn’t quite it, but is also nice. 64 min In a game almost entirely devoid of reducers, it takes the smallest man on the pitch to administer one, Bernard clattering Romeu. He’s booked, and would be well advised to watch his step from here on in. 63 min Looking again, Ings might’ve been marginally ahead of play. He must’ve left it for the man coming in. 62 min What?! Redmond collects a loose ball after useful foraging by Adams, slipping outside him to Armstrong; his cross is a doozy, but somehow Ings manages to avoid tapping it home! Not a clue. 61 min I saw Gordon play for Everton in the League Cup game against Salford. He looked a serious talent, and my guess is he’ll play in behind Calvert-Lewin. 59 min “No discussion on sash kits would be complete without mentioning Crystal Palace. Here’s a mid-80s beauty.” The one I found was earlier than that, but it’s the same idea. I assume the photo was taken after Allen signed for Palace from Arsenal, who he’d joined for £1.25m only to leave without playing a game, in a swap deal for Kenny Sansom. 58 min Ancelotti goes again, bringing on the extremely exciting Anthony Gordon for Doucoure, and also sending on Delph for Sigurdsson. 57 min Digne crosses and Walker-Peters has both hands above his head, giving Everton a free-kick just outside the box, left-hand side. Sigurdsson decides to swing it out, but can’t avoid the first man. 56 min Whatever Ancelotti said at half-time, it hasn’t worked. Problem being, he’s not replete with options that might solve it. Two strikers would at least change things though. 54 min But look at this work of art from Southampton, as referenced earlier. 52 min Godfrey chases Bertrnad into the box and Bertrand falls, but there’s not enough contact for either ref or VAR to award a penalty. 51 min “I HATE it when team turn out in totally unnecessary alternative strips,” emails Simon Gill. “Example 1: Everton today. Seafoam green and charcoal indeed. What would the likes of Shanks or Cloughie have had to say about that? Example 2: Wolves at Leeds the other day. The old gold and black is iconic; turning out in something like the castoffs from a Portugal training strip is not. Even if that is meant to be somehow referential, it still sucks.” Tangentially, I used to like my team playing away to Southampton because we got to see the blue third kit RIP, of which I’m struggling to find a snap. 50 min On which point, Ralph Hasenhuttl very clearly knows some things. If I was a rich club contemplating a change of manager, he’d be near the top of my list, with Marco Rose and Julian Nagelsmann. 49 min So far, the second half looks a lot like the first. This match-is not suiting Everton. 47 min “I’m not against sashes on kits,” says Chris Fowler, “and I like Rayo Vallecano’s model. But, although I know that in the early days Saints kit had a sash, I always prefer their kit, at least, to be red and white stripes. Like the good old days (the 1970s, when I first went to the Dell, for example), when the same strip was used season after season, The stripes didn’t have to be necessarily all the same, mind you, and I really liked the kit when Keegan played for us at the beginning of the 1980s, with its wide 2 red and 1 white stripes with a black pinstripe between them. The two shades of blue away kit was a cracker, too.” Yes, agreed on all counts. I remember a blue away kit a little later too, George Lawrence era, maybe worn in the 1986 cup semi against Liverpool. Ah, here we go. 46 min Immediately, Southampton get the ball into Adams, who holds up then swivels and shoots straight at Pickford. 46 min We go again. Everton send Bernard on for Iwobi, but I’m not certain what that’s going to achieve – the problem seemed to be one of shape rather than personnel. “Being at the top of the table this far into the season has been a dream,” says Mary Waltz. “Well it is quite obvious from this first half that it is still 2020, Trump is still President, and I am no longer dreaming and I am wide awake. My boys look like they have been reading their clippings and have been played off the field.” Half-time entertainment: Southampton have been excellent, while Everton have been poor. I doubt things’ll proceed quite like that, so the second half should be decent. 45+1 min Godfrey, who’s had a stressful baptism, finds himself in space down the right and considers a cross, which ends up flying behind. Whoops. 45 min There’ll be one additional minute. 44 min There’s not much rhythm to Everton’s play. I’m sure being without Richarlison is bothering them, but they’re also missing the width they get from Coleman down the right, and I wonder if changing to a diamond or a 4-4-2 would help them get into the game. Or maybe they might just play better. 43 min James finds Doucoure, and the ball ends up with Iwobi, but Ings is back by his own box to tackle. What a very very good player he is – you could tell when he was at Burnley in that first season they came back up, a one-man forward line and doing brilliantly in the bigger games. It didn’t work out at Liverpool, but right now he’d be a really good alternative to Firmino. 40 min Here come Southampton again, and Adams looks offside, but the flag stays down because this is now the procedure. Armstrong then drills home what looks like number three, but the flag is then raised. Southampton look dangerous every time they go forward, and though Everton look good for at least one, they’re struggling to create and still look likelier to concede. 37 min “It’s one of the better kits of the 2020 PL lot,” says Mike Hollitscher. “You take the River Plate/Rayo Vallecano sash and reverse the colours. I don’t get why some don’t seem to like it. Is it too Johnny Foreigner?” I doubt it – the whole culture is influenced by fashion from elsewhere. I can only speak for myself, and say that on its own, it’s not bad even if it looks like they’re in a beauty pageant, but it’s not what I’d expect from a Southampton kit. And this Everton one, modelled by the HILARIOUS John Bailey, what a CHARACTER is also a jazzer. Danny Ings, the creator supreme! This time, he turns up on the left, bustling away from poor Godfrey and slapping over a low cross that falls nicely for Adams. He takes a touch, ponders the ultimate futility of existence, as the 35 defenders inside the box run about in circles, then cracks a low one past Pickford with the help of a slight deflection. I’m not sure that was in the corner. 33 min “Jumping in on the kit chat,” says Barry Brian, “there are some disastrous kits this year (Chelsea’s blue and pink, Man United’s black and white, Inter home), but this Everton number certainly isn’t one of them. As for Southampton, I love a sash but fear we are in danger of overuse in recent years.” I quite like the United one, though it reeks of people with attention-seeking facial hair and glasses – yes, I realise that these days, that narrows things down to about 42 percent of the world’s population – doing themselves mischiefs trying to design something “iconic”. As for this Everton one, it’s a nice colour, but very toothpaste. 31 min “It looks like whoever designed the kit has been watching the Canadian Premier League, says Kevin Smith, attaching a picture of Calgary’s Cavalry FC. 29 min Both sides are playing well, but Southampton have looked the incisive to this point, and ought really to have scored sooner. Everton need to get James on the ball and give Calvert-Lewin some decent service, or failing that, some service. Twenty-four seconds later, poor Pickford is picking a pot of pickled peppers the ball out of his net, and what lovely reason he was given. Ward-Prowse finds Ings, who feeds him back in with a megs pass, and a deft first touch puts him in prime position to absolutely shmice a fine finish into the far bottom corner! 26 min Nice from Southampton, Redmond again on the ball and sliding back and across for Romeu, tanking onto it ... and he absolutely lamps it, a little flick off Keane forcing Pickford into a plunging save! 25 min “Everton’s kit is officially ‘seafoam green and charcoal’, by the way,” emails Andrew Goudie. That reminds me of the salmon and pink classic. 23 min Ings sticks one out wide to Bertrand, and another low cross finds Armstrong, but he’s kind of side-on to it so that when the ball arrives at speed he can’t quite resolve the conundrum of his feet, tentatively poking at a backheel that gets nowhere. 21 min How do we feel about this Southampton rig? Do they look like contestants in a beauty pageant? 19 min How! Again, Everton switch the ball left, this time to Sigurdsson, and he has a look the larrups a shot which looks to be flying over and plenty ... until it dips mid-swerve and crack the crossbar! 17 min Redmond gets himself at Godfrey again, but this time opts to go inside. The attack continues, the ball comes back to him, and this time he sticks Betrand in behind yerman – he needs help from Doucoure, who I think is the midfielder on that side. This time, though, he escapes when Bertrand’s low cross goes into the side-netting. 16 min ...James gets a decent connection and goes around the wall, but McCarthy waits for him, collecting the ball without needing to move. This is a good game so far. 15 min A foul on Calvert-Lewin gives Everton a free-kick 25 yards out, marginally right of centre. Sigurdsson fancies it, but not a chance James is stepping aside, armband or not... 13 min Everton are finding Iwobi constantly, and this time he comes in off the left and drags a shot towards the near post which is deflected just wide. The corner comes to nowt. 12 min Lovely from Southampton, Ings finding Redmond, who runs away from Godfrey – there it is! – then cuts back for Adams, arriving onto it just as you’d like. But he doesn’t make the connection he’s after, bumbling a shot that skips just wide. 11 min Godfrey misplaces a pass and Adams snaffles the loose ball, running away from Allan, but though Ings is moving for him he’s forced backwards and Southampton must build again. 10 min Everton are pushing. 8 min “I was there!” says Richard Adams of the Plymouth-Watford game. “And yes I can confirm that Reilly is hated in Plymouth for scoring against us. Pic: Umbrella Vi. Stood on the halfway line of the Lyndhurst End every home game for decades.” Can an end have a halfway line? But yes, I love this stuff – my mate’s nan is Man City’s longest-serving season-ticket holder. Here she is. 6 min “The Lomana Lua Lua incident actually led to the introduction of the exclusion rule barring on-loanees from playing against the parent club, as this Guardian article so eloquently explains,” emails Clive Naylor. It’s one of those that seems counter-intuitive. Of course they should play, but not allowing it guards against skulduggery. 5 min Nice from Everton, Allan spinning and laying back to Keane, who unleashes a gorgeous, er, “diag” to Iwobi. It’s about a yard too long. 4 min “A year to the day since this,” says Andrew Goudie, although that’s nothing compared to Ajax’s tonking yesterday of VVV Venlo (surely the only team with four consecutive Vs in their name).” Just when I thought we’d managed not to raise it. That will haunt all involved forever. 3 min It comes to nowt. 2 min Southampton win a free-kick out on the left, ideal for Ward-Prowse to swing in, and Calvert-Lewin is up first, but a shout from Keane allows him to escape at cost of a corner. 1 min I feel like Allan is the new Belgium, a player everyone knows and accepts is good, but is discussed like some sort of secret whose contributions are noticeable only to the highly enlightened. 1 min Off we go! The players take a knee. Let’s support them by donating, educating others and educating ourselves. The players are out! “I was on the North Bank when Inchy Heath scored that goal,” says Gary Naylor. “It’s hard to put into words how much the FA Cup meant back then, and the feeling of going to Wembley after being at Elland Road in 1980 watching Frank Lampard run round the corner flag. Happiest of days.” Yup, I remember. My parents went to the 1983 reply without me (I was deemed too young, aged four) and I’ve never quite forgiven them. And my team winning it the following year remains an extremely special memory. “Manchester United, playing with great pluck and intelligence, this player Hughes coming into it more and more...” On which point, did we have way better commentators then, whose lines we recall like that, or are we just old with too much football on to allow us to remember any of it? Oh yes! This from the game in question. Goodness me! Here’s Mac Millings with further details: “In the other semi-final of the ‘84 FA Cup, the mighty Watford FC defeated Plymouth Argyle by the odd goal. Perhaps the most notable footnote to that game was the reaction of one Plymouth fan to Watford’s goalscorer, George Reilly. Key line: ‘The attacker chewed off one of Reilly’s ears and whispered ‘Plymouth’ into the other one.’” I remember the game, but I did not know that. Ralph tells Sky that it’s been a “very intense time with lots of ups and downs,” and recently, performances have stabilised. The team, aren’t as far in development as they think they can be and still have things to improve, but they like to learn and have a good chance to win every game. Today, he thinks, is a good test against a strong side, and though the table doesn’t tell you everything after five games, it’s not a coincidence that they’re top. “Not sure about the Pennant one,” says Adam Griffiths, “but Lomana Lua Lua scored a last kick of the game equaliser for Portsmouth against Newcastle in 2004, while on loan from Newcastle. For reasons that are unclear, Newcastle hadn’t insisted on a ‘you can’t play against us’ clause. And yes, he did the full celebration.” Lovely stuff. Email! “As a neutral Mancunian (who only got Sky recently after hearing Murdoch had left) I’m really looking forward to this. Everton turned a corner this season and Southampton did last season. Both seem to want to control the game rather than sitting back defending.” Yes, I really like both of these too, and think we’ll see a decent game. One of the reasons the league table is as it is is because of corona, one way and another, but another reason is that almost every club has serious players who can hurt you. Which I guess brings us back to Sky. What Southampton need to beware is Everton’s attackers darting between the lines of what can be quite a rigid formation, and losing the numbers game in midfield. My guess is that they’ll have made specific plans for dealing with James. So what’s going to happen in this game? If I was Ralph Hasenhuttl (for avoidance of doubt, I’m not), I’d be looking to get Redmond running at Godfrey wherever possible, but as early as possible too – as in-form him is not something to face at the best of times, never mind out of position, on debut. Everton, meanwhile, need to beware the press that might stop the playing out, and in Romeu, Allan will find someone who delights in all the same things as him. Yet somehow I don’t think they’ll be friends. Kieron Dyer then spoke really movingly about those men as his pioneers, leading into a discussion about the dearth of black managers. The lack of Rooney rule, and the lack of desire on the part of the Premier League to institute such a thing, tells us how much we still have to do. On Sky at the moment, we’re watching a mini-doc on black players in the Premier League years, with Andy Cole, Paul Ince, John Barnes and Troy Townsend. Check it out, it’s really good. All black lives matter, people. These teams met in the 1984 FA Cup semi-final, at Highbury. Which ended in the traditional style. Ancelotti tells Sky that James didn’t train much in the week, but has recovered from his knock. He also says that replacing Gomes with Sigurdsson - who captains the side – was a difficult decision, but he’s been training well and is rewarded for his attitude. Meanwhile, Ancelotti is confident in Jordan Pickford, and hopes his team play with ambition; though they’ve started well, they need to keep at it. Everton, meanwhile, make three changes: Ben Godfrey makes his first Premier League start for the club, in for the injured Seamus Coleman; Gylfi Sigurdsson is in for Andre Gomes; and Alex Iwobi deputises for the suspended Richarlison. All of which tells us that James Rodriguez is good to go; good. On which point, I might be misremembering – YouTube is silent on the matter – but didn’t Jermaine Pennant once score the winner for Leeds, when on loan to them from Arsenal? Stuart Armstrong comes straight back for Southampton, following time out with corona; goodness me, if my experience is anything to go by he’ll find that an extremely taxing endeavour. He replaces Theo Walcott, not allowed to play according to the terms of his loan. Southampton (a throwback futuristic 4-4-2): McCarthy; Walker-Peters, Vestergaard, Bednarek, Bertrand; Armstrong, Romeu, Ward-Prowse, Redmond; Adams, Ings. Subs: Forster, Stephens, Long, Tella, Diallo, Vokins, N’Lundulu. Everton (a simple complex 4-3-3): Pickford; Godfrey, Mina, Keane, Digne; Doucoure, Allan, Sigurdsson; Rodriguez, Calvert-Lewin, Iwobi. Subs: Olsen, Delph, Nkounkou, Bernard, Gomes, Gordon, Davies. VAR’s straight man: Kevin Friend The Premier League is absolute state – and for once, in the best possible way. Everton top, and with this game in hand, is one thing. But if Southampton win today, they move from 13 to fifth, which is to say that this is a whole new ball game. I’m sure there’s a cheap gag to be made here, about Goodison and the world’s most perpetually indignant crowd, but anyway: Everton have very quickly become very good, and the way they’ve gone about it is telling. Carlo Ancelotti is a very particular kind of manager, who tends to inherit very good but very unhappy players, fortifying them with very good vibes and very minimalist tactics. And that lookslike what he’s done at Everton, finding the right few words for Dominic Calvert-Lewin – “one-touch finishes like Inzaghi” – then giving him, and Richarlison, all the scope that they need to show all that they have. First, he provided them with a happy working environment, then he contracted Abdoulaye Doucouré and Allan to build them a platform, and finally he asked James Rodríguez to decorate it. It’s extremely simple, but it’s also extremely difficult, because if it wasn’t, everyone would do it. Southampton are slightly different. Like playing for Ancelotti, playing for Ralph Hasenhüttl looks a lot of fun, but with a lot more drilling - pressing triggers, half-spaces, and all that jazz. In the end, though, it works partly because his team run their arses off for him and partly because they have a pair of big, burly, classy centre-forwards, marking whom sounds like the absolute worst way to spend a Sunday lunch. This should be really good. Kick-off: 2pm GMT, 3pm BST
0||Southampton's bright start ensures first defeat for lacklustre 10-man EvertonA year on from the infamous 9-0 home shellacking by Leicester, this was stirring evidence of Southampton’s impressive transformation under Ralph Hasenhüttl, whose side ended Everton’s unbeaten start to the season as fine goals by James Ward‑Prowse and Che Adams brought Carlo Ancelotti’s side back down to earth with a bump. Everton were insipid from the moment they fell behind and Lucas Digne’s red card for appearing to rake his studs down Kyle Walker-Peters’ achilles with around 20 minutes to play compounded a frustrating trip south. For the Saints, this was the closest thing to a complete performance. With 39 minutes played, Stuart Armstrong, the beneficiary of Adams’s endeavour and awareness, thought he had added a third. At that point Ancelotti removed his hands from the pockets of his royal blue trench coat and made his feelings known, berating Jordan Pickford for failing to hoover up the initial pass downfield to Adams, always a willing runner. Pickford argued there was no such problem and, as it happened, the assistant referee flagged for offside and the goal was disallowed, but it was an episode symbolic of the kind of chaos that ensued as Southampton carved Everton open. Ancelotti revealed James Rodríguez had barely trained this week after sustaining a knock against Liverpool last weekend and, while he conceded the Colombian was undercooked, that was the least of the manager’s concerns. Everton were two goals down inside 35 minutes, with Ward-Prowse arrowing in across Pickford after a neat give-and-go with Danny Ings. Ward‑Prowse hooked the ball over Allan before Ings slipped in the midfielder, who finished emphatically. Adams, who has often slogged without reward, doubled the advantage just eight minutes later. Ings again turned provider, scooting away from Ben Godfrey and Yerry Mina before hanging a cross towards the back post, where Ward‑Prowse was waiting unmarked. But Adams, too, was lurking and, with the Everton defence having gone walkabout, he smashed in via a Gylfi Sigurdsson deflection. Given Everton have never won a Premier League game when trailing by two or more goals at half-time, it is fair to say Ancelotti had work to do. He tweaked personnel at the interval, introducing Bernard in place of Alex Iwobi, one of three substitutes from the Merseyside derby promoted to the starting lineup, but little changed. They sorely missed the suspended Richarlison – they are yet to win a Premier League game without the Brazilian since he signed two years ago – and the isolated Dominic Calvert-Lewin cut an aloof figure aside from an initial spurt, but it was the absence of Séamus Coleman, who was forced off against Liverpool, that told most dearly. Godfrey again deputised at right-back but the £25m signing from Norwich never looked comfortable. Twenty-eight seconds into the second half Everton were fortunate not to trail by a bigger margin after Adams comfortably eluded Godfrey inside the channel but the striker dawdled before getting a tame shot away. At least Godfrey tried to atone for his errors, racing back to regain possession after losing the ball upfield early in the second half. The body language of Digne and Sigurdsson, who had the captain’s armband until being withdrawn on the hour, was not so reassuring. Everton were lethargic and lukewarm at best. Sigurdsson came close to opening the scoring after a swerving shot from distance skidded off the top of the Southampton crossbar, cutting inside after collecting a Rodríguez pass, bringing a chorus of gasps from the Everton dignitaries and substitutes scattered across the stand. Everton’s appetite appeared to wane but Southampton were relentless and strode forward with the tempo the animated Hasenhüttl conducts on the touchline. He bounced around the technical area to roar his players on, yelping in disbelief as Armstrong’s cross somehow eluded Ings in the six-yard box. Southampton were supercharged, but not by any ghosts of that Leicester game. “It’s not interesting for us,” Hasenhüttl said. “We are so concentrated on what we have to improve all this time; we don’t have time to speak about anniversaries. The way the guys managed this was game outstanding.” It was a similar story in the first half, when Nathan Redmond dragged wide after meeting a cross by Ryan Bertrand, again overlooked by the England manager, Gareth Southgate, this month. Moments later, a Bertrand cross pinballed around the Everton penalty area before Michael Keane eventually averted the danger after Walker-Peters recycled possession. But that was just the start of things to come, not that Southampton will be resting on their laurels any time soon. “If you lean back a little bit, you immediately get the bill for it,” said Hasenhüttl. “We have to keep on working and keep on being focused. It seems we have definitely done some big steps forward. ”
6||Ann Ambache obituaryMy friend Ann Ambache, who has died aged 72 of a heart attack, left Northern Ireland in the 1960s for a 40-year teaching career in England. She herself carried on learning new skills all her life, which enabled her to make a move from home economics to teaching information technology to children with special needs. Ann was born in Dungannon, County Tyrone, where her parents, Bridget (nee Hart) and Patrick Campbell, ran a small farm. Ann, eldest of four children, attended Killyman junior school and Dungannon academy. She had to be self-sufficient from an early age and helped her aunt in her shop. After taking her A-levels, Ann trained as a home economics teacher at Mary Ward College in Nottingham (1967-70) and then taught in Warley in the West Midlands. She also worked for several evenings a week in a hostel for older children. There she met Jeremy Ambache, a young social worker. He asked her out and for their first date she took him to a parents’ evening at her school. They married in 1973 and moved to London, where Ann became a supply teacher at Sacred Heart high school in Hammersmith. After a career break to have their daughters, Zoe and Lucy, she returned to Sacred Heart. Ann had a real curiosity and thirst for learning and completed a BEd at the University of Surrey in 1985 while teaching. Policy changes moved home economics into food technology, which inspired Ann to retrain. She gained a certificate in counselling at Westminster Pastoral Foundation in 1991; a BA (Hons) in psychology at the Open University in 1992; a diploma in information technology and education at King’s College London in 1993 and a diploma in education for those with special needs or dyslexia at Kingston University in 1995. With her new skills she developed a rewarding career in special needs education with responsibility for IT, joining Cambridge school in Hammersmith, where she remained until her retirement in 2008. She resisted school politics and management, preferring to stay in the classroom, and was famous among her students for her portrayal of a good and bad interview job candidate – everyone remembers her impression of a scruffy, gum chewing and uninterested teenager. Ann swam and attended the gym daily at Putney leisure centre, near her home in south-west London. She enjoyed London’s cultural opportunities, especially seeing Ibsen or Chekhov plays, and was the secretary of a women’s culture and theatre group in Putney, where she and I first met, for more than 20 years. She had a wicked sense of humour and was highly irreverent; she was a “giver”, especially to her family, looking after her six grandchildren during her 13 years of retirement. She was a wonderful cook and loved to grow and pick fruit and vegetables. Ann is survived by Jeremy, Zoe and Lucy, and her grandchildren, Eva, Ella, Una, Rory, Zander and Stella, and by her brothers, John and Francis, and sister, Kathleen.
5||In the restaurant where I work, Covid has brought out the worst in customersWaitressing can be a difficult job at the best of times. The hours are long, the work is exhaustingly physical and the customers have a tendency to take out on you whatever frustrations have been building in them all week. I fondly remember one weekend brunch shift when a woman berated me because we only had white sugar for her coffee, not brown; she insisted that this was a breach of “etiquette”. She was definitely not sweet enough. I took the job last summer as a way to make ends meet while I started a new life in Manchester after moving from London. It wasn’t exactly what I’d trained for in drama school, but it paid the bills and I love being around people. I took the good customers with the bad, and found solace venting with my partner at the end of the day. Then Covid hit. We endured the closure of the restaurant due to lockdown along with the rest of the country, but from July onwards we were lucky enough to be able to set up an ad hoc outdoor space for customers. It was a relief to be able to keep the place open and all we asked of customers was to register with the Covid app, wear a mask when they entered the indoor area and stay seated as we provided table service. Maybe waitressing would even become easier, I thought, as groups were restricted to no more than six. Surely this would be a simple enough bargain to make in order for us all to stay safe while enjoying a return to some semblance of our normal lives? Yet since customers have started to stream back through our doors, I have been faced with a different reality. When I greet them and ask them to scan the test-and-trace app barcode, many will ignore me or say they don’t have their mobile phones with them, only to sit down and put their phones on the table. It’s not just my restaurant that faces this sort of attitude; one of my favourite places to eat in the city was given a two-star review by a customer complaining about being asked to register on the app. Apparently the place was “brim with ridiculous rules and concepts”. Tell that to Boris Johnson, love, not the service staff. As we’ve moved into tier 2 and now tier 3, we have had to be alert to groups of more than one household turning up. Despite the rules, it’s patently obvious that we’re receiving parties of mixed households, unless communal living has really taken off in Manchester. There is only so much we can do: I can’t ask to see their house keys, or quiz them on each other’s preferred breakfast cereal. The rules are unsustainable and shouldn’t be our responsibility. Then there’s making sure people are wearing their masks to keep each other and staff like me safe. You’d think we were taking away people’s right to vote by asking them to pop a piece of cloth over their face while they nip to the toilet. All of this would be bad enough, but to compound issues, management have decided that the maxim “the customer is always right” endures, despite staff going no further than enforcing government regulations. When you eventually get everyone seated, you hope that the hard work is behind you. But then comes the shouting across the room to get your attention, and the eyes boring into your head as you finish up serving another customer. I’ve cried in work more than once because of the way a customer has treated me. In hospitality there’s always that one difficult customer, but nothing could prepare me for life post-lockdown. We all want to get back to normal and it can feel frustrating at times, but this situation has truly brought out the worst in people. If you plan to go out this week, please remember to be polite to your waiting staff: they’re living through exactly the same pandemic as you. The writer is a waitress in Manchester
17||Joan Hocquard, Britain’s oldest person, dies aged 112Britain’s oldest person, Joan Hocquard, who drove ambulances during the second world war, has died aged 112. Hocquard died at her home in Poole, Dorset, on Saturday. Her nephew, Paul Reynolds, 74, said she had always sought to live life to the full and that she “loved eating butter and cream and didn’t believe in dieting”. She was born on 29 March 1908, under the reign of Edward VII, the same day as the world’s former oldest man, Bob Weighton, who died in Hampshire in May. Their final birthday celebrations were held behind closed doors because of the national coronavirus lockdown. The pair also shared a birthday with Alf Smith from St Madoes in Perthshire, who shared the title of Britain’s oldest man with Weighton until his death in 2019 at the age of 111. Reynolds described Hocquard as an independent spirit who had refused a card from the Queen on her 100th birthday because “she did not want people to know how old she was”. Born in Holland Park, west London, Hocquard spent much of her childhood in Kenya, where her father was a colonial officer in charge of shipping on the Great Lakes in east Africa. She later worked as a cook in a French hotel near Geneva in Switzerland, and met her husband, Gilbert, through their shared love of sailing. During the second world war, she drove ambulances in London before she and Gilbert moved to the south coast of England. The couple travelled across Europe in a camper van and went on yachting holidays until his death in 1981. In the late 1980s she met widower Kenneth Bedford, who was 20 years her junior, at the Bournemouth Gramophone Society and they had lived together since in Poole. She lived “an extraordinary innings and died peacefully in her own home, which is all you could wish for”, said Reynolds. “She was a strong-willed character and loved telling stories about how naughty she was as a schoolgirl.” The oldest living Briton is now Lilian Priest from Swanage in Dorset, who is 111.
3||Party chair insists Republicans will hold Senate after Trump voices doubtAfter Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said he could not and did not want to help some senators, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted the Senate would stay in GOP hands, saying: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” In fact, as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls, senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have sought to put daylight between themselves and Trump. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour. McSally dodged opportunities to express support in a debate. Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on policy. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election but McSally and Cornyn are in tight races. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday, before admitting: “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeating that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” According to FiveThirtyEight.com, while Trump trails Joe Biden by 2.6 points in Arizona, McSally is struggling in her battle with Mark Kelly, a former astronaut now a campaigner for gun control reform. Other Republicans facing tough fights include Cory Gardner in Colorado, David Perdue and Kelly Loeffler in Georgia, Thom Tillis in North Carolina, Lindsey Graham in South Carolina, Susan Collins in Maine and Joni Ernst in Iowa. Most forecasters give Democrats a good chance of retaking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47. Trump insisted again on Sunday that his party could take back the House but that seems unlikely, Democratic control firm enough that Speaker Nancy Pelosi barely created a ripple with her confirmation to CNN’s State of the Union that at the age of 80 she will seek to stay in the role. Corey Lewandowski, a Trump adviser, played down the president’s comments about the House but told NBC’s Meet the Press he had been “out aggressively campaigning for members of the US Senate” and had “asked his surrogates, including me, to go out and help.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” he said. “The Senate is very tough.” He also said: “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in. I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” McDaniel said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Lewandowski said the president had “helped raise money. He’s got a great partnership with Senate leader Mitch McConnell. They’ve raised money together, and we feel very, very strongly that we’re going to retain our majority in the US Senate.” Frustrated by McConnell’s rush to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court, Democrats are considering structural reform to both the court and the Senate. McDaniel said: “Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are not not hiding the fact they want to get rid of the filibuster” – the 60-vote threshold for new legislation – “and they want to fundamentally change the third branch of government [the court]. “This is a tight race, we know this, but the trend lines are good in these states. You’re seeing McSally gain momentum. You also didn’t mention candidates like John James [Michigan] and Jason Lewis [Minnesota], who are in competitive races against Democrat incumbents. “So we’re gonna keep the Senate, we’re working hard to do that.”
0||Kevin McCarra: a pioneer who changed football journalismIt was around about 1990, long before journalists had mobile phones. Kevin McCarra, the former football correspondent of the Guardian who died from Alzheimer’s disease on Saturday aged 62, was travelling from Glasgow to cover a game at Easter Road for Scotland on Sunday when his train got stuck somewhere near Falkirk. Time passed. It became clear Kevin wasn’t going to make kick-off. Still the train didn’t move. He wasn’t going to make half-time, either. Unable to contact his desk but knowing they had a space to fill and needed copy, he composed a piece about being on the train with frustrated fans, filed when he was finally able to disembark and somehow produced something true and insightful, and far more memorable than anything that had been written at the game itself. It was a moment of improvised unorthodoxy typical of Scotland on Sunday at the time. It was a bright, fresh paper, fizzing with imagination in every section. Kevin’s role was vital. In the era of Fever Pitch, fanzines and Italian football on Channel 4, Kevin was one of those who transformed football journalism. Out went the jaded hackery of old, and in came a far more literary sensibility. Kevin had been doing a PhD placing the 15th-century Scottish poet Robert Henryson in his European context when an arts centre where he worked part-time asked him to put on an exhibition about Scottish football. That led to him being commissioned to co-produce A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, published in 1984. He wrote it on an Amstrad PCW using the deeply unintuitive Locoscript. As anybody who sat near him during a game knew, it was the last thing to do with computers he ever really mastered. “Technology is a word we only use when it goes wrong,” he would say; he used it a lot. The contacts made during his research led to further writing opportunities. As disillusionment with academia set in, Kevin became a regular in Scottish Field before being invited to join Scotland on Sunday when it launched in 1988. He also co-founded the Mariscat Press, publishing poetry editions including Edwin Morgan’s 1984 work Sonnets from Scotland. Kevin later worked for the Sunday Times and the Times before succeeding David Lacey as the Guardian’s football correspondent after the 2002 World Cup. It was his dream job. He even took a pay cut to move, although only because he misremembered his salary during negotiations (characteristically – practicalities were never a forte). It was Lacey he most admired and Lacey whose prose his most resembled, crisp and free of cliche, capable of summing up a game with deceptive economy. Looking back at old pieces now what is striking is both his prescience and the unusual cadences of his writing. He was rarely controversial, although there was the incident after a friendly against Spain in 2007 when the England manager Steve McClaren referred to the upcoming Euro 2008 qualifier in Israel as “the real bull”, apparently a laboured bullfighting analogy. Kevin, taking his turn with transcription, was understandably mystified and decided McClaren had said “rainbow”, leading to McClaren being mocked up on the back of the tabloids with George, Zippy and Bungle. With somebody else, it might have created major issues, but McClaren and everybody at the Football Association knew that with Kevin it would have been an honest mishearing, no mischief intended; there was never any malice to either him or his writing. The affection in which he was held became clear during Euro 2016, when he went missing in Avignon. The football community rallied to appeal for help and the following day he was found, confused and dehydrated, by an England fan who had seen his photo on Twitter. Kevin never savaged anybody, remembered always the person behind the mistake he might be describing. Only once did a manager ever really lose his rag with him, and that was, of all people, Tommy Burns, who had been taught by his father. “I can’t believe Joe McCarra’s boy could write those things,” he hissed, pinning Kevin against the wall, before the preposterousness of the situation overcame the pair of them. It was Burns’s No 10 Kevin later had on the back of his Celtic shirt. He co-wrote a book on Celtic’s 1967 European Cup win and there was a sense he never enjoyed anything quite so much: Kevin was a famously terrible footballer – so bad that after he’d reluctantly agreed to make up the numbers for a team at Glasgow university, he was quickly subbed off as his teammates decided they would be better playing with 10 – but he enthusiastically acted out the key moments of that campaign as recreated for him by Jimmy Johnstone in his living room. Some journalists end up covering football because it’s where they are shunted, some do it because it’s a job; Kevin did it because he loved football. That perhaps came through most obviously in his broadcast work. Kevin was one of the original regular guests on Football Weekly and a huge part of its early success. After leaving the Guardian in 2012, Kevin returned to Glasgow and wrote another book, telling the history of Celtic through the biographies of nine key figures. Long after illness struck, he kept going to Parkhead and Partick Thistle. He was, as his friend Philippe Auclair put it, “a gentle fanatic”, obsessed by Celtic but never partisan. He was unashamedly erudite, but also had great warmth. He was a pioneer who changed Scottish football journalism but, most fundamentally, he was a thoroughly nice man.
2||Global report: Spain declares Covid state of emergency as Italians urged to stay homeThe Spanish government has declared a six-month state of emergency and ordered a nationwide curfew, while Italians have been strongly advised to stay at home as both countries impose tough limits on people’s movements in a effort to contain the second wave of the coronavirus. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said his cabinet had approved a state of emergency on Sunday morning that is set to remain in force until 9 May 2021. The decree will allow Spain’s regional governments to order an overnight curfew to run from 11pm to 6am, or to begin and finish and hour earlier or later. The only area of Spain exempt from the curfew is the Canary islands because of what Sánchez termed “the very positive epidemiological situation there”. Spain became the first western European country to record more than 1m Covid infections last week, and Sánchez said on Friday that studies suggested the real number was three times higher. The state of emergency also permits Spain’s regional governments to bring in full or partial lockdowns, and limits public and private gatherings to six people. “We have to protect our economic and work activity and preserve, as far as we can, the rhythms of our lives,” Sánchez said in a televised address on Sunday afternoon. “Sacrifices will be indispensable. No one, not the government of Spain nor its regional governments, want to impose a single restriction that isn’t necessary to flatten the curve and protect public health.” He said his government would seek congressional approval for the six-month state of emergency next week, and called on opposition parties to support the measures. The initial declaration comes into effect on Sunday night and will last a fortnight. Sánchez said the drastic decision had been taken following scientific and expert advice, but that it would not remain in force a day longer than necessary. He said the government believed the situation could be brought under control without the imposition of the strict national lockdown that tamed the first wave of the virus in the spring and early summer. “The more we stay at home and the fewer the contacts we have, the more protected we’ll be, and the more we’ll be able to protect our loved ones and the health of everyone,” he said. Italy’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, said the country’s escalating infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals as he announced new restrictiions on Sunday. His government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums can stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been urged not to leave their homes except on work, medical or educational grounds. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. A €1.5-2m funding package is being considered to support businesses penalised by the latest measures. There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme rightwing group Forza Nuova also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew introduced on Friday. The number of coronavirus infections in the Netherlands rose by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, hitting a new record, according to data released by the National Institute for Public Health. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boyko Borissov, became the latest political figure to test positive for the coronavirus. “After two PCR tests, I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page on Sunday, adding that he had mild symptoms and would self-isolate at home. The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, tested positive for coronavirus on Friday, joining a list of leaders who have contracted the virus that includes the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, the US president, Donald Trump, and his Brazilian counterpart, Jair Bolsonaro.
1||F1: Hamilton surpasses Schumacher with victory at Portuguese Grand Prix – as it happenedSo Lewis Hamilton takes Michael Schumacher’s astonishing record of F1 race wins, and will leave Portugal offering little prospect of anyone getting near it for the forseeable future, or derailing his hopes of joining the German on seven world championship titles. Here’s the updated list … Most F1 race wins 1 Lewis Hamilton – 92 2 Michael Schumacher – 91 3 Sebastian Vettel – 53 4 Alain Prost – 51 5 Ayrton Senna – 41 6 Fernando Alonso – 32 7 Nigel Mansell – 31 8 Jackie Stewart – 27 =9 Jim Clark – 25 =9 Niki Lauda – 25 And finally, here’s Giles Richards’s report from the circuit. Thanks for joining us and enjoy the rest of your weekend. Bye! 1 Mercedes 435pts 2 Red Bull 226 3 Racing Point 126 4 McLaren 124 5 Renault 120 6 Ferrari 93 7 AlphaTauri 77 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 1 Lewis Hamilton 256pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 179 3 Max Verstappen 162 4 Daniel Ricciardo 80 5 Charles Leclerc 63 6 Sergio Pérez 75 7 Lando Norris 65 8 Alexander Albon 64 9 Pierre Gasly 63 10 Carlos Sainz 59 11 Lance Stroll 57 12 Esteban Ocon 40 13 Sebastian Vettel 18 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 The Mercedes team principal in conversation with Sky Sports F1 … 92 race wins? Who would have thought that when we embarked on the project in 2013. It’s an almost surreal number of wins. The talent, the ability … he’s just standing out. Victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve means Hamilton has now, incredibly, finished in the points at 45 races in a row. Testimony not just to his own skill but the dominance in reliability terms that Mercedes offer compared to their rivals. His last failure to finish was at the Austrian Grand Prix in July 2018. The race-winner says: Today was tough. It was all about temperatures, and with the setup I pre-empted it. We got some slipping at the start. Into turn seven I got a huge oversteer moment, so I backed off massively … I knew I could come back later on. On taking Schumacher’s wins record … It’s going to take some time for it to fully sink in. I’m still very much in race mode mentally … I can’t find the words at the moment. Speaking to Sky Sports F1, the second-placed driver says: The opening lap was pretty good. Some cars behind with the soft tyre had the upper hand. After that though, I just had no pace today. I don’t understand. I couldn’t go past [Hamilton] … I was hoping to go for the soft tyre in the end but I don’t think it made a difference. 1 Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Bottas (Mercedes) +25.592sec 3 Verstappen (Red Bull) +34.508 4 Leclerc (Ferrari) +65.312 5 Gasly (AlphaTauri) +1 lap 6 Sainz (McLaren) +1 lap 7 Pérez (Racing Point) +1 lap 8 Ocon (Renault) +1 lap 9 Ricciardo (Renault) +1 lap 10 Vettel (Ferrari) +1 lap 11 Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 12 Albon (Red Bull) +1 lap 13 Norris (McLaren) +1 lap 14 Russell (Williams) +1 lap 15 Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 16 Magnussen (Haas) +1 lap 17 Grosjean (Haas) +1 lap 18 Latifi (Williams) +2 laps 19 Kvyat (AlphaTauri) +2 laps DNF Stroll (Racing Point) After a poor start, the Mercedes driver recovered brilliantly to take Michael Schumacher’s record! Lap 66/66: Hamilton goes into the lap 25 seconds in the lead. Bottas second, with 7.5secs in hand. Verstappen remains safe in third. It will take tremendous late drama to stop that being the podium. Lap 65/66: Gasly goes fifth! He refuses to settle for sixth, swings wide and away, and suddenly Sainz has a whiff of blood too. Lap 62/66: Perez, on soft tyres, climbs all over Gasly as they fight for fifth. Very dicey stuff given the relative lack of grip so late in the race. Lap 61/66: Drizzle alert! It may take something more substantial than that to upset the applecart, but it’s a late additional reminder to the drivers to keep their focus. Hamilton is 22 seconds clear, with history beckoning. Lap 60/66: Hamilton’s sluggish start feels a long, long time ago, and the race on the whole has settled down into fairly standard my-car’s-faster-than-your-car fare. The only drivers from the top 10 in the standings not currently in a points place are Norris, Albon and Stroll – Sainz, Ocon and Vettel are the trio punching above their recent championship weights. Lap 58/66: Bodywork issues for Bottas, who has debris hanging off to the right of his cockpit. Hamilton, muscles perhaps lulled into a bit of complacency, reports a touch of cramp. Surely no late drama to derail a one-two for the Mercedes pair? Lap 56/66: TEN LAPS TO GO! Ocon, Ricciardo and Vettel are in a Renault-Renault-Ferrari ding-dong-ding for eighth place. Four-times drivers’ champion Vettel has had a fairly unenjoyable weekend but has made up a handful of places for a points position. Lap 55/66: Still pretty serene up front for Hamilton – he’s almost 16 seconds clear of Bottas. He’s lapped everyone down to fifth place now. Kvyat, down in 16th, has attracted a time penalty. Lap 54/66: Spoke too soon – Stroll is the first retirement. Since his third place at Monza, that’s four successive failures to start or finish for the Racing Point driver. Lap 52/66: Still no retirements, despite Stroll’s earlier efforts. Still serene progress for Hamilton up front. Russell has now taken Giovinazzi, and meanwhile Albon has had two warnings for track limits and is on notice. Lap 50/66: Russell, down in 14th, is having an enjoyably competitive race, clambering all over the back of Giovinazzi despite the best efforts of his Williams, which hops off the track as the car loses downforce. Lap 47/66: Bottas has stopped the rot of ebbing pace and pulls away a little more from Verstappen – the gap is now 8.2secs. Sainz relegates Ricciardo to ninth, while Raikkonen rounds out the points places. Oooh – impressive work in the pits from Red Bull … a superb 1.8secs stop for Albon. Lap 46/66: Twenty laps to go. Verstappen is shortly to be within seven seconds behind. As things stand, there’ll be no constructors’ title for Mercedes today, but Michael Schumacher is looking a lot like ending the day with the second-most all-time F1 race wins. Lap 45/66: The gap from Hamilton to Bottas is holding steady, but the one from Bottas to Verstappen … not so much. The Red Bull racer is now within eight seconds of second. Gasly takes Ricciardo for seventh place. Lap 43/66 Full standings 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Pérez 6 Ocon 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Sainz 10 Raikkonen 11 Albon 12 Vettel 13 Norris 14 Giovinazzi 15 Russell 16 Kvyat 17 Grosjean 18 Magnussen 19 Latifi 20 Stroll Lap 42/66: Fake news … Bottas comes in, and he takes the hard compound as well. He rejoins behind Hamilton and is losing even more pace. Gap is now over 11 seconds. Verstappen, on the medium compound, is still third, 10 seconds behind the Finn. Lap 41/66: Hamilton pits, takes the hard compound, and rejoins in second behind Bottas … who is considering switching to softs. Lap 39/66: Everyone below Ocon in sixth position has now been lapped, but still no retirements to report. Bottas is falling even further behind Hamilton – the gap is about to be 10 seconds. Lap 38/66: George Russell pits from seventh. An encouraging opening stint from the Williams driver. He comes back out in 14th. Hamilton has pulled out another second from Bottas – suddenly the lead is around nine seconds. Lap 35/66: After all that, Sainz retakes 10th moments later. Vettel is up to third after Leclerc pits – the Ferrari re-emerges in fourth. Bottas briefly cut the gap to Hamilton by half a second, but it’s holding steadyish around the eight-second mark. Lap 33/66: Sainz and Raikkonen are slugging it out for that 10th place. They trade the final points position multiple times before Raikkonen emerges, chest puffed out. “Cool the car,” reports Bottas’s dashboard. Uh oh. Could another retirement be on the way? Standings at halfway: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Leclerc 4 Verstappen 5 Ocon 6 Pérez 7 Russell 8 Ricciardo 9 Gasly 10 Raikkonen Lap 30/66: As half-race distance approaches, the gap from first to second expands to over eight seconds. Lap 29/66: Hamilton is moving beautifully, seven seconds clear of Bottas. Leclerc is 23 back, with Verstappen 21 further behind in fourth. Raikkonen is back in the points in 10th. However Stroll, in last, has attracted another penalty, this time for exceeding track limits. Lap 26/66: Leclerc, in third after Verstappen’s stop, is 16 seconds behind Bottas. Sainz pits to switch for mediums, to leave Gasly the final racer on soft tyres. With Vettel in the pits, that leaves Hamilton, Bottas, Leclerc, Gasly, Ocon, Russell, Giovinazzi and Magnussen are the only drivers without stops to their name. Lap 23/66: Five-second penalty for Stroll! That’s small comfort for Norris, who is now down in 19th after their collision. The wins record is very much on for Hamilton – 3.3secs now the lead. You may have noted incidentally that Williams’ George Russell, without a point this season, is currently running ninth. He’s never finished higher than 11th in a grand prix. Lap 22/66: Bottas is suddenly slipping to almost three seconds behind the new leader. Always fun to see a top 10 shaken up as stops start playing a part btw … Current standings: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Gasly 6 Sainz 7 Ocon 8 Vettel 9 Russell 10 Giovinazzi Lap 20/66: Hamilton’s quick progress has taken him right into Bottas’s slipstream, he makes use of DRS … to take the lead into turn one! A pretty regulation overtake and almost immediately he pulls a second out from his teammate. Lap 18/66: Lance Stroll spins while trying to go wide on the kerb to take Norris – suddenly he’s down in 11th, and there’s bits of front wing hanging off for the Racing Point driver. Some sweary testimony from Norris’s side of things on the radio. Lap 17/66: Sainz and Gasly are having a great little ding-dong for fifth. The McLaren driver shuts the door belligerently a couple of times to maintain his place. Eeeeeee Verstappen’s front right looks more than a little problematic. Lap 16/66: Hamilton sets the fastest lap of the race, despite his apparently dicky tyre. He’s been holding steady around 1.9secs behind his teammate. Lap 15/66: Ocon is in the points in 10th. Ricciardo is in and rejoins with medium tyres, while, intriguingly, Hamilton radios in to report discomfort with his left front tyre. Lap 13/66: Ricciardo more or less waves Stroll through into eighth. Raikkonen’s had enough of the soft compound and has rejoined in 20th on mediums. Verstappen is over nine seconds off the lead, 6.8secs behind Hamilton in second. Lap 12/66: Leclerc’s Ferrari is back up to where it started, taking fourth from Sainz. Vettel, incidentally, is down in 13th. Verstappen still third but he wants to pit. Lap 10/66: Those on soft tyres – Sainz, Verstappen, Norris, Raikkonen, Ricciardo, Gasly and Albon – will soon have a decision to make. They’re being outpaced by rivals on the medium compound. Gasly is up to sixth, while Stroll takes ninth from Raikkonen, whose incredible start suddenly feels like it’s from a different race weekend. Lap 9/66: Fastest lap of the race for Bottas. Leclarc takes Norris. Raikkonen’s brilliant start is fading, with Ricciardo now up to seventh, and Gasly also finds a way past. 1 Bottas 2 Hamilton 3 Verstappen 4 Sainz 5 Leclerc 6 Norris 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Raikkonen 10 Stroll Lap 8/66: Verstappen relegates Sainz to fourth, while Leclerc – also on the medium compound tyres – takes Raikkonen’s sixth spot. Hamilton is just shy of two seconds down from his teammate, with Verstappen a further 2.5secs back. Lap 6/66: Bottas retakes the lead and straight away pulls clear from Sainz. Verstappen’s taken Norris and is lapping quicker than anybody on the track. Into lap seven, and Hamilton eases past Sainz as well, as the leading drivers running medium tyres start to capitalise. Lap 3/66: Verstappen’s interesting start has eased into a battle for fourth with Norris. Raikkonen is just behind, having made up 10 places from the start. Lap 2/66: Sainz LEADS! Hard to blame Bottas there as all drivers take interesting approaches to find the desired line. Hamilton still third. Lap 1/66: Oh my days. Rain IS falling. Cars lunging wide at corners two and three. Raikkonen spitting fire while on the charge to sixth. Sainz took second from Hamilton … before … Hamilton swallowed up … and Verstappen hits Pérez! Wild start, with the Dutchman taking second from Bottas, while Hamilton is unable to lead the charge from pole and loses the lead. A few corners later Verstappen is off the track after catching the Racing Point … LEAVING BOTTAS IN FRONT! Mirror, signal, ’AV IT. Go, go, go! They’re off for the formation lap. And apparently that rain I mentioned, that was due to just about miss the race, might actually be about to play a part … Gasly says a few spots have just landed on his visor. Given the tyre fun teams endured yesterday, that could really shake things up. STAND BY YOUR BEDS … race incoming … In seven minutes’ time, brace yourselves for a dramatic start. Stroll and Verstappen collided at turn one in practice on Friday, and Sainz is wary that it could cause a hairy situation at the start of the race. Speaking to F1.com, the McLaren driver said: “That Turn 1, it’s asking for some accidents. The angle of the corner and how fast the guys on the outside will approach it – and how slow the guys on the inside [will be] and which angle we will approach it – it will be tricky! It’s going to be a bit of an experiment this track, and hopefully it can create some cool racing.” The drivers have just been out to make the now-familiar End Racism gesture, with Hamilton wearing a Black Lives Matter shirt. Some fans are present at the circuit this weekend, and the message was warmly received. Speaking to Sky Sports earlier, Hamilton displayed a different shirt bearing the hashtag: “#ENDSARS”, a protest against Nigeria’s infamous Special Anti-Robbery Squad. Some more context here … While the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve makes its F1 bow, it’s not completely alien to everyone on the grid and working at some of the teams. Within weeks of the circuit’s completion in 2008, Ferrari and McLaren spent two days testing that December. Renault, Toro Rosso (now AlphaTauri) and Williams also spent some tinker time there in early 2009. Ricciardo won the British F3 championship on the circuit in 2009, while Pérez competed in GP2 the same year. Albon, Leclerc, Russell and Stroll all competed in the Formula 3 European Championship. Asked about the venue earlier this weekend, Hamilton said: “Oh god – it’s hardcore. It’s a really, really hardcore circuit. There are places where you can’t see where you’re going. You’re looking at the sky for periods of time. Understanding your braking points, there are no references when you’re looking at the sky. It really is one of the most challenging circuits I’ve been too.” In the drivers’ standings, Verstappen closed the gap on Bottas in second at the Eifel GP. The Finn’s failure to finish from pole due to a power problem left the way open for 23-year-old to take second place. Hamilton has a mammoth 69pt cushion at the top. Drivers’ standings 1 Lewis Hamilton 230pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 161 3 Max Verstappen 147 4 Daniel Ricciardo 78 5 Sergio Pérez 68 6 Lando Norris 65 7 Alexander Albon 64 8 Charles Leclerc 63 9 Lance Stroll 57 10 Pierre Gasly 53 11 Carlos Sainz 51 12 Esteban Ocon 36 13 Sebastian Vettel 17 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 Another subplot today is that, mathematically, Mercedes could secure their seventh successive constructors’ title. It would require them to better Red Bull’s points haul from the weekend by 40 or more, which would require both Max Verstappen (who starts third) and Alexander Albon (starting sixth) to both have days to forget. Constructors’ standings 1 Mercedes 391pts 2 Red Bull 211 3 Racing Point 120 4 McLaren 116 5 Renault 114 6 Ferrari 80 7 AlphaTauri 67 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 The cars are on their way out on the pit lane, with the start 35 minutes away. On the first hot runs in Q3 Bottas led the Mercedes pair out and set the initial pace with a 1min 16.986sec, an advantage over Lewis Hamilton of four-hundredths of a second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was ultimately third, still in touch, a tenth back on the leaders. Their times, however, were down on earlier runs as the wind picked up in the hills of the Algarve and with the drivers still struggling for grip on the newly resurfaced track Mercedes offered both their men options for their final runs – what rubber to run and whether to make two or three laps. The latter was crucial – two laps carried less weight in fuel but three offered the possibility of the rubber working marginally better on the final run. Both Hamilton and Bottas switched from the soft to the medium tyre but Bottas chose a two-lap run and Hamilton the three. Hamilton had an extra lap to work his rubber, putting in two quick runs after his out lap. It proved inspired but it could not have been closer as the lead seesawed between them. Hamilton’s first flying circuit set the pace with a 1:16.934 only for Bottas to better it with a 1:16.754. But the Finn then had to peel off into the pits as Hamilton circled one more time, banking on having the very best of what grip there was at the death. It worked and he delivered as he checked out with a 1:16.652, a tenth clear of Bottas and two-tenths up on Verstappen. 1 Lewis Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Valtteri Bottas (Mercedes) 3 Max Verstappen (Red Bull) 4 Charles Leclerc (Ferrari) 5 Sergio Pérez (Racing Point) 6 Alexander Albon (Red Bull) 7 Carlos Sainz (McLaren) 8 Lando Norris (McLaren) 9 Pierre Gasly (AlphaTauri) 10 Daniel Ricciardo (Renault) 11 Esteban Ocon (Renault) 12 Lance Stroll (Racing Point) 13 Daniil Kvyat (AlphaTauri) 14 George Russell (Williams) 15 Sebastian Vettel (Ferrari) 16 Kimi Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) 17 Antonio Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) 18 Romain Grosjean (Haas) 19 Kevin Magnussen (Haas) 20 Nicholas Latifi (Williams) Before we get to a qualifying catch-up, an unsettling story from yesterday that has affected things behind the scenes in Portimão … Vitaly Petrov, the Russian former driver who was a steward at the Portuguese Grand Prix, has stepped down after his father, Alexandr, was shot dead at his home in Vyborg, 80 miles north-west of St Petersburg. He will be replaced by Bruno Correia, the Formula E safety car driver. On Thursday Petrov had been criticised for being used in the stewarding role by Lewis Hamilton in response to the negative comments Petrov had made on the British driver’s anti-racist stance this season. The FIA stated Petrov had stepped down from his position after “a personal bereavement” and Russian media is reporting the incident as an assassination. Petrov has returned home to Russia. Happy Sunday! Welcome to lap-by-lap coverage from the first Portuguese Grand Prix since 1996. It’s already been a dramatic weekend at the 12-year-old Autódromo Internacional do Algarve, making its F1 bow, with drivers frustrated by a broken drain cover that halted final practice and delayed qualifying, and then a brilliantly tight qualifying session (of which more in a sec). It’s all led up to a Mercedes one-two on the grid, fronted by defending champion and runaway 2020 drivers’ standings leader Lewis Hamilton, who has been racking up records in recent times, and today has his first opportunity at a big ’un, outright. Michael Schumacher overhauled Alain Prost for race wins at the 2001 Belgian Grand Prix, when he took his 52nd victory. Between 2001 and 2006 he added 39 more, leaving him light years ahead of everyone else. In recent times, Hamilton has reeled his haul in and two weeks ago at Nürburgring he joined Schumacher on 91. Given the British driver’s dominance in recent seasons, and his team’s superiority over the chasing pack, it’s a a question of when rather than if he will make the record all his own. His teammate Valtteri Bottas starts second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen third and Charles Leclerc an encouraging fourth for Ferrari. Rain is forecast to arrive at Portimão in a few hours, but as things stand we should just about get a full race in bright, cloudy conditions. With BST ending overnight in the UK, sending a nation into its six-monthly fart about to find instructions of how to change the clocks in their cars and on their ovens, the race starts at 1.10pm GMT.
17||Fijian-born British soldiers lose latest legal fight to stay in UKEight Fijian-born soldiers who served with the British army in Iraq and Afghanistan have been rebuffed in their initial attempt to seek a judicial review of the handling of their immigration claims. A high court judge said the Commonwealth veterans were “out of time” – but the veterans are able to demand a fuller oral hearing in December, where they will make a final attempt to win the right to remain in the UK. The British army actively recruits from Fiji and those who serve more than four years have the right to remain in the UK if they can afford the application fees. But the eight say that because of systemic administrative errors they were not properly informed of their rights when discharged. Esita Tuimanu, from Commonwealth Neglected Veterans, said the eight were victims of “institutional discrimination” from the Home Office and Ministry of Defence and they would “keep on fighting till the end”. The veterans and their lawyers say they intend to run a public campaign in the run-up to the final high court hearing, in the hope that ministers will allow them to remain in the UK without paying the usual application fees of £2,389 per person. One of those joining the campaign is Tuimanu’s 10-year-old daughter, Gracie-Ann Kelly, whose father, Etuate Bakaniceva, served in Iraq and Afghanistan. She has started making badges in support of the veterans and posting videos about her efforts on YouTube. “They must not be forgotten for their service to the Queen,” she said. She was born a British citizen because of her father’s service but has been unable to see him for the past six years, partly because of the immigration complications that followed after he had served in the army. Bakaniceva was prematurely discharged in 2010, a year after he had been injured in an RPG attack in Musa Qala, Afghanistan, that killed another British soldier, Cpl Danny Nield. Bakaniceva could not afford the cost of applying for citizenship for both him and his wife after he was discharged, and was suffering from tinnitus and PTSD. Struggling with his condition, he eventually returned to Fiji to get help. But Tuimanu said that because he had been away for more than two years he had to reapply to reenter the UK and see Gracie-Ann or obtain treatment. His medical and citizenship problems “tore his family apart”, she said, and his young daughter does not want others in a similar position to suffer in the same way. “Gracie-Ann is fighting for justice for these veterans because she wants to see the Commonwealth eight veterans get to have the peace and luxury to family and private life. This was a privilege she never had the opportunity to enjoy,” Tuimanu added. Most of the eight claimants have not been named, but one, Taitusi Ratucaucau, is facing a £50,000 NHS bill after a brain tumour, with the hospital waiting to see if his immigration status is being resolved before levying any bill. Costs of £12,000 were awarded against the veterans, who have been crowdfunding their campaign, by Mr Justice Lane following the initial ruling. As he ruled against the claimants, the judge accused them of “an inappropriate attempt to mount a legal challenge in respect of what is in reality a campaign to change the law”. A government spokesperson said: “The Home Office and Ministry of Defence work closely with our foreign and Commonwealth recruits to make sure they are aware of how they and their families can attain settlement in the UK, and the costs involved.” “Whilst legal proceedings are ongoing, we cannot comment on these cases.” The lawyers for the claimants, led by Anthony Metzer QC from Goldsmith Chambers and Vinita Templeton from Duncan Lewis Solicitors said they would “continue to pursue legal redress vigorously for what we consider to be a just and principled cause”. The final oral hearing is scheduled for 1 December.
1||Lewis Hamilton wins Portuguese GP to break Michael Schumacher's F1 recordOnly time will tell how long Lewis Hamilton’s extraordinary success story will run. At this moment, however, it is enough to acknowledge the world champion as he is now – in winning the Portuguese Grand Prix to become the most successful Formula One driver in history. A sportsman at the peak of his powers who has delivered now so consistently, for so long, that like the true greats he is almost making the extraordinary look commonplace. Which is to do him a disservice, everything about his victory summed up why he is one of the greatest of all time. His touch was exquisite, the win emphatic. As he crossed the line at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve to take his 92nd win, one more than Michael Schumacher, his race engineer Peter Bonnington summed it up succinctly. “What a race,” he said. “You are rewriting the history books.” Which he is. Schumacher’s records were thought untouchable. Hamilton has them all in his grasp and will likely shatter them to the winds. He already holds most pole positions and now race wins. This season he will match Schumacher’s seven titles and there is every chance next season surpass that milestone too. Yet much as this was a recognition of the accumulation of success, a numbers game, it was also a moment of sheer emotion for the world champion too. Two weeks ago, on equalling Schumacher at the Nürburgring, he had been moved, humbled, he said. Here in Portimao there was a sense of giving free rein to revel in the joy of having achieved something no other driver has ever managed. Having climbed from his car he went to enjoy a long embrace with his father Anthony, who had been so vital in supporting Hamilton’s career when he began racing. There were tears in his father’s eyes as his son stood atop the podium, doubtless made all the more poignant now the pair have reconciled after their once close relationship broke down in 2010. For Hamilton himself there was unalloyed joy and a distinct sense that this was a moment he would allow himself to savour. He deserves it and the recognition for it. It had been his remarkable judgment that led him to run an extra lap in qualifying that helped ensure he took pole. It is an almost other-worldly talent possessed by only a tiny number of sportspeople. He has combined this with an enormous natural talent and an intimidating ability to turn in performances that are so often flawless. In Portugal it was his touch in managing his tyres such that he had pace a class apart from his rivals. Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas, who was second, admitted he could do nothing to challenge the world champion. Indeed if there are chinks in Hamilton’s armour he guards them well. Physically and mentally the British driver presents a rock against which the waves of the opposition crash with futility. It has taken him 262 races to reach his remarkable 92 wins, having scored his first at Canada in his debut season in 2007. Now 35 years old, his record since then has been hugely impressive. He is the only driver to have taken a win in every season in which he has competed, now stretching across 14 years in F1. Since Mercedes proved so strong when the turbo-hybrid era began, he has been ruthless in taking every opportunity and returning an extraordinary success rate. He has 71 victories for the team and bar 2017 when he took the title with nine wins has scored 10 or more a season every year since 2014. It is relentless success that has perhaps made it sometimes feel almost as a foregone conclusion yet it is anything but. This trait, the repeated inch-perfect execution across circuits, conditions and machinery season-in, season-out is what other drivers recognise as making him so hard to beat. Max Verstappen, who was third for Red Bull, acknowledged it. “Everybody knows he is very quick but what has been his strong point is he is very consistent and very rarely makes a mistake,” Verstappen said. “That’s why he got to these numbers so quickly, it’s very impressive.” Hamilton did so in Portugal with a masterclass that epitomised Verstappen’s assessment. Recovering from a testing start when he lost places from pole on cold rubber, the world champion held his composure and put his head down to then manage his tyres to perfection. The track surface lacked grip and was a challenge but Hamilton had its measure, exploiting the additional pace he was able to eke out from not overworking his rubber to retake and then hold a significant lead over Bottas. Portugal has not hosted a grand prix for 24 years since 1996 when Jacques Villeneuve won at Estoril, in doing so making a memorable pass on Schumacher. This time Hamilton showed the same fine race management the great German so often exhibited. Indeed, he was on rails through the undulations of the hills of the Algarve’s rollercoaster. Once he had ensured he had put less wear into his tyres and regained his lead, he never looked back, taking the flag 25 seconds from Bottas. More is surely to come, this moment a special one but Hamilton’s entry in the history books is far from finalised yet. Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc an excellent fourth and there was a superb fifth for Pierre Gasly in the AlphaTauri. Carlos Sainz was sixth for McLaren, Sergio Pérez seventh for Racing Point. Renault’s Esteban Ocon and Daniel Ricciardo were in eighth and ninth and Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel in 10th.
18||Girlhood: Girlhood review – breezy, 90s-tinged electropopSinger-songwriter Tessa Cavanna and producer Christian Pinchbeck first crossed paths in 2017. He heard her singing, so the story goes, when she walked past his narrowboat in east London and was so impressed he invited her to hop on board and record in his studio. The resulting project, Girlhood, marry sweet, soaring vocals with iPad instrumentals, channelling the expansive spirit of the Avalanches and the gospel-tinged beats of Moby. In other words, at times they can sound anachronistic. It’s the older tracks, such as Bad Decisions and Milk &amp; Honey, that really shine on their self-titled debut – the former with its taut percussion and uplifting vocals; the latter all spiralling melodies and trip-hoppy scratches. Queendom, meanwhile, is smooth and soft, while Fever Sweat recalls the atmospheric warmth of producer Flume, and Keep On and The Love I Need possess a housey euphoria. So, while there’s nothing especially fresh-sounding here, Girlhood is a solid set of breezy electropop with a hint of future possibilities.
19||Nightmare on asylum street: His House, the horror film about the migrant crisisThere has never been a whole lot of overlap between the social realism of Ken Loach and the twisted horror of A Nightmare on Elm Street. But that’s about to change with the release of His House, a strikingly original debut from the gifted British film-maker Remi Weekes, which was snapped up by Netflix at Sundance earlier this year for an eight-figure sum. His House follows a South Sudanese couple – Wunmi Mosaku as Rial, Sope Dirisu as her husband Bol – who are dumped on a bleak Essex housing estate while their appeal for asylum is considered. Their temporary home is blighted by peeling walls, dodgy wiring and hostile neighbours. Worse than that, it’s haunted. If they flee, Rial and Bol risk deportation for violating bail. Stay, however, and they will need to do battle with the wall-dwelling creatures, which appear to have followed them from Africa. This isn’t the first film to use the conventions of horror to address this modern crisis: Mati Diop’s Atlantics imagined the women of Dakar being possessed by the ghosts of migrants who had perished at sea. But it is undoubtedly the scariest. His House thrives on two types of threat, the social and the supernatural, each intensifying the other. Horror audiences will be accustomed to figures lurking in the back of the frame – it’s just that, in this case, there’s no knowing whether it will be a scuttling monster, a meddling immigration official, or a lout. When the idea of a horror story involving asylum-seekers was first proposed to Weekes by producers, he was unsure if he had any personal connection to the material. Although his grandparents are from St Lucia and Sierra Leone, he was raised in London. “But once I thought about it, I was reminded of how I felt growing up in this country,” says the 33-year-old, sitting in his home with a bicycle leaning against the wall behind him. “You’re torn. There’s one side that wants to assimilate and be accepted by a culture that is ambivalent toward you. Then another side wants to reject that, to be proud of where you’re from, to rebel against the norms. That’s always been in the background of conversations with my family and friends: which parts of us are English and which are from other places?” The theme of tribalism underpins His House. Back in South Sudan, Rial scarred herself with the markings of two warring factions to improve her chances of survival. Now in Britain, she finds it harder to move between tribes. In the film’s most provocative scene, she approaches a group of black British teenagers for help, only to receive a chastening reminder that skin colour is no guarantee of solidarity. Weekes consulted with Waging Peace, an organisation that opposes genocide and human rights violations in Sudan, and Right to Remain, which helps people navigate the UK asylum system. This was to ensure a realistic grounding for a story that takes flight into the nightmarish. “It was important to know how asylum seekers are treated,” he says. “The draconian rules, the uncaring bureaucracy, it all shows this lack of empathy.” Physical displacement and disorientation become, in the film, a breeding ground for internal horrors. “Being effectively under house arrest, you can really take a battering psychologically. All the spooky stuff that happens in the house I wanted to treat as tangible. Whether it’s real or not doesn’t matter – it feels real to the characters.” Weekes first made his name as one half of the partnership Tell No One, turning out playful, effects-driven video shorts with his childhood friend Luke White. The duo’s name suggests the sinister or the secretive, though nothing could be further from the truth. “We just wanted to put stuff online without telling anyone,” says Weekes. “It was more a reference to our psychology, to not letting ego get in the way. We’re very understated people. Get us in a meeting and we go quiet.” Posting their shorts on YouTube and Vimeo, the pair attracted commissions from fashion and advertising. Those films have an enchanting simplicity: in one, coloured umbrellas pop open like vibrant floral blooms, while another shows arms layered digitally on screen to create a tree of limbs. His House also features a multiple-arm scene, as does Weekes’s Channel 4 horror short Tickle Monster. Does he have a fear of limbs? “I don’t think so,” he says with a sheepish giggle. “Tickle Monster came from a conversation I had with a friend. He was dating someone who kept tickling him. Even though he hated it and it made him feel awful, his laughter seemed to the other person like some weird form of consent. I thought, ‘That could be a horror film.’” He has also encountered another kind of monster: Harvey Weinstein, who was desperate to get his paws on His House, back when it was a hot script doing the rounds. “When I turned the Weinstein Company down, they got upset and tried to sue me. They’re very aggressive about getting the rights to films. If it wasn’t for the #MeToo movement that blew up the company, they probably would have had their way.” Now that’s a scary story. • His House is in selected cinemas now, and on Netflix from 30 October.
5||Sudan is being rewarded for its revolution with blackmailFew countries in the world have been subjected to as many punitive sanctions as Sudan. After the deposed president Omar al-Bashir came to power in a military coup in 1989, the country was gradually cut off from the rest of the world, with the upholding of human rights the rationale. Economic sanctions were followed by a spot on the state sponsors of terrorism list, and then by the indictment of Bashir by the international criminal court. At some point it became hard to keep up with all the legislation, punishment for the reckless harbouring of terrorists in the 1990s, and the brutal slaughter of marginalised ethnic groups in areas such as Darfur. There were sanctions on individuals, a US travel ban on all Sudanese-born people, acts of Congress and lawsuits by members 9/11 victims’ families. The country became a sort of human rights cause celebre, attracting Hollywood stars and a vast network of lobbyists in Washington who, whenever it seemed like there might be a relaxation of sanctions, campaigned fiercely to keep them going. Bashir was a president over whom it was easy to reach consensus. Here was an African brute in the classic mould, a military man who turned on his own people, and a sharia-wielding terror sponsor to boot. But it was not Bashir or his government that suffered. He remained in power, if anything getting stronger. He and his vast network of cronies had the means to circumvent sanctions, finding ways to do business and enrich themselves. The Sudanese people, those whom the global human rights community was ostensibly supporting, struggled in isolation, in poverty and with a lack of access to basic healthcare. Eventually, interest in Sudan faded. The war on terror ran out of steam after the killing of Osama bin Laden and the weakening of al-Qaida, and the moral outrage over Darfur found catharsis via war crimes indictments. The international community moved on, but all the sanctions stayed. The world remembered Sudan last year, when an epic revolution overthrew Bashir at long last. His removal came at a heavy cost. Many were killed in confrontations with security forces, and the economy, already on the brink, was pushed over the edge. But it was worth it. The feeling on the streets was that the blood, the economic instability, the political jeopardy were all worth it if the Sudanese were to have a shot at democracy and dignity. The United States, the Sudanese people’s alleged white knight, took one look at the success of the Sudanese revolution and decided to blackmail the country in return for taking it off the state sponsors of terror list, reintegrating it into the international financial and trade system, and providing aid. Last week Donald Trump made clear that the price tag would be $335m (£256m) of compensation for terrorist attacks that took place under the old regime. Alongside this, the US is forcing the fragile new interim government, already struggling to maintain its mandate amid worsening economic conditions and the plotting of Bashir loyalists, to recognise Israel and normalise relations – a move that is hugely unpopular with the Sudanese people, and about which they weren’t consulted. Even for those of us in Sudan who had given up expecting more, this naked exploitation of a country brought to its knees but still crawling to freedom is hard to stomach. The choice for the Sudanese government is to risk economic collapse and a resurgence of the old forces – essentially the overturning of the revolution – or to accept all of the US’s conditions. That is no choice at all. Trump crowed about the deal, tweeting that Sudan had “agreed” to pay the $335m, and that this was “justice” for the American people. The agreement to normalise relations with Israel was announced last week, and has already triggered anger domestically. The condition seems to have been thrown in just because the US could, and amounts to bullying a country with which Israel is not likely to have many trade or diplomatic ties anyway. It’s about building numbers and momentum in the Arab world so that more valuable regional assets, such as Saudi Arabia, can be convinced to normalise relations too. That is all Sudan is – a weak pawn. It’s a case study in how the moral framework within which human rights law is drafted and enforced is designed not to bring about regime change and the safety and security of people suffering under despots, but to leverage the victimhood of those people to advance other interests. The first of these interests is self-image. Western powers can maintain their charade of virtue by coming down hard on poor countries that have little strategic importance. The second is a need to divert scrutiny away from allies, such as Saudi Arabia, that have never been in the dock to answer questions about sponsorship of terrorism or the quashing of internal dissent. Who has attempted to hold Riyadh accountable for its palming off of Osama bin Laden to other countries to wreak havoc, its exportation of dangerous hardline Islamism? Indignation, sanctions, censure and condemnation are instead reserved for countries such as Sudan. Even with these burdens, the Sudanese people managed to liberate themselves from Bashir’s grip. But the injustice they have suffered was compounded by the very system that was supposed to help them: the west’s hypocritical, counterproductive human rights regime. • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist
16||The Knife of Dawn/New Dark Age review - isolation meditationsThe goodwill that inevitably greeted this double bill – a proper staged event with live music! – couldn’t quite hide the disappointment with the first half. Hannah Kendall’s opera The Knife of Dawn, originally staged at the Roundhouse in 2016, is a rather laboured and didactic piece that succeeds only in informing us about a largely forgotten moment in colonial history. It follows the aftermath of the 1953 elections in British Guiana, the first under universal suffrage, which were overturned by British authorities. The story is told from the point of view of the Guyanese poet Martin Carter, one of the many members of the victorious People’s Progressive Party who was jailed. He is on hunger strike and is starting to hallucinate, haunted by offscreen female voices – his wife and daughter, other political prisoners, long-dead Guyanese slaves – who drive him to the brink of madness. Despite a fine performance by baritone Peter Braithwaite, the monologue lacks any dramatic momentum, mistaking showing for telling. We are told that Carter is a great poet, which he was, but it’s not evident from Tessa McWatt’s excruciating libretto, which spends an hour outlining the historical background and ends just as it starts to explore any artistic and emotional ramifications. Much more effective is the second half of the bill, New Dark Age, in which existing compositions by three leading contemporary composers are reworked into a 10-part song suite that narrates post-pandemic life, accompanied by Grant Gee’s artful slow-motion film. The only original piece is Anna Meredith’s swooping Fly By Night, but even the compositions that are more than five years old, such as Missy Mazzoli’s quartet from Vespers for a New Dark Age, setting poems by Matthew Zapruder, seem to have an eerie post-Covid resonance. The shimmering Vivaldi-meets-Philip Glass textures of Meredith’s Stoop seem to sum up a locked-down population straining to enjoy the bright sunshine of April 2020, while Anna Thorvaldsdottir’s two choral pieces – a blend of austere medieval plainsong and holy minimalism – serve as a threnody for the victims of the pandemic. By the end of the suite, with Meredith’s bleak a cappella Heal You (text by Philip Ridley) and her icy, discordant, malfunctioning harpsichord-and-strings piece Low Light, the bemasked audience at the ROH seemed emotionally prepared for a second lockdown. • Available to stream on demand to ticket holders until 23 November.
20||Serco staff told to wear masks in courts and cells after complaintsEscort and security officers working for Serco and other firms have been told to wear face masks in courts and cells amid complaints about inadequate social distancing in the criminal justice system. The abrupt policy change, which comes into force on Monday, has been imposed by the Ministry of Justice on the outsourcing company, which also runs a widely criticised contact-tracing service for the government that is supposed to limit the spread of coronavirus infections. The MoJ instruction also requires all security staff, including those working for GeoAmey, another outsourcing company that carries out similar prisoner guarding and transporting duties, to wear masks when on duty. Until recently it was assumed by the court service that work inside courtrooms was sufficiently socially distanced or individuals adequately protected by perspex screens. But the rapid rise in infections during the pandemic’s second wave has forced a review of health safety measures. The Guardian has been told of one incident in a criminal trial where a judge requested security staff to put on face masks but they declined to do so. Concern has been expressed by lawyers and other court staff over the more relaxed regulations inside court buildings compared with compulsory mask wearing in shops. Last week, the barrister Sarah Forshaw QC tweeted that mask-wearing for security at court would be desirable. Another barrister tweeted: “Well, none of us could have predicted this. Also, why are GeoAmey etc not telling the cells staff to wear masks or providing PPE? In every cell area I’ve been in during the pandemic, gaolers have been maskless.” Concerns have also been expressed by Intermediaries for Justice, the experts who sit alongside vulnerable witnesses and defendants in court, helping them to understand and communicate during proceedings. Catherine O’Neill, the chair of the charity, said: “Our members are concerned that dock officers are not wearing masks. The conference rooms are extremely small and intermediaries throughout the country are reporting concerns that when they visit the custody suites there’s poor ventilation but no one seems to be wearing PPE [personal protective equipment]. “I have seen barristers wearing visors and masks. One judge used gloves. But the dock officers in Serco uniforms were not wearing any PPE. Serco is running the test-and-trace contract. I cannot understand why they do not have a duty to look after their employees and to the prisoners who will be the last to have a voice. “After being in court the other day where no masks were worn in the building, it felt like a different world when I stepped outside and all the cafes and shops were compliant and doing their best.” A Serco spokesman said: “As of 21 October [the date the MoJ letter arrived], all Serco officers have been mandated to wear PPE face masks by our customer, the MoJ. “Prior to that date, safe systems of work were in place which were endorsed by the MOJ, where a risk assessment process determined whether a mask was to be worn; for instance for confirmed or suspected Covid cases only or where the 2-metre rule could not be met. “All safe systems of work and risk assessments were aligned to PHE guidance; this has clearly now changed to reflect more stringent measures.” A spokesperson for GeoAmey said: “With limited exceptions, from Monday 26 October it will be mandatory for GeoAmey employees to wear GeoAmey-provided medical-grade PPE face masks when entering an HMPPS establishment, within the court custody suite and associated docks, and aboard vehicles and in offices where social distancing cannot be maintained.” An MoJ spokesperson said: “All custody and security staff are required to wear masks where social distancing is not possible. Following consultation with partners this will be extended to all circumstances.” Judges are understood to have been given discretion to decide whether security staff need to wear them while sitting in the dock alongside a defendant.
18||Royal Northern Sinfonia/Cottis – buoyant return with Mozart and an intriguing rarityThe autumn season has started late for the Royal Northern Sinfonia – as it has for almost every British orchestra. But this weekend it embarked on an initial seven-week series of concerts in its home auditorium at Sage Gateshead, with a socially distanced audience of around 300 in the concert hall, and an online audience watching via a livestream. The programmes are a nice mix of reassuringly well-known pieces with rarities and new works. In the opening concert, which was conducted by Jessica Cottis, the familiar feelgood music was by Mozart – the overture to The Marriage of Figaro and the 39th symphony, K549, both given suitably buoyant, if slightly routine performances, with just the occasional moment when the ensemble was not quite as precise as it might have been had the orchestra been playing regularly together for the last seven months. If a short piece, Strum, by the composer-performer Jessie Montgomerie seemed a disappointingly routine workout for strings here, never conveying the freshness and energy reported for her music, the real collector’s item was Jean Françaix’s Double Bass Concerto, with the RNS’s newly appointed principal double bass, Philip Nelson, as the soloist. Françaix wrote concertos and chamber music for a huge range of instruments, but unlike Hindemith, another neoclassicist who was equally prolific, he generally did so with a sense of humour. The gruff little march with which the double bass concerto opens is surely tongue-in-cheek, and the lyrical episodes in the later movements seem to have been inserted just to take the solo instrument as far out of its comfort zone as possible, though Nelson obviously relished every opportunity to put it in the spotlight. The home stream didn’t run as smoothly as those we’ve seen from other orchestras and halls – just teething problems, I’m sure. But it’s a shame the concerts are only being made available online live, and those who pay to watch them are unable to view them again, while others who couldn’t make the live cast, can’t catch up with them later. • Sage Live 2020 continues until December.
11||NHS denies elderly people were refused care during early CovidNHS bosses have denied claims that thousands of frail elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic in order to stop the health service being overrun. NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. “The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts. It was older patients who disproportionately received NHS care. Over two-thirds of our Covid-19 inpatients were aged over 65. “The NHS repeatedly instructed staff that no patient who could benefit from treatment should be denied it and, thanks to people following government guidance, even at the height of the pandemic there was no shortage of ventilators and intensive care.” The newspaper claimed the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. The Sunday Times said its claims were the result of a three-month investigation that involved speaking to more than 50 sources in the NHS and the government about the health service’s response to the pandemic. As a result, they decided to stop “large numbers of elderly and frail patients” going into hospital in the first place, so that intensive care wards would not be overwhelmed, which meant that many patients died of Covid-19 at home or in care homes, it added. Ambulance crews and hospitals were told to be more selective than usual about who should be admitted, “with specific instructions to exclude many elderly people”, the Sunday Times said. Dr Alison Pittard, the dean of the Faculty of Intensive Care Medicine, said patients had not been denied care. “Throughout the first wave of Covid-19 the NHS did not run out of critical care capacity, which remained available to everybody who would benefit from it,” she said. The Sunday Times pointed out that of the 59,000 excess deaths in England and Wales in the first six months of the pandemic, only 8,000 occurred in hospital, while 26,000 were in care homes and 25,000 in private homes. It also claimed that an “age-based frailty score” commissioned by Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, played a key role in the alleged policy of denying care. A spokesperson for the Intensive Care Society said, however, that while an expert group did undertake work on developing guidance for doctors on which patients should be prioritised for admission, it was “subsequently stood down on 28/29 March 2020, with Department of Health and Social Care or NHS implementation, after a review of capacity and pandemic trajectory”. NHS sources are adamant that “NHS hospitals did not run out of intensive care beds, so there was never a need to refuse anyone treatment on the basis of NHS capacity. There was categorically no blanket national decision to refuse care to any group of people, including on the basis of their age”.
7||Scottish Tory leader: I still can't see why Dominic Cummings did not resignThe Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross, has reignited the row over Dominic Cummings’ Durham lockdown trip by indicating that he could not see how the prime minister’s most senior aide did not resign over the incident. Ross, who quit his junior ministerial post in protest at Cummings’ 264-mile journey from London at the height of Covid-19 restrictions, said the actions of Boris Johnson’s adviser were “indefensible” and that they had undermined the government. In a fresh intervention unlikely to prove popular in Number 10, Ross stood by his decision to stand down and suggested Cummings should have followed his lead. Pressed on whether he believed Cummings should have resigned over the affair, Ross told the Guardian: “If someone who was not involved at all resigned then, yes, I don’t see how the individual themselves couldn’t take that position. I was so far removed from the actions yet even that far away from it I felt what he did was indefensible and that’s why I would assume, or I feel, he would take the same decision but he didn’t.” Ross was particularly unconvinced by Cummings’ excuse that he had gone on a separate drive with his family while he was in Durham to nearby Barnard Castle, apparently to test his eyesight. “I felt the only way I could be true to myself was to resign from government and to express my opposition to what he’d done, particularly the driving 60 miles to test your eyesight.” Noting his wife’s job as a police officer, he said: “I did think, how would she manage if she pulled someone over for driving issues and they used the defence that they were testing their eyesight?” He has no regrets: “Several months on, I still believe it was the right decision to take.” Rather than setting back the 37-year-old MP’s career, within months of his resignation in May from the role as parliamentary undersecretary of state for Scotland he was thrust back into the frontline of politics when he became the Conservatives’ leader north of the border uncontested. He has since set about reinvigorating the Scottish Conservatives’ approach as the SNP renews its calls for a second independence referendum. Nicola Sturgeon’s party is riding high in the polls ahead of next year’s Holyrood election. Ross, who has a seat in Westminster but not in the Scottish parliament, appointed Ruth Davidson, who held his job until 2019, to be his party’s leader in Holyrood. Davidson has been no fan of Johnson and any apparent attempt by Ross to differentiate himself from No 10 could play well with the home crowd, given the prime minister’s popularity in Scotland is questionable. In his conference speech this month, he called on his party to end the “defeatism and disinterest” over the country’s future in the UK, arguing that an SNP majority in next year’s Holyrood election was not inevitable. Reflecting on the speech, Ross said he had wanted to “make it very clear that it’s in our name that we are both Conservative and unionists”. “I said in my speech it’s in our DNA and if you don’t believe in strengthening the union and the bonds that we share across four nations of the United Kingdom then you’ve got to reflect on if you’re in the right party or not,” he said. “The feedback I’ve had back since is people at various levels in the party think it is right that that message was delivered just now because the defeatism and disinterest only benefits the SNP and their agenda to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK and I want to do everything I can to stop that.” It comes as a poll this month put backing for independence at a record high of 58%. The SNP constitution secretary, Mike Russell, indicated on Thursday that Scotland could face a second independence referendum as early as next year, following the victory for the Better Together camp in 2014. Ross called Russell’s comments “deeply disappointing but sadly predictable”. Reports also emerged this month about a leaked memo from a political consultancy firm given to senior Tories which said continuing to dismiss calls for another independence referendum could be counterproductive. It proposed potentially handing more power to Edinburgh. Ross said he did not receive the memo, but dismissed the suggestion of more powers going to Holyrood, suggesting the current ones should be used to better effect. On Sturgeon’s handling of the pandemic, Ross highlighted her communication skills in what some might characterise as a subtle dig at Downing Street. “No one would doubt that Nicola Sturgeon is a highly effective communicator but when you look at the response to the pandemic in Scotland, and across the UK, it has been largely similar,” he said. “So people who suggest there has somehow been a different approach to dealing with coronavirus in Scotland to the rest of the UK are simply unable to point to anything substantial that has been done differently. But there has been a difference in terms of the communication.” Asked about Downing Street following Scotland in U-turning over the summer on exam results, Ross said: “From students receiving their exam results in Scotland, the U-turn took longer by the Scottish government than it did by the UK government. Now I think the UK government should have seen what happened in Scotland and changed the decision before exam results south of the border were even delivered … but the fact is that it took the Scottish government longer.”
5||Tenants are facing eviction again, despite the UK government's promisesAfter a seven-month gap, the housing courts are open. Although many of them will not be operating at any capacity until early November, some cases are starting to be heard. In mid-October I represented a typical couple, Monty and Lola (not their real names). They were in court to prevent a bailiff’s appointment that had been scheduled for the Friday. The government has insisted that such hearings should continue. It has set in place two main protections for tenants. First, in the majority of cases, landlords have to wait several months after serving notices on tenants before issuing proceedings. Second, where cases were begun during the first lockdown, landlords must serve a “reactivation notice”, telling the courts whether a tenant has been affected by Covid. The idea of both provisions is to filter out the cases where the justification for eviction is clearest. Monty and Lola were excluded from either protection because a final possession order had already been made against them before Covid. In drafting the rules, the government refused to include any safeguards for people in that situation. Eighteen months earlier, their landlord had served a section 21 notice, a document that requires a tenant to leave without the landlord needing to show the tenant has done anything wrong. Monty and Lola went to their local Citizens Advice office and were told that the landlord could not win. He had taken a deposit from them but had not registered it within the statutory time and any section 21 notice would be invalid. The government has promised, many times, to repeal section 21 – however, it has indefinitely postponed acting on that promise. Although Monty and Lola had been in a strong position, they tried to be fair. They told the landlord’s solicitor they just needed to stay in their home until June 2020 when their son was due to leave school. The solicitor offered Monty and Lola a compromise: they could stay till the summer so long as they promised to leave then. They signed a consent order granting the landlord outright possession against them, never imagining that the pandemic would destroy all their plans. The issue before the court was simply whether that order had been properly made. The hearing was supposed to start on the Wednesday at 2.45pm using the court’s cloud video platform. Fifteen minutes beforehand, I logged into an online waiting room. I could see an icon representing me and one for my opponent. I could see a blue dot by the names of the people in the hearing, as the judge invited each of them to speak. But I could not hear them, and nor could they hear me. By now, my pulse was racing at around 200 beats a minute – think what it was like for my clients. The hearing was stopped and began again by telephone at 3.30pm. The judge had promised us a decision that day, but I needed to explain my client’s case, and the landlord’s barrister had to reply. Time wore on: past four, four thirty … We stopped at five, with no decision but the promise of a judgment on the Thursday. On Thursday morning, I spoke to my clients and asked how they were. “Terrible,” said Monty. “We couldn’t sleep,” added Lola. Monty was focusing on their son who is in year 12. He suffers from dyslexia and has a statement of special educational needs. They had been expecting to take him out of school after his GCSEs. But his mock grades had been so poor (and, because of Covid, they had become his final results) that he had been forced to stay at school another year to re-sit his exams. That was why they were trying so hard to stay in a home they had previously been planning to leave. Lola was focusing on the practicalities: they would not be able to find a moving company in the short time available to them. She and her husband had already driven more than 20 times to storage, they had moved everything they could. What they had left was heavy furniture, things they could not move without someone else’s assistance. They had asked the local authority to help, but it had refused. She could not imagine how they would move everything before the bailiffs arrived. “We can’t do it,” she told me, “we just can’t.” I had my telephone on speakerphone as the judge gave us her decision. She spoke gently and softly, but with urgency. The judge noted the decision of the higher courts that I had quoted. She referred to the cases my opponent had cited. The tension was so great, my hands clawed up. I could not type. She said that she agreed with me on the law – a consent order is binding in possession cases only if both parties had been absolutely clear in recording the factual admissions that would justify granting possession. That hadn’t happened in this case. Accordingly, she set aside the possession order and dismissed the warrant. Court officers would call the bailiffs and tell them the appointment was cancelled. When I rang Lola and Monty later, they sounded drunk with relief. Covid made everything rushed. It meant my clients had no proper warning of the bailiff’s appointment. It caused the hearing to be listed just days before the bailiff’s date. It meant that if we lost there would be no time to appeal to another judge. If the local authority had ended up moving my clients to emergency housing, it would have been shared accommodation – including possibly with people who might be ill. The government is aware that there is a problem, and has recently begun a process of negotiating with the bailiff’s bodies, inviting them to hold back from evictions in tier 2 and tier 3 areas. While this is to be welcomed, it doesn’t go far enough. There isn’t any proper legal basis on which bailiffs can refuse to carry out court orders, even at the government’s request. The new measures also are not being properly publicised, when (as we saw in Monty and Lola’s case) the problem in evictions is repeatedly that tenants don’t know their rights, and landlords rely on their ignorance. Much better would be a return to the summer’s ban on evictions. That system worked well and protected people who needed it. Until we do, many tens of thousands of people like Monty and Lola are going to suffer unnecessarily. • David Renton is a housing barrister at Garden Court Chambers
15||‘We had nudity on the greens!’ The battle over Britain’s golf coursesHollingbury golf course is a big splodge of green bleeding into Brighton’s grey urban sprawl. For more than a century, its 18 holes have risen above the seaside city towards the ruins of an iron age hillfort, which is now enclosed by holes nine, 12, 13, and 14. From Hollingbury’s highest point, it is possible to look west on a clear day and see the hills of the Isle of Wight. As housing has spread around the course, which is owned by the council, so has tension between golfers and walkers, who are permitted to cut across it on a network of footpaths and old drovers’ tracks. Relations seem calm on the autumn day I visit, but I gather “Fore!” is not the only four-letter exclamation to have bounced along the manicured fairways. In late March, the awkward relationship flipped on its head when a lockdown ban on golf coincided with a yearning for green space among Britain’s confined households. A national campaign, supported by the Brighton MP Caroline Lucas, called for golf courses to be opened to the public to relieve crowded parks. At Hollingbury, which has no fences and is part of the South Downs national park, residents responded like calves put out to pasture. They cartwheeled on the fairways and picnicked on the greens. “It was like being in the mountains up here, with that open-space feeling that makes you feel immediately better,” says Michaela Spryanova, an office administrator who lives just beyond the course’s western edge. Rachel Henson, an artist and translator, came here every day, basking in the spring sunshine and sweeping views over Brighton and the Channel. She taught her daughter to ride a bike on the sloping fairway of hole 10. “We learned all the common birdsong together,” she says. But then, in June, golf was permitted once more – and golfers reclaimed the course. “We knew it was coming, but it was a terrible shock,” Henson says as we walk with Spryanova from their children’s school after the morning drop-off. We stroll up towards the hillfort on one of the old paths to which non-golfers are again confined. “It depressed me so much I couldn’t come up here for a while,” Henson adds. The struggle for space at Hollingbury – and a second council-owned golf course two miles to the west at Waterhall – reflects a wider debate about conservation, ecology and democratic access to green space. As a pandemic triggers a revolt on many of Britain’s fairways, it poses a vexed question: is it time we opened up all golf courses to the public for good? One of the joys and challenges of golf is that it requires a lot of nice green space. How much space is disputed. A common claim that Britain’s golf courses occupy more land than housing is based on dodgy estimates, but it is a lot of land. The American writer Malcolm Gladwell once considered the scale of gated golf courses in Los Angeles, a city of few parks. He calculated that if you gave each player on a basketball court the space a golfer commands, the court would cover 12 hectares (30 acres); the hoops would be more than 400 metres apart. “They’d have to play on motorcycles,” Gladwell wrote. Yet this calculation depends on a course being busy. Not all courses are busy. Steve Garrioch, who has been the captain at Hollingbury since 2009, tells me he was one of significantly more than 500 members when he joined 20 years ago. There are now 122 members and about twice as many season-ticket holders. Garrioch, a leather merchant, blames an oversupply: Hollingbury is one of six courses within five miles of Brighton Palace pier in a city of about 300,000 people. But its decline is not unusual. According to a participation report by KPMG late last year, membership of golf courses in Great Britain dropped to a low of slightly more than 850,000, down almost 20,000 in a year. In Scotland, membership has dropped by 14% since 2014. Yet the number of courses – more than 2,000 – is relatively stable. Hollingbury, which opened in 1908, is not exclusive. “It’s for working-class people,” Garrioch says. “We’ve got taxi drivers, builders … there’s nothing elite about it.” Yet perceptions fuelled the debate about the role of courses in lockdown. “I think a certain US president has done golf no favours,” says Guy Shrubsole, a campaigner and the author of Who Owns England?. For Shrubsole, Donald Trump – and the eponymous courses on which he has played out a large part of his presidency – exemplifies the image of golf as a gated, gilded pursuit. In early April, when many councils threatened to shut the gates of crowded parks, Shrubsole launched a petition at change.org calling for golf courses to be opened. More than 7,500 people signed it. Lockdown was highlighting space inequality; studies show that people in poorer postcodes not only have smaller gardens, or none at all, but also less access to smaller parks. Pushing open the gates of golf courses began to feel like a moral imperative. “There’s a sense that golf is played by a small number of people and that they are potentially quite wealthy, retired, white men who don’t necessarily represent society,” Shrubsole says. It is not known how many courses opened to the public. It was a fraught process for many that did. “We had nudity on the greens and kids riding bikes straight over the bunkers,” Garrioch says. Elsewhere, there were reports of quad biking, horse riding and rampant picnicking. One couple were spotted playing a rather different sport in a bunker at Glenbervie golf club near Falkirk in central Scotland. “This isn’t Butlin’s,” an anonymous member of the club told the Daily Record. “It’s frustrating that members aren’t even allowed to get their daily exercise by playing a round on their own in the fresh air, yet you’ve got locals having sex in the bunkers. Where’s the social distancing in that?” But for the responsible majority, including Henson, Spryanova and their families, the overnight arrival of new parks was a revelation. “I wanted to shift debate and say there was something deeper going on here – this was about our exclusion from public space and our inability to provide enough of it,” Shrubsole says. That debate was big in Brighton before the pandemic. Ten-year management contracts at Hollingbury and Waterhall were due to expire on 31 March. “It came up at pretty much my first committee meeting last year,” says Marianna Ebel, a German-born IT engineer who was elected as a Green party councillor for Goldsmid ward in May 2019. Brexit inspired Ebel, 35, to enter local politics. She is now the joint chair of the council’s tourism, equalities, communities and culture committee, so council-owned golf courses are her responsibility. For a while, it was assumed a new operator would simply take over the leases. “But I remember looking at the membership numbers,” Ebel says. “I thought: ‘Instead of continuing, how about rewilding the courses?’” In October, the council appointed an estate agent to market the courses, offering 25-year management leases. But they also invited bids for other uses, including projects to restore the wildlife-rich chalk grassland on which the courses were laid. “We simply cannot miss this exciting opportunity to create a health &amp; wellbeing sanctuary and a wildlife haven for all,” read a petition launched in late December by the Brighton branch of Extinction Rebellion (XR), the environmental campaign group. Counter-petitions called for golf to be saved. Meanwhile, Liberal Democrat councillors pushed for the space to be used for affordable housing. More than 5,000 people signed the rewilding petition, including Chris Packham, the presenter and campaigner. In January, XR Brighton held a protest outside a committee meeting. They marched on Hollingbury. “We’re not anti-golf,” insists Ben Benatt, an ecology surveyor and XR member. “It’s about a sustainable solution that addresses the climate and biodiversity emergency.” In January, the council awarded a new contract for Hollingbury, securing its future as a golf course. It was a blow to campaigners and the families who had roamed the course. But the council also announced that Waterhall, where membership was in steeper decline, would shut down for a rare experiment: the rewilding of a golf course. “They call chalk grassland rainforests in miniature,” says Kim Greaves, as we crouch low on the first green at Waterhall. The 37-year-old played here briefly as a teenager. These days, he works with adults with learning disabilities and teaches Brazilian jujitsu, a martial art that relies on skilful leverage. He is also an amateur naturalist and part of the campaign to restore Waterhall. Golfers abandoned the course when lockdown stopped play just seven days before the old lease expired. It had stood here since 1923. Six months later, the greens are cracking up. Daisies and ragwort are growing and the old holes and bunkers are filling with soil and debris. The clubhouse, which sits just above the first green, has sweeping downland views. There is one proposal to move the building towards a rugby club, where dog walkers now park to enjoy the old course, and turn it into an education centre. For now, it is a symbol of a lost era. Abandoned trophies left in the window of the Spike Bar collect dust next to a golf glove, on which a large bumblebee has expired. The very thin layer of soil that covers chalk in valleys across the south-east of England – the result of centuries of grazing – lets rain drain straight through it. Nutrients are scant, so dominant grasses, and the shrubs and trees that would succeed them, tend not to do well. Instead, an array of resilient wildflowers cling to the earth, supporting rare species of butterfly and birds. Diversity on the old greens is still low; it will take years for the effects of mowing and pesticides to be flushed out. But Greaves wants to show me what is happening on the fringes of the fairways. Wildflowers with evocative names – betony, harebell, devil’s-bit scabious, lady’s bedstraw – are creeping in from the rough. “I even saw a round-headed rampion in the middle of the fairway,” Greaves says of a survey he did in the summer. “It might have been there without flowering for decades.” The delicate blue flower, also known as the Pride of Sussex, is a magnet for the chalkhill blue butterfly. Rewilding here will require management. Without any intervention, ecological succession will do its thing, even on thin soil. Last month, the council took responsibility for the project after a leaseholder pulled out. Greaves is anxious to start controlling the hawthorn that is already dominating areas between fairways. In other ecosystems, big fauna would do this kind of work. “Perhaps we’ll introduce elephants here eventually,” Greaves says with a smile. Golf still offers pleasure and exercise to hundreds of thousands of people. Many clubs enjoyed a growth in visitor numbers when they reopened in June; golf is nothing if not a socially distanced sport. Even XR Brighton says a sensitively managed links is far from the worst way to preserve green space, “especially if it brings a revenue stream that can help manage it in the right way”, Benatt says. Housing can be an obvious – and lucrative – alternative, especially when privately owned courses can rescue their finances with a sale to developers. Reading golf club, another old, struggling course, will next year merge with Caversham Heath, a club two miles to the west. A controversial housing development will take its place. But Waterhall’s fate adds weight to campaigns for old courses to remain green yet public, making permanent the freedom that excluded communities briefly enjoyed this year. Four years ago, Lewisham council closed a municipal 18-hole golf course that had occupied an old Georgian estate in Beckenham, south-east London. It is now a public park with a restored lake for swimming and boating. “It shows what local campaigns can do,” Shrubsole says. It will take time for balance to be restored at Hollingbury. Today, walkers and joggers outnumber golfers by far. “It’s just getting ridiculous,” says Brian Coomber, a club member who is looking for his ball in the rough next to the 10th fairway. He says people have been using the footpaths way more since golf resumed, interrupting play and messing up the fairways. “Don’t get me wrong, I’ve got a dog myself, but at the end of the day this isn’t common land,” he says. His friend, Dave Slocombe, nods in agreement. Days later, the men leave Hollingbury to join East Brighton golf club, which is only three miles away. Henson and Spryanova still walk on Hollingbury, where Spryanova says a few comments from golfers have made her children feel uncomfortable on their walk to school. Lockdown inspired Henson’s art. She made videos of the course, in which images of cartwheeling children fade into more recent footage of golf. Birds sing in the background. As we stand at the hillfort, taking in the sweep of Brighton, she can still picture those weeks. “At sunset, everyone would have been sitting here looking west, each little group taking a mound,” she says. “It looked a bit like a very spaced out village green.”
21||Bubble review – tetchy, tender tale of love under lockdownThe playwright James Graham has suggested it is too early to address the politics of the coronavirus crisis head-on in dramatic form. Instead, he gives us a “Covid romcom” that captures the domestic isolation and claustrophobia of pandemic life. On the brink of lockdown, Ashley (Pearl Mackie) and Morgan (Jessica Raine) have had an “amazing” first date just as the “whole frigging world is shutting down”. Should they take a leap of faith and quarantine together or face isolation alone? This one-hour drama enacts both outcomes in parallel narrative strands. In one reality, they end up in Morgan’s open-plan attic flat. In the other, they conduct an app-based courtship. As a part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival, it was staged in the theatre and simultaneously streamed online. Sleekly directed by Adam Penford, it takes place on a stripped-down stage that mirrors the stripped-down nature of the relationship evolving on it. Online, the camera shows the women more intimately on a split screen. As a drama, it is an eloquent survey of the past eight months with lively repartee, and it is impressive that Graham can take the over-familiar (jokes about face coverings, the horrors of shopping, and the insomnia induced by it all) to make it freshly witty, with sparky moments of insight. Reflecting on Zoom technology, Ashley says: “It’s like a historical re-enactment of talking.” Later, she observes how gardens have become the “new class divide”. Graham has proved himself to be a master of political playwriting, with shows such as Brexit: The Uncivil War, The Vote and This House. While this is primarily written in a comic vein, there is politics here. We are reminded of Boris Johnson’s Covid-19 experience and the killing of George Floyd. Both become heated points of contention between the women, and the play flares to bigger life as a result, if only briefly. “This fucking virus, man, it’s racist,” says Ashley, as a comment on the uneven burden of key work on BAME communities, including her mother. There is clever observational comedy in both narratives, and the two versions of coupledom push against each other, rather like the parallel worlds in The Last Five Years, but the “together” version is better investigated with all the awkward domestic intimacies, quibbles and moments of bonding. Ashley is a classic millennial – an upbeat vegan yogi who owns a micro-pub and watches reality TV. Morgan, a school teacher, lives off white wine and espressos and is more bristly. Both actors steer their characters from over-excitability to growing tetchiness and occasional tenderness. The nature of love and togetherness is explored, too, though perhaps with too light a touch. “What was it you liked about me?” asks Morgan as the couple sink into the fug of quotidian home life, and she dismisses love as nothing more than manipulation, though the play offers up its own happy ending. There has been a steady output of Covid-era romances over the course of the pandemic, both online and latterly on stage, such as in Sunnymead Court, which also has lesbian love at its centre, and the recently revived Lungs, so it is all the more of an achievement that Bubble finds freshness against this backdrop. Morgan and Ashley’s relationship does not particularly gather in emotional intensity or even in romance, but it always stays joyfully warm and entertaining. • Bubble is part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival.
2||'He was a father figure': loved ones remember victims of UK's Covid second waveWhen Roehl Ribaya left intensive care after 60 days in the summer, his family thought his battle with coronavirus was over. In July, he left the doors of Blackpool Victoria hospital to applause from staff as lead consultant Dr Jason Cupitt said it signalled the hospital had “survived the first wave of this silent killer”. But the 47-year-old experienced difficulties from then onwards, finding tasks such as walking up stairs challenging. He was breathless and fragile. On 13 October, he had a cardiac arrest, leaving him in a coma until he died two days later. Complications from Covid-19 led to Ribaya’s death and his story is among recent tales of loss as the UK experiences a second wave of the virus. “He was depressed when he came out of the hospital because he is 47 and should be fit and well but he felt like a 90-year-old man,” said his close friend Mark Delabajam. Delabajam and his wife, Angela, had formed a strong bond with Ribaya and his wife, Stella. When the couple first moved to Blackpool from the Philippines, Ribaya had offered them his house to stay in after only meeting them that day. They spent Christmas and holidays together. He said that when Ribaya came out of the hospital, even though he had challenges he would always try to be positive for those closest to him. “He was strong for his family and friends but we knew he was struggling with his breathing,” Delabajam says. “I had a conversation with his wife who said he would often cry in the middle of the night.” Ribaya was an aerospace engineer who came to the UK from the Philippines, following in the footsteps of his wife who got a job as a nurse here. “He was like a father figure to many, not just us – there are lots of overseas workers coming in from the Philippines at the moment as hospitals are short-staffed. All those Filipinos that come over, he is like the father figure to most of them,” Angela Delabajam said. The couple said they saw Ribaya the Sunday before he died and he seemed all right although he had been complaining of shortness of breath. If he could send a message now, Mark said it would “lecture people if they gathered in groups or in crowds … He would say my experience and what I went through hopefully will give you an insight into how bad or worse it could be.” Hambi Haralambous, 69, a music legend in Liverpool and the founder of the Motor Museum Studio in Lark Lane, which has hosted bands including Oasis and the Arctic Monkeys, died from coronavirus on 16 October. Haralambous posted photos of himself from his hospital bed, warning people about not taking Covid-19 seriously. His son, Narada, says his father had to wait three days before getting his coronavirus test and was told he would have to go to north Wales for it. Eventually, he got a diagnosis but his health got worse and he was admitted to intensive care. Haralambous was born in London to Cypriot parents who came to the UK for work. He was seven when he moved to Liverpool and as a young man, he went to art college before travelling in India. He met his first wife around this time and had two children. He later remarried and had another son and daughter. Haralambous fronted the popular synth band Hambi and The Dance in the early 1980s, which were signed to Virgin Records. He then moved into recording and managing for other artists, and later retrained in film. “When my dad was ill in hospital he told me about how unfair this was and how angry he was as he had so much more he wanted to do,” said Narada. “I asked, what it is you want to do, Dad? He said he wanted to finish off certain [creative] projects. That was his passion and what he was thinking about.” He said the family went through periods of thinking he was getting better.“After a while, he seemed to improve and the doctors were happy with his progress … then he called me one morning and he said the doctors said he was not going to make it. I was shocked as they had just moved him to a different ward.” “I spoke to the doctors. I wanted to do that before telling the family and they reassured me a bit. They said that they had not told my father he wasn’t going to make it but they had said he had deteriorated a lot and worried and concerned about him.” Narada said his father’s condition got worse and he died not long after this conversation. “People are not taking this illness seriously and I am sick of seeing it … People don’t understand what this is doing but seeing doctors and nurses, and what have to deal with [shows the toll]. They are doing such a good job of looking after people. No one has a clue until it hits you,” he said. Another local legend, Rotherham taxi driver Haji Tanveer Hussain, who worked up until his death to support his family, also died from the virus, on Wednesday 7 October, a few weeks after getting ill. Tributes flooded in for the Pakistan-born driver since his death, with colleagues and customers of Gold Star Taxis worker expressing their sadness at the loss of a “humble” and “joyful” man. Nasar Raoof, a friend, said Hussain always offered him golden nuggets of advice when he was feeling hopeless. Raoof recalls one particular time when he bumped into him at a local garage and he had had a tough day and felt people were being ungrateful for his hard work. He said Tanveer told him satisfaction comes from within and “by what you do and how you help people”. “It brightened up my day because it was not going well and it was hectic. It brought a smile to my face,” Raoof said. He had conversations with Hussain about his concerns working at a time when cases were so high, particularly in Rotherham. “He was worried but he said it was always about striking a balance between being able to provide for your family and being able to stay safe while you do your work,” Raoof said, adding that he always joked that he wished he had a job in an office instead. During the peak of coronavirus, Hussain was one of a few drivers who offered to do free pharmacy runs for vulnerable people unable to go outside and get their medication. “Every customer really loved him. He was really just a smiling joyful person. He was polite and courteous – putting himself out there in harm’s way to provide a service. These were the messages that came through social media. There were customers ringing in to offer their sympathies and condolences,” Raoof said.
12||In brief: Solo; The Forger's Daughter; Little Weirds – reviewsSolo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind) Rebecca Seal Souvenir, £14.99, pp304 Could there be a more apt moment for a book about working on your own? The former Observer journalist Rebecca Seal is a long-term “soloist” who knows all about the glories and gut-churning grind of self-employment. Deep-diving into productivity literature, economics and social sciences, as well as hard-won experience, she’s crafted a primer that covers topics from resilience and focus to procrastination and the curse of comparison. It contrives to be kind, realistic and genuinely helpful, all without lapsing into business speak and psychobabble. Install a copy on whatever surface is functioning as your desk, and you may even feel a little bit less alone. The Forger’s Daughter Bradford Morrow Grove Press, £12.99, pp288 According to Bradford Morrow, literary forgers are coy about their craft, preferring to think of it as creative endeavour rather than crime. His hero, Will, is just such a man – or he used to be, until he got caught. Now, decades later, a villainous character from his past has materialised, demanding that Will create a copy of the rarest book in American literature, Edgar Allan Poe’s Tamerlane and Other Poems. The novel flits evocatively from upstate New York farmhouses to Manhattan auction houses, and there’s an aptly gothic tinge to the tense drama that ensues. Little Weirds Jenny Slate Fleet, £9.99, pp240 The actor and comedian Jenny Slate works hard at being weird in her debut essay collection. Must we really think of her as a homemade croissant, oozing “antique decadence” and made up of “layers and layers of fragility and richness”? Peel away the artifice, and she turns out to be rather like the rest of us, albeit with the volume turned way up. She’s a gardener, a dog-lover, and “very divorced”. She gets stage fright still. And, when she stops trying quite so strenuously, she becomes a writer of tender, zestful prose. • To order Solo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind), The Forger’s Daughter or Little Weirds go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
5||Brexit was no aberration. The European Union needs to learn from itIn fewer than 100 days, Brexit will have been completed. Britain will be outside the European Union customs union and the internal market. But Brexit poses questions for the EU as well as for Britain. It challenges what might be called the ideology of Europe. It is, after all, a serious matter for a democratic organisation when a major member state decides to leave. “It would,” declared Donald Tusk, then president of the European council, shortly after the Brexit referendum in 2016, “be a fatal error to assume that the negative result in the UK referendum represents a specifically British issue … the Brexit vote is a desperate attempt to answer the questions that millions of Europeans ask themselves daily.” President Macron of France was honest enough to confess to the BBC’s Andrew Marr early in 2018 that it was possible a referendum in France could even have yielded the same result as in Britain. What, then, are the lessons? In her Bruges lecture of 2010 (as important as Margaret Thatcher’s lecture of 1988, though less noticed) German chancellor Angela Merkel pointed to a continual and creative tension between two Europes – supranational Europe and intergovernmental Europe. If that tension is disturbed, and supranational policies intrude upon national identities, there will be popular resistance. The problems sparked by migration and the euro show in graphic form how the EU can arouse such resistance, if it goes beyond what is acceptable by seeming to challenge the national identity of member states. The strong executive action needed to resolve the euro and migration crises could only be taken by national governments working together. These crises were confronted primarily by the governments of the member states in the European council: the commission and the European parliament played a distinctly secondary role. The Covid crisis, like past crises, is leading to talk of further integration. Some EU leaders seek new economic and budgetary instruments culminating in fiscal union so as to place the euro on stronger foundations. But with fiscal union, what issues would be left for national elections and national governments when so much economic policy has been removed from the agenda? Further integration, let alone treaty amendment, is the last thing Europe needs. For supranationalism is now a threat to the fulfilment of the European ideal, not a facilitator of it. As long ago as 1990, when Jacques Delors, former president of the commission, told the European parliament that he wanted Europe to become a “true federation” by the end of the millennium, the then French president François Mitterrand, watching on television, burst out: “But that’s ridiculous! What’s he up to? No one in Europe will ever want that. By playing the extremist, he’s going to wreck what’s achievable.” Few in Europe seek to submerge their country’s national identity in a federation. Instead, they seek to pursue their own national interests constructively within a co-operative European framework. Perhaps Britain should have done the same. There is, paradoxically, a sense in which Brexit Britain, together with Gaullist France, were in the vanguard of European development, rather than hindrances to it. For both appreciated – Britain, thanks to its long evolutionary history, and the Gaullists as a result of France’s experiences during the war – what the sacrifice of sovereignty would actually mean in practice. When, in the 1990s, prime minister John Major declared that Europe was not yet ready for a common currency, his warnings were ignored and he was regarded as an obfuscator. But perhaps the other member states should have heeded what he said. That would certainly be the view of those young people in the Mediterranean member states who find themselves unemployed as a result of the austerity policies caused by the euro. For those member states emerging from dictatorships, it was easy to say, rhetorically, that they were eager to sacrifice sovereignty. But all of them found their acceptance of shared sovereignty was subject to very strict limits: Germany, when it came to sharing debts; Greece, when it came to budgetary restrictions; and the Visegrad countries of central Europe (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia), when it came to accepting a due quota of Syrian migrants. What Europe needs, as Tusk frequently pointed out, is not more Europe but better Europe – practical improvements, such as completion of the European services market. Services, after all, make up 70% of economic activity in the EU, but there are still about 5,000 protected professions. Europe also needs a digital single market, which Mark Rutte, prime minister of the Netherlands, has calculated would add €400bn (£370bn) to Europe’s GDP. The EU, then, must remain primarily an intergovernmental institution in which the member states, through the European council, dictate the pace of change. But such a Europe of states would be an intergovernmental organisation with a difference, since member states would be considering not only their own national interests but the interests of the whole continent. Europe has suffered in the past from the absence of such a perspective. Had it been there in 1914, had national governments considered the interests of Europe as a whole rather than merely their own national interests, war would have been avoided. Brexit, then, was not an aberration. Instead of applauding or condemning it – for, after all, Brexit is yesterday’s argument – the EU must seek to learn its lessons. • Vernon Bogdanor is professor of government at King’s College London, and author of Britain and Europe in a Troubled World
18||Billie Eilish review – immersive adventure with fish and spidersOf all the online attempts to fill the gaping chasm where live music used to be before coronavirus, Billie Eilish’s livestream has attracted the most attention. Understandably so. The 20-year-old has a far keener visual sense than any of her peers, expressed through her album covers and self-directed videos. If a pop artist can come up with something eye-catching enough to make you temporarily forget there’s no chance of proper gigs for the foreseeable future, goes the thinking, it’s probably her. For your 30 bucks, you get a 55-minute performance, a “pre-show” that involves clips from a forthcoming Eilish documentary and a variety of celebrities – including Lizzo and Eilish’s “surrogate dad” Steve Carrell – imploring fans to vote in next month’s US election. A lot of fuss has been pre-emptively made about the “extended reality” technology used in the staging of Eilish’s performance, but what the show itself most closely resembles is a souped-up version of a late-60s or early-70s pop TV special devoted to a single artist, an impression underlined by the fact that between-song changes to the set are masked by the screen fading to black. Clearly, though, things have moved on. The technology means Eilish and her fellow musicians – brother Finneas and drummer Andrew Marshall – appear to be performing underwater, with fish swimming around them, or in the middle of a glistening cartoon forest, or, for All the Good Girls Go to Hell, in a corridor of images of environmental catastrophe and protest marches that stretches into infinity. It isn’t clear how live the music is, although Eilish’s vocals audibly are, and all the more impactful for being devoid of the showboating latter-day pop singers tend to go in for: during Xanny, a kind of 21st-century teenage equivalent of Neil Young’s The Needle and the Damage Done, her voice comes out as a kind of sighing mumble, as if she’s so bored with druggy excess she can barely be bothered to articulate her contempt. Occasionally, you’re struck by the feeling that the simplest staging ideas are the most effective: a single spotlight that strobes and casts a Nosferatu-like shadow behind the singer, a vast spider that crawls around the stage during You Should See Me in a Crown. And occasionally the technology is used to create a simulacrum of the communal experience of a gig. Fans watching at home find webcam images of themselves flashed up on the screens. Some of the fans appear prepared for this, holding up homemade signs and making heart shapes with their hands. Others do not: one girl is so startled by the sight of herself, there seems every chance she’ll be carried away from her computer on a stretcher. It’s both striking and entertaining – no one who stumped up the cash is likely to feel short-changed – but it doesn’t feel anything like being at a live show, as Eilish acknowledges. “The only benefit of not having a crowd,” she says, “is that none of you are in the pit, fainting, like usual.” The time may come when someone harnesses technology in order to produce an online live music experience that’s fully, game-changingly immersive. This isn’t it, but as stopgap exercises go, it’s impressive, if haunted by the sense that no one really knows how long the gap it’s stopping will last. “One day, if we vote the orange man out, we might see each other again,” says Eilish, before the screen fades to black again and the credits roll.
3||'Sue if you must': Lincoln Project rejects threat over Kushner and Ivanka billboardsThe Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards put up in Times Square. “Sue if you must,” Matthew Sanderson said. The New York City billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, displaying apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. According to Johns Hopkins University, more than 8.5m coronavirus cases have been recorded across the US and more than 224,000 have died. Case numbers are at record daily levels and one study has predicted 500,000 deaths by February. New York was hit hard at the pandemic’s outset. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday, Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president against allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing first amendment rights of free speech and the “reckless mismanagement of Covid-19” by the Trump White House. In a legal response on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson told Kasowitz: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, citing supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticise freely”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting in March, in which Kushner criticised New York governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter, Sanderson wrote, “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” A footnote to Sanderson’s letter cited “one of the seminal libel-proof plaintiff cases”, that of a well-known mobster whose reputation was “so tarnished … he could claim no damages for defamation”. “Mr Kushner and Ms Trump’s claims will fare no better than Boobie Cerasini’s given their tarnished reputations on Covid-19,” it said. Sanderson also said “this isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian on Saturday, that seems unlikely. Donald Trump “has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.”
2||Europe's Jewish population has dropped 60% in last 50 yearsEurope has lost almost 60% of its Jewish population over the past 50 years, mainly as a result of the collapse of the Soviet Union after which many Jews left eastern Europe as borders opened, a study shows. Only about 9% of the global Jewish population now lives in Europe, compared with nearly 90% in the late 19th century – but similar to the proportion 1,000 years ago. In total, an estimated 1.3 million Jews live in Europe in 2020, about 0.1% of the continent’s population. Two-thirds of them live in France, the UK and Germany. The figures are in a report produced by the London-based Institute for Jewish Policy Research, which attempts to give a comprehensive picture of Jewish populations in European countries. “Jews have not only been an integral part of European history and culture but are actually one of its oldest and original component groups,” says the report, titled Jews in Europe at the Turn of the Millennium. “However, throughout history, the inherent weakness of a landless and powerless minority vis-a-vis territorially based societies and their constituted powers often put theJewish people in a condition of dependency and instability, and translated into powerful ups and downs in the Jewish presence.” Between the end of the 18th and 19th centuries, the number of Jews in the world rose to more than 10 million, and climbed further to 16.5 million on the eve of the second world war. Most of the growth was in eastern Europe, then America and then Palestine and Israel. The murder of 6 million Jews in the Holocaust reduced the global population to around 11 million, “radically disrupt[ing] what had been up to that moment the continuous build-up and transformation of European Jewry”. In 1880, 88% of the world’s Jews lived in Europe. By 1945, this share had fallen to 35%, then to 26% in 1970 and to 9% in 2020. Most of this decline happened in eastern Europe, where the share of the global total fell from 26% in 1945 to 2% in 2020. In the latter decades of the 20th century, the “opening of the doors of the Soviet Union” meant that more than 1.8 million Jews left eastern Europe between 1969 and 2020, resulting in “a drastic shift in the Jewish population’s centre of gravity from the east to the west of the continent”. The study also reports that almost 70,000 Israeli-born Jews now live permanently in Europe, about 25% of these in the UK. The vast majority of European Jews – including 90% of British Jews – are not actively planning to emigrate to Israel or elsewhere. A minority of European Jewish families have more than five children, with the highest proportion (24%) in Belgium, which has a large ultra-Orthodox population. The lowest proportion (5%) is in Poland. More than three-quarters of Polish Jews are married to non-Jews, but only 14% of Belgian Jews. Intermarriage has been a “significant factor in the erosion of the Jewish population size” as children in such families are often not brought up as Jewish. The UK Jewish population had the smallest proportion (4%) of converts to Judaism, and Spain the largest (25%). In every one of 12 EU countries , Jews were more pro-EU than the non-Jewish population. In Hungary, there was the biggest gap, with 51% of Jews saying they had a strong attachment to the EU, compared with 19% of the total population. There were also big gaps in Poland, Austria and Hungary.
21||Lone Flyer: The Last Flight of Amy Johnson review – soaring spiritAmy Johnson is, in many ways, still the epitome of the romantic female adventurer. Finding international fame as the first woman to fly solo from England to Australia in 1930, she lived fast and died young, breaking a host of records before crashing to her death at the age of 37. In this revival of Ade Morris’s 2001 play about her life, we glimpse the woman behind the celebrity pilot and aviation engineer, as frustrated by social convention as she was determined to embrace adventure. We meet Johnson in her dying moments and her life flashes before our eyes over the course of the play. We flit back and forth from that frantic, final flight to her early years in Hull and at Sheffield University, then to finding her passion for flying and meeting the loves of her life. Lucy Betts’s direction navigates a socially-distanced stage so cleverly that we barely notice the lack of touch between its two actors. In flying jacket and cap, Hannah Edwards, as Johnson, is spirited, sparky and full of yearning for a remarkable life . She steers between steeliness and vulnerability in the narration of her story, while Benedict Salter switches with virtuosity between several roles, including Johnson’s gentle father, her remote first lover, Franz, and her husband and fellow pilot, Jim Mollison. It is Johnson’s poetic subjectivity that leads the storytelling and the script zings with colour as she speaks of a near-drowning in a “huge fist of sea” – the freezing waves were “a million needles of icy hot”. She refers to wartime zeppelins as “flying badgers” and to a teacher who has “a face like cold suet pudding”. A revolving trolley is the central prop and mostly functions as Johnson’s Gipsy Moth plane. Jamie Kubisch-Wiles and Thom Townsend’s sound design, together with Harry Armytage’s lighting, signal scene changes without any other big shifts in the set. The sea is suggested by undulating white light; a cinema hall is evoked with flickering illumination and piano music; and the sound of a school bell or an aeroplane engine’s thrum instantly create an atmosphere, alongside the eloquence of Morris’s script. It is clear that Johnson is a maverick, pushing against norms to be the woman she wants to be rather than the “teacher or nurse” she is expected to become. She speaks of her fear of being stuck in an unfulfilled life which, it is hinted, led her sister to kill herself. Travelling through a series of dull jobs, from a typing pool to the lingerie department of Peter Jones and a law firm, she finally trades it in for a “more precarious existence at Stag Lane aerodrome” in London. Her dilemmas feel strangely – even sadly –contemporary as she reflects on marriage, motherhood and personal freedom. “Love makes me dependent and I hate that it saps all my adventure,” she says, though she craves it, too. The play also, obliquely, shows how the world judges female heroism. She is described as a “blonde” and as a “daughter” by the press, even after her extraordinary accomplishments as a pilot. At the height of her fame, she seems to be caught in an uncomfortable and intrusive alliance with the press. “Fame is like battery acid – use it, don’t drink it,” she says, almost as a warning to herself. This aspect, while not heavily investigated, again feels contemporary and reminiscent of the way in which adventuring women such as the late Alison Hargreaves – the first female mountaineer to scale Everest alone and without supplementary oxygen – have been judged. Discordant cello music signals a return to her final moments in the air. It sounds slightly shrill by the end and we return to this scene too often, but the play holds its power right until that final crash, and all the hope of a magnificent, adventuring life in it. • At the Watermill theatre, Newbury, until 21 November.
19||Honest Thief review – low-stakes thrillerLiam Neeson is Tom Carter, AKA “the In and Out Bandit”, a bank robber who has swindled 12 banks in seven states, accruing $9m. Importantly, he’s “met a woman” and is ready to hand over the money and turn himself in. In this low-stakes thriller, FBI agents Niven and Hall (Jai Courtney and Anthony Ramos) scupper his plans for a quiet life by attempting to kill him and steal the money for themselves. Former marine Tom is having none of it. With Neeson well within the confines of his comfort zone, tailed by corrupt cops and diving out of hotel windows, the film should be better. Yet it drags, not least in tedious scenes of him earnestly telling new girlfriend Annie (Kate Walsh) how she’s put him on the straight and narrow.
20||Royal Mail to hire record number of Christmas tempsRoyal Mail is to hire a record 33,000 temporary workers for the Christmas period – two-thirds more than usual – to handle the UK festive parcel frenzy triggered by the surge in online shopping. Christmas is always the busiest time for the postal service, but this year it is seeking record numbers of temporary recruits to help to sort an even higher flow of packages as high-street closures during the pandemic have forced shoppers online. The UK has about 90,000 postal workers and Royal Mail typically hires 20,000 seasonal workers. This year, the extra staff will work mainly in sorting offices, delivery vans and data centres. Sally Ashford, the Royal Mail’s chief human resources officer, said: “During these unprecedented times we believe it is critical that Royal Mail continues to deliver. We want to do our best to deliver Christmas for our customers and support the effort on the pandemic. This helps the whole country to celebrate and stay safe during these difficult times.” The company aims to fill more than 13,000 vacancies in mail sorting offices in England, 1,400 in Scotland, 700 in Wales and 500 in Northern Ireland. About 1,000 additional workers are also sought for Royal Mail’s dedicated Covid-19 testing kit collection team, while other sorting and driving roles are on offer in logistics and at its Heathrow international hub. There are also temporary positions in data inputting. The pandemic has accelerated the shift to online shopping, with restrictions closing non-essential high street shops for months during 2020 and further closures not being ruled out. Royal Mail staff have worked throughout the pandemic, despite significant safety concerns from unions. Last week, Royal Mail announced that its postal workers would for the first time collect parcels on the doorstep, in one of the biggest changes to the service as it adapts to the decline in letters and rapid growth in online shopping. Royal Mail reported a £139m increase in total revenue in the five months to 30 August, as the pandemic caused a surge in parcel deliveries. While letter deliveries collapsed, parcel volumes during that period rose by a third year-on-year – an increase of 177m parcels. It normally carries 1.3bn parcels a year. Rivals such as Amazon and other parcel companies have, however, helped to erode its market share.
20||Desperate UK Covid home workers renting solace from nimble-footed firmsTired of working on the kitchen table or juggling conference calls and family life, and with no return to their desks in sight, many of the country’s office workers are seeking out alternative workplaces – from hotel rooms and cocktail bars to fitness clubs – for a change of scene. Businesses are hoping that the offer of a desk, reliable wifi and refreshments will attract workers weary of half a year of working from home, while boosting their income in challenging times. On a wet weekday morning, Edmund Weil has bagged a cosy corner table at Swift Shoreditch, a cocktail bar in the hip east London district. But he’s there for a business meeting rather than the drinks. “Everyone has seen a lot of home,” Weil said. “Lots of people who don’t have a home office are at the stage where if you have to choose between a face-to-face meeting and Zoom, they choose face to face.” The father of three children, including a four-month-old baby, Weil has been looking for places to work where there are fewer distractions. As a bar owner, he is more used than most to spending daylight hours in venues dedicated to night-time socialising, but he is part of a growing number of workers finding temporary desks in different locations. Coral Anderson, the general manager of Swift Shoreditch, said the 10pm curfew has hurt trade at bars that usually make most of their income in late-night trading. Swift Shoreditch has signed up to a “work from bars” initiative created by Fraser Campbell, ambassador for whisky brand Dewar’s. Its intention is to highlight venues that are now welcoming workers, while bringing new customers to businesses struggling with reduced trade and government regulations. “Bars have changed their opening hours to open at 12 o’clock, they have started doing food, they have amazing wifi, and tables with distance between them,” Campbell said. Campbell’s online map of 150 venues across the UK, from London to Aberdeen, has been visited almost 20,000 times in the four weeks since launch. Anderson hopes joining the map will help Swift Shoreditch to reach a wider audience. The number of British workers travelling to work has been falling since early October, according to official figures, and a quarter of workers are still working exclusively from home. Following the government’s U-turn over the return to the office in September, some of the country’s largest hotel chains have begun to offer daytime room rentals to workers in search of peace and quiet, as hotels grapple with a lack of international tourists and slump in business travel. Hilton has launched day rentals across the majority of its more than 160 UK hotels, from one of its most luxurious hotels, the Conrad London St James, which costs from £150 a day, to £44.85 a day for a room in York’s Hampton by Hilton. Meanwhile, European hotel group Accor, owner of brands including Novotel and Ibis, has launched a similar offering at about 220 locations from Brighton to Edinburgh. Hilton offers rooms with a desk and chair, facilities to make hot drinks, as well as room service and wifi, and use of the gym or swimming pool, with a promise of high levels of hygiene. “Hotels are having to be creative,” said John Rogers, the head of brands and franchise operations for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at Hilton. “Where historically there would have been large volumes midweek of corporate business, clearly those volumes are lower.” Beyond hotels, the David Lloyd fitness club chain has reported a 40% increase in online inquiries for corporate memberships, which it attributes to employers wanting to provide staff with gym access and a workplace. Growing demand for one-day desk rentals has sparked a change at flexible workspace provider Fora, which previously rented out offices for a minimum of one month. Fora, with 11 buildings across London and Reading and plans for more, offers a day pass at a cost of £40 in the capital and £25 in Reading. “People aren’t certain how much office space they need right now and how often they want to go into work,” said Enrico Sanna, the chief executive of Fora, who is himself working from the stylishly designed building on Broadwick Street in Soho. “There is a hardcore of people who don’t want to be at home. These are people who can do it for three months, but not past that, as it’s not the right setup mentally or physically.” Opening a new business during a recession is for the brave, but Dominic Cools-Lartigue jumped at the chance to open a restaurant, gallery and co-working venue in Shoreditch. The building, which houses the Tramshed Project, once an East End tram generator, became available after its former occupier, a fine dining restaurant, collapsed into administration in April. When the Guardian visited a few days after its reopening, about half of the well-spaced tables in the 1,860 sq metre (20,000 sq ft) building were occupied by laptop users. Laurent Louvrier, the chief executive of the artificial intelligence firm SuccessData, had booked one of Tramshed’s booths for a brainstorming day with three of his 11 staff. The startup terminated its lease in a building run by flexible office provider WeWork during lockdown, saving a “not negligible” amount of money. Instead, small groups from SuccessData meet once a week at venues such as the Tramshed Project, where a four-person booth requires a minimum daily spend of £30 on food and drink. “This is all we need at the moment,” said Louvier. “Just opening this vast space as a restaurant right now wouldn’t be viable,” said Cools-Lartigue. “The co-working will help the with the evening restaurant bookings. Hopefully one will feed the other.”
20||Sunak must extend universal credit or be forced into another U-turnRight from the start of the Covid-19 crisis the government was never in any doubt about the implications of putting the economy into deep freeze. The Treasury knew it was going to be bad, so there was a furlough scheme for employees, financial assistance for the self-employed, grants, loan guarantees, a business rates holiday, a deferral of VAT, and a £1,000-a-year increase in universal credit. The last of these – the £20 a week increase in UC – has tended to be overlooked in recent months as attention has focused on what should replace the furlough, but as things stand the temporary increase will be reversed next April. Make no mistake, this has all the hallmarks of a slow-burn crisis for the government that it would do well to address while it has the time. Otherwise, it will eventually be forced into yet another U-turn at a moment not of its own choosing. The Treasury says it is keeping UC under review, but its message is that the extra £20 a week comes at a hefty cost – £9b this year – and that there is only so much money to go round. More for welfare means less for other public services. It is as simple as that. Except that it isn’t. The increase in UC was supposed to be temporary for the same reason that the furlough was supposed to be temporary: the Treasury assumed that by now the Covid-19 crisis would largely be over and that the economy would on its way to a complete recovery. Rishi Sunak’s decision last week to beef up his job support scheme was an acceptance that the effects of the pandemic are going to be felt until at least next spring. New restrictions, either through the two-week circuit breaker in Wales or the tiered systems in England and Scotland, mean businesses will close and workers will be laid off. Sunak hopes that most of the closures and the layoffs will be temporary but many of them won’t be. It’s Sunak’s job to worry about the public finances and there is no question that the government has been borrowing a lot. The deficit stood at just over £200bn in the first six months of the 2020-21 financial year – comfortably a peacetime record. Yet faced with the threat of mass unemployment, the chancellor last week made the only possible decision: to extend the furlough in all but name and ignore the impact on the deficit. Sooner or later he is going to be faced with a similar decision over universal credit – and if he has any sense he will come to the same decision. The original increase in UC back in March was the right thing to do. Although no Conservative would admit to it, years of benefit cuts had left the UK’s welfare system unfit for purpose in normal times, let alone during a government-imposed lockdown that was certain to cost many jobs. Torsten Bell, the director of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, noted last week that low earners have been at the centre of the economic storm. Not only have they borne the highest health risks while higher earners have been working from home, they have been three times as likely to have been furloughed as high earners, and four times as likely to have lost their jobs in the first phase of the crisis. It’s not hard to see why. Many low earners are in consumer-facing jobs in sectors such as hospitality, tourism and leisure. These are the bit of the economy that faced the biggest hit in the spring and in the case of hospitality are about to suffer another tough period. Bell adds, though, that income inequality has not changed all that much during the pandemic, with the blow reasonably equally distributed among low, middle and higher income brackets. Why? Partly because those on the lowest incomes were less likely to be working going into the crisis, partly because of the wage top-ups provided by the furlough, and partly because of the cushion provided by UC. “This increase in income from the state, coming at the same time as the decrease in income from the labour market, meant that the overall incomes of the poorest fifth were close to being unchanged in the first phase of this crisis,” Bell said in an article for the online magazine Tortoise. “Without this policy action they would have fallen a full 8%.” There is one other reason why Sunak needs to make the welfare system more generous: it would be good for the economy, and ultimately the public finances. A paper produced by the TUC and the thinktank, the Institute for Public Policy Research, models the impact of either doubling child benefit or increasing the child element of UC by £20 a week. Either measure would lead to a reduction in child poverty, which would be welcome in itself, but the IPPR researchers found there were also sizeable multiplier effects, under which each one pound of stimulus produces more than one pound’s worth of output. The reason is that the poorest 40% of the population have a higher tendency to spend any extra income than richer groups. Put simply, if you are having trouble putting food on the table, the first thing you do if your UC goes up is to head down to the supermarket. The money feeds straight back into the economy, creating work for food suppliers and cashiers, who in turn spend some of their extra income. The study estimates that multipliers could be as high as 1.7 or 1.8 for the changes it is proposing. Something for Sunak to consider as he works out when to fly the white flag over UC. • Sign up to the daily Business Today email here or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk.
1||NRL grand final 2020: Melbourne Storm beat Penrith Panthers– as it happenedAnd with that, we should leave the Storm players to their celebrations. And the Panthers to their commiserations. Melbourne won it in the first half; Penrith ensured there was a period of squeaky bum time for the Storm as time ran out, but ultimately, Cam Smith’s team held on and are NRL premiers once again. Thanks for joining us. Here’s Emma Kemp’s match report: The Storm players get up onto the stage and one-by-one receive their premiership rings from Craig Bellamy. Time for Cameron Smith to speak again - plenty of thank yous, respect for Penrith etc. Peter V’landys and Andrew Abdo get a mention for getting the competition back up and running. But nothing about his future plans, natch. He signs off with some words of wisdom for his teammates: “Lastly, fellas, this 2020 season, it’s one like no other and what we’ve been able to achieve tonight, it’s - we’ll never forget it. We’ll remember it for the rest of our lives and a big congratulations to everyone, particularly the boys that are celebrating their first premiership. Hold on to that forever, boys.” Cue Tina Turner.... The kid looks a bit overwhelmed. “This is unbelievable,” he says. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history. “It’s been a great year. Been able to play with the GOAT and these boys again, thanks, Penrith. You are really good. 17 in a row is an unbelievable achievement. Well done to you guys. Thanks to our fans who stuck strong. Especially our ones back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back there at the moment and we wear the V on our jersey proudly. Can’t wait to go back there and celebrate with you guys, so thank you.” And your Clive Churchill medal winner is.... Ryan Papenhuyzen! Clive Churchill medal announcement is on its way... Josh Addo-Carr and Cam Munster, being nice about Penrith. Here’s JAC: “We knew the Panthers would come out firing. We got the start that we wanted. You know, full credit to Panthers. They will be a very tough side for many years to come.” And Munster: “We know what Penrith are like, the best team. Their attack outstanding. That’s the reason why they are the minor premiers. We knew we had to start well. We didn’t off the kick-off, but 50/50 in some tries there, just ended up getting the right bit of green. But full credit to Penrith tonight. It’s been the best team all year like I said.” And the maestro Cameron Smith: “We did it the hard way there, 11 men in the end. Penrith were coming home with a wet sail and playing the footy they played all year. It’s just been terrific. “As a club and team and organisation, we’ve admired what Penrith have done this year, to win 17 in a row in this competition, it’s a special effort. On top of what everyone’s been through this year, as I said before the game, it is going to be a great contest. There’s another couple of minutes on the clock, I don’t know what would have happened there. You’ve got to give credit to Penrith. They fought to the end. “I’m just really proud of this - not just this football team that played tonight, the entire squad. There’s a handful of players there that they trained, they trained hard every year and applied it every day, applied themselves every day to help the 17 going out on the weekend and they didn’t even get a game of football this year. You know, the entire squad has done a fantastic effort. We haven’t been home for about five months. You know, just with the conditions that we’ve been under, I think it’s just a remarkable effort to be here tonight and to get a victory.” A disappointed Nathan Cleary: “Super disappointing. I thought I let the boys down, but, yeah, hopefully we’ll be back. “There were a few moments through our intercept and obviously the one at half-time, and, just let in too many ordinary tries. They were too good. “We’ve got a taste of it now. It’s going to hurt for along time, but it’s fuelled us for next year. Train harder than ever now.” Melbourne tryscorer Ryan Papenhuyzen: “I’m so emotional.Oh, wow! The whole day was just the unknown. You don’t know what’s going to happen. You’re so confident in the boys, but these guys coming off 17 in a row, the most butterflies I’ve ever had. These boys, we’ve done it so tough this year. We have the V on our jersey because back home they’re doing it a lot tougher than we are. That is unbelievable, so proud of the boys. I didn’t think I would be able to do one of these and we’ve done it. “Our first half, that’s the best defensive performance I have seen from our side this year. We had confidence after last week that we could start well and done that. They came back strong at the end, but our first half definitely set the platform. That’s unbelievable.” What a finish to the game! My goodness, the Panthers made you think they could actually pull off a miraculous comeback. In the end, they fell just short, as Melbourne Storm once again prove they’re the best in the business. Stick around for the post-match interviews. 80 mins: Such drama late on but the Storm hang on! Melbourne are NRL premiers! 80 mins: Cleary scores! He runs at the Storm defence all on his own and goes over! He declines the kick and they’ll have one final chance to score - one play to go the length of the pitch... 79 mins: It’s been one hell of a fight by Penrith, but they’ve simply run out of time. Melbourne look like they’re going to hold on. Meanwhile, Smith is sinbinned for a professional foul and the Panthers will finish with 11 men on the pitch. 77 mins: Time is running out for Penrith. Mansour can’t get on the end of a loose ball in the Storm in-goal following a Kikau kick... it’s not going to be their night. 74 mins: The Storm defence looks slight ragged as Penrith turn up the offensive heat. Lui kicks a high swirling ball forward which Papenhuyzen does really well to hold in the Storm in-goal. It’s now that the nerves will be heightened and errors can be made. 73 mins: The Panthers are back in this! Incredible scenes in Sydney! Lui throws a brilliant ball over the top to Mansour who’s all alone out wide and touches down! Cleary’s kick is askew, but still, we have a game on our hands here. Are the Panthers about the stage one of the greatest comebacks of all time? 72 mins: The Panthers have the wind in their sails now - they can smell a comeback. They get anther six as the crowd turns up the volume. Clearly jinks forward... 71 mins: Panthers ball. Crichton threatens. Storm repel the attack. But hang on - they’re looking into a professional foul now – Hughes on Kikau as the Panthers man looked to race onto a kick. Cam Smith argues the toss but it’s ruled as a professional foul and Hughes is off! Drama at ANZ Stadium with nine minutes to go in the 2020 grand final! 69 mins: The crowd erupts as Crichton gives the Panthers a glimmer of hope! Cleary is at the centre of the move, passing to Lee who in turn feed Crichton. The youngster steps inside and out before barrelling across the line and, with 11 minutes remaining, do we have a game on our hands? 67 mins: Papenhuyzen! What an athlete! He leaps yards over the touchline to knock a high kick back into play. Amazingly he keeps it alive - tremendous effort! 65 mins: A brief moment of excitement for the Panthers as they look to break on the left hand side, but Mansour’s unexpected attempted kick is smothered and the move fizzles out. The groan from the stands is audible... 63 mins: The Storm are nearly through again here after a brilliant pass from Kaufusi to Lee, but he is held up. Last tackle is called and the pressure eases. 61 mins: Melbourne hold a 20-point lead, with 20 minutes to go, and they begin a new set on the 20m line. But they make a mess of it and Penrith come away with the ball. 60 mins: Even if Penrith received a boost from that try, time is rapidly running out for them to capitalise. A quarter of the grand final remains, and the Storm are again pressing forward. 57 mins: Dale Finucane is hit hard by Kikau, and the big man gets up gingerly. In fact, he’ll have to come off for an HIA. It’s a brutal game, rugby league. 54 mins: Are Penrith back in this one now? Certainly the crowd have been revived by that try - and the slice of luck finally afforded to them. 53 mins: But hang on, Penrith look to have got one back! Yeo dinks a kick through and Brian To’o races onto it and grounds the ball right in the corner! There’s a degree of controversy over the legality of the kick in the first place, Yeo having taken advantage of running behind one of his own players, but the Bunker isn’t bothered about that. To’o is adjudged to have stayed in play and the try stands! Cleary adds the two, off the post and through. 52 mins: It looks like the Storm have scored again, as play is switched from left to right. Hughes kicks through and Vunivalu sprints ahead of Mansour to touch down! But replays show it wasn’t a clean touch down, and the try won’t stand. Worrying signs for Penrith, regardless. 51 mins: Here come the Storm, surging down the left hand side of the ANZ Stadium pitch. The passing is slick, the running is hard... 48 mins: Mansour gets dragged back about 10m by three Storm players - not the direction the Panthers need to be going at this stage. Melbourne look in total control - and that feeling doesn’t go away as moments later Kikau is pulled up for touching the ball a second time as he tries to roll it under his boot. Oh dear, these errors are going to be costly for Penrith. 46 mins: Papenhuyzen scores! Is that it? Brilliant play from the Storm man who spots a hole in the Panthers’ line, puts his head down and hoons off to score what could be a crucial try for the Storm! Smith... misses with the extras! But still, a healthy lead has just got even healthier and the Panthers have it all to do. 45 mins: Moments later Penrith are called for a Leota knock-on. He challenges the call but after a brief break, it’s unsuccessful. 43 mins: Cleary launches a huge kick under pressure that Vunivalu allows to bounce. He recovers and the Storm go again with a fresh six. But Addo-Carr makes a hash of his handling, some confusion follows and there’s a knock on somewhere. Penrith will feed a scrum. 41 mins: And we’re back under way in Sydney. Given what Cleary just said, can the trophy engraver crack on with writing Storm on the premiership trophy as soon as Melbourne score again? Here they come early this second half... Munster kicks at the end of their six - a decent one at that. Ivan Cleary still believes. “Obviously didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next. Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try. We can do that. Anything can happen. Get some momentum going. That’s the goal at the moment. They don’t score again and we’re next to score.” Sterlo on the TV has just said it will be the greatest premiership comeback if the Panthers can get back into this one. He’s not wrong. Billy Slater, meanwhile, says of his old mate Smith becoming the all-time top points scorer in grand finals (42): “Just another record for Cameron Smith. Boy, didn’t he go to work in that first half. The great No 9, it started with an early kick out of dummy half. He turned the Penrith Panthers around and allowed his aggressive defensive line to get up and apply the pressure on it. He kicked multiple penalty goals and it’s just his true indication in defence, he’s so effective in that middle third of the field. He’s suffocating Penrith Panthers, but picking up the right options and also picking up the first try of his grand final career. So this is his grand final career. So this is his first grand final try. If this is his last game, he’s certainly making it count.” The first 40 minutes in brief: Melbourne took the lead through a penalty try after Tyrone May stuck out a leg on Justin Olam Suliasi Vunivalu scored a second after intercepting Nathan Cleary’s pass and running nearly the full length of the pitch Cam Smith, who also kicked two penalty goals, took advantage of a loose ball on the stroke of half-time to score Melbourne’s third Luckless Panthers have had two tries disallowed - first Josh Mansour and then Stephen Crichton What a half of NRL football! It’s going to take quite some comeback from the Panthers if they are to catch the Storm after the break. Penrith will feel disappointed to be 22 point down without a reply, but many have found out to their cost that Cameron Smith in this kind of mood is an awful proposition. The irrepressible Smith has been immaculate with his kicking this half, and added that try late on for good measure. If this is going to be his last game, he’s going about making it a memorable personal performance. There’ll be plenty more twists and turns to come. Time to take a breath for now though. Half-time show coming up... 40 mins: Smith celebrates a try! The immediate call is “no try”! Koroisau knocks the ball out of Smith’s hands as he tries to pass, but the veteran picks it up quickly, spots an opening and dives over the line. There’s no problem with that and Smith has his try! He adds the extras and the Storm will head into the sheds with a commanding lead! 38 mins: Oof, Asofa-Solomona surges forward as Melbourne threaten the Penrith line again. 36 mins: The intensity-ometer has just been turned up, as a couple of bone-crunching tackles come in from the Storm defence. The ball eventually goes forward and Melbourne will feed a scrum. The challenge for Penrith now is to keep Melbourne out until the half-time siren sounds. 34 mins: Melbourne get another set of six - and another chance inside the Panthers half to trouble the scorekeepers. Smith goes to Munster, who is brought down 5m out from the line before Kaufusi attempts a kick that is smothered. The Panthers survive. 32 mins: Channel Nine has done the analysis and Vunivalu was travelling at 33kph as he raced off towards the tryline there. Incredible sequence of play, and the Panthers must be feeling like it might not be their night already. 31 mins: Here come the Panthers, looking to get on the scoreboard for the first time tonight. Martin looks to break through on the right hand side, it comes back inside to Cleary who looks to fling a long high ball back to the left flank... but Vunivalu is there! He plucks the ball out of the air, falls to the ground but springs back up and hares off towards the Panthers’ try line. They’re not going to stop him in a foot race! Vunivalu takes to the air in customary fashion and dives over the line! No bother for Smith with the conversion. Again. 27 mins: With the resulting kick, Smith makes no mistake from a very similar position to his last kick and the Storm extend their lead again! 26 mins: Some big hits coming from all angles at the moment. Fisher-Harris is pulled up for a late hit on Brandon Smith, who joins Welch off the pitch for HIA. 24 mins: Smith attempts a kick to touch but it hits Martin in the legs, so it’ll be a Penrith feed in a scrum. 22 mins: It’s been quite the opening quarter of this match – hectic to say the least, and filled with plenty of attacking moments. And there’s more drama now as Kikau is called for picking the ball up in an offside position. Smith will have a chance to add another couple for the Storm. He’s deadly accurate and Melbourne edge further ahead. 17 mins: The crowd can sense something here... Martin leaps like a salmon to take an AFL-type mark to the delight of those in the stands, but it comes to nothing. An aside: it’s great to hear real fans and real reactions in a proper sized crowd at a sporting event. There must be plenty looking on from afar with a touch of jealousy that there’s a major sporting event that fans are able to enjoy in person. 16 mins: Now the pressure turns to the other end - Cleary flicks to Kikau, who bursts forward before Crichton gets the ball and tries to dive over the line! The call is no try, and judging from the Panthers’ muted reaction, that’s probably the case. Yes, he doesn’t get it down and we’re stil at 6-0. 14 mins: The Storm had momentum here, but Bromwich is hit hard and loses the ball. With that goes a bit of the pressure on Penrith, who can breathe again and look to build from deep in their own half. 12 mins: Here goes Mansour, making some metres for Penrith. Then Kikau takes up the mantle, but he turns the ball over to Melbourne after playing the ball after his arm hit the ground. Danger looms here. 10 mins: That’s two Bunker decisions that have gone against the Panthers already tonight. Not a great way to start the game for them, but both looked to be correct. 8 mins: Mansour leaps over in the corner to get the Panthers back on level terms! They look to get a little stuck in the middle of field, but some quick hands from Luai to Kikau and then to Mansour on the outside opens things up. But the Panthers are left disappointed by the review system again - this time Crichton is penalised for running into the defensive line and the try won’t stand! 5 mins: Well, that’s a turn-up for the books - penalty tries are a rarity in the grand finals. How will the Panthers respond to that now? 4 mins: Is this a the first try of the game? No, says the referee, despite Melbourne’s celebrations!. Addo-Carr keeps the ball alive for the Storm, flicking it back inside to Olam, who tries to burrow under May to the line. He doesn’t get the ball over, but on review the call is that May’s leg prevented Olam from scoring and he’s given a penalty try! Smith adds the extras from the sideline, and the Storm lead early! 3 mins: Melbourne hold their line despite the early pressure from the Panthers though, and will now get a first chance to move downfield. 1 min: And we’re off! Cleary boots the Black Hawk-delivered ball down field, where the Storm struggle to pick it up. Hughes let the ball bounce, the Panthers pounce and it’s Penrith ball from a scrum! Great start for the team in black. National anthem: Chloe Zoule has some pipes! She delivers a rousing rendition of Advance Australia Fair. And we’re just about ready to go (just the six minutes behind schedule so far, which isn’t too bad). Here they come! Smith leads the Storm down the tunnel and out into the stadium... to a chorus of boos from the “home” crowd. The reception as the Panthers arrive could not be more different. The minor premiers burst out of the tunnel to a rock soundtrack and a hearty welcome. 40,000 fans are inside the stadium tonight. The match ball has been delivered onto the pitch by.... a Black Hawk helicopter. Because, why not? We’re nearly at kick-off. The teams are just getting ready to leave the sheds and enter the arena. Ivan Cleary talks: “[This week has been] a little bit less commitments than usual but can still feel the buzz. In Penrith, the community is right into it so it’s been really cool. It’s obviously a difficult season for everybody involved. I just - the fact we have been so consistent’s been probably the thing that’s really pressed me andI’m most proud about. “[The weather] is definitely a factor, how you control are the ball, kicking game. Defence particularly in their end of the field is going to be key tonight. “We’ll have some definite things about how we start but you’ve also got to play the game. There are going to be moments out there tonight and you’ve got to be alive and ready to play. We have been able to do it all year and I think we can do it again tonight.” Craig Bellamy talks: “A bit excited, a bit nervous. You never get sick of coming to a grand final but it has been a lot different this year. Only came down yesterday. Usually you’re down here three or four days before the grand final.The guys have been great all year and they’ve handled what we’ve had to handle and it’s been a great year and hopefully we can finish off in style today.” Asked what his message was to the Storm players, Bellamy said: “I want them going out and playing their strengths. Back themselves and do what they do well. That’s why they are in the team.They are in the team for a certain reason, what they do well. We need them to go out and do that well today.” NRLW: In case you missed it earlier, the Broncos underlined their utter dominance of the women’s competition with a 20-10 win over the Roosters. That’s an incredible three straight Brisbane titles since the competition’s inception. The pre-match entertainment is under way at ANZ – Amy Shark has just wrapped up her set. If you want a view on that, head to Twitter – there are plenty of opinions on that website. I’ve no intention of labouring the point about what the NRL has been through to get to this point, so will instead point you in the direction of this, by Emma Kemp: Much like some sports stars, coronavirus does not adhere to regulations, and the line between risk and reward was as fine as they come. The NRL operated at the behest of the pandemic, and just about got away with it. Read the full piece here: Channel Nine’s update on the weather has the conditions “wreaking havoc”. Can’t wait. Cameron Smith: Will he? Won’t he? The Storm great is still giving nothing away (officially) about his future after tonight’s game. It’s been the talk of the town all week (and for ages before that to be honest), but Smith is not going to be drawn. Earlier Freddie Fittler had a go at getting him to, but with no joy. “I’ll just try to keep the team with a level head,” Smith said on Channel None. “A result won’t determine my decision past this year. Whatever the result is, I will go away and think about it after this game. Whatever will be, will be.” Team news: No late changes for the Storm, but Ivan Cleary has sprung one with Tyrone May starting in the centres for the Panthers. Brent Naden will start on the bench. It is just the eighth time utility May has started a game this season Panthers: Dylan Edwards, Josh Mansour, Tyrone May, Stephen Crichton, Brian To’o, Jarome Luai, Nathan Cleary, James Tamou (captain), Apisai Koroisau, James Fisher-Harris, Viliame Kikau, Liam Martin, Isaah Yeo. Interchange: Brent Naden , Kurt Capewell, Moses Leota, Zane Tetevano. Reserves: Mitch Kenny, Dean Whare, Matt Burton, Spencer Leniu. Storm: Ryan Papenhuyzen, Suliasi Vunivalu, Brenko Lee, Justin Olam, Josh Addo-Carr, Cameron Munster, Jahrome Hughes, Jesse Bromwich, Cameron Smith (captain), Christian Welch, Felise Kaufusi, Kenneath Bromwich, Nelson Asofa-Solomona. Interchange: Brandon Smith, Tino Faasuamaleaui, Dale Finucane, Nicho Hynes. Reserves: Tom Eisenhuth, Paul Momirovski, Tui Kamikamica, Ryley Jacks. Tonight’s referee is Gerard Sutton. The toss: This happened earlier – the Panthers won it and will kick off proceedings later tonight. Weather update: It’s been steadily raining pretty much all day in Sydney – the opening round of the Women’s Big Bash League has already been impacted by the rain – and slippery conditions, both underfoot at ANZ and in terms of ball-handling could well be factors in deciding the NRL grand final. My weather sources (the internet) tell me there’s a lot more rain to come tonight too. Well, here we are then. The final act of an engrossing, unique and plain bonkers season, the likes of which we will surely never see again. Coronavirus did its best to derail the 2020 campaign, but, given we are about to enjoy the spectacle of a grand final at ANZ Stadium, you could say it failed. Sure, the NRL had to demonstrate a degree of agility and deal with a few curveballs along the way, but a mix of stubbornness, determination and a large slice of luck has meant we are in a position where there will be a 2020 premiership winner. You could argue there will be an asterisk by the name of either the Panthers or Storm later this evening, given the disruption to the season, but that’s a discussion for another time. For now, there’s a grand final to be played, some elite rugby league to be enjoyed and a Kick off is scheduled for 7:30pm AEDT, which is about an hour away. Plenty to talk about before then, so why don’t you drop me a line at mike.hytner@theguardian.com or tweet @mike_hytner. It’s always more fun having others on board.
1||Melbourne Storm hold off late Penrith charge in grand final to claim fourth NRL premiershipIt started with an illegal outstretched leg and finished with a frantic flourish that was very nearly a Penrith comeback for the ages. Ultimately, though, Melbourne Storm confirmed they are the dominant NRL team of the 21st century. The Panthers were less than four minutes into their first grand final in 17 years when Tyrone May’s stuck out his right limb, which stopped Justin Olam burrowing under him and over the line. Josh Addo-Carr had kept the ball in play with a smart flick at the corner but, for the few moments after on-field referee Gerard Sutton ruled this a “no try”, May had seemingly done his job. Seconds later the indefatigable Cameron Smith had made the first of three conversions – he finished the 80 minutes with 14 points – in the Storm’s 26-20 triumph, a turbo-charged, sometimes grotesque, often spectacular affair. The scoreboard at ANZ Stadium read 22-0 at half-time; the Panthers scored three times in the last 12 minutes. That early penalty try was the first since one was awarded to Jamie Lyon in 2013. These oddities tend to happen in season-deciders. Just utter the phrase “six again” and every Canberra Raiders fan will understand its significance. Yet in the strangest of seasons, and after a 16-team competition somehow side-stepped a pandemic, order was, in a sense, restored via Melbourne's sixth grand final win – albeit the 2007 and 2009 titles were stripped due to salary cap breaches. And while Penrith must wait at least another year to add to their 1991 and 2003 premierships their counterparts, displaced amd living out of suitcases since June due to Covid-19, ensured their era of superiority continued. This was the Storm’s 10th grand final in 23 years, and one up against the youthful vitality of the minor premiers. But it was their first premiership without the other two-thirds of the big three in Billy Slater and Cooper Cronk, and may yet send the last out on a high, should 37-year-old Smith retire. He refused to shed any light on the subject on the night. It was also an individual triumph for coach Craig Bellamy who, at 61, is the oldest coach to win a decider, overtaking super coach Wayne Bennett who was 60 when he guided St George Illawarra to glory over the Roosters in 2010. And while Bellamy’s charges were pushed until the death – not to mention the late sin bins for Brandon Smith and Jahrome Hughes – the brutal first-half dismantling they had already inflicted proved a fine safety net in a game where little is safe. There was a sense in those first 40 minutes that luck was on the Storm’s side. Olam’s penalty try was the start. Then, Josh Mansour’s seventh-minute try was disallowed for Stephen Crichton’s obstruction. Soon thereafter Crichton himself thought he had touched gold only to be told he had only made contact with a bit of air. Smith kicked two penalty goals. There were also periods – before the frenetic finale – during which the Panthers’ play warranted a 19th straight win, when set after set and wave after wave had the Storm stretched thin, their every sinew strained. But there were others, too, like when Nathan Cleary misdirected a pass and had the misfortune of watching the intercept fall for Suliasi Vunivalu. The Fijian took it to ground, then he flew, melting away 80 metres at 33km/h as mere mortals in black chased vainly in his wake. This turn of events had a distinctly Houdini flavour - the Panthers appeared to have buried themselves alive despite their clear capacity to get themselves out of a bind. Except that, instead of emerging intact, Ivan Cleary’s men never resurfaced. The whole escapade wreaked of Vaudevillian wickedness, headlined by a Cameron Smith caricature. The veteran of “will he or won’t he?” fame made another cut 60 seconds before the break, right when Penrith needed to stem the bleeding. The initial call was “no try”, on the assumption Smith had dropped the ball before retrieving and dashing through an opening. But replays showed Apisai Koroisau had knocked it from his hands, and another conversion later it was 22-0. “Obviously it didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next,” coach Cleary said at half-time. “Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try.” Five minutes into the second half, Clive Churchill medallist Ryan Papenhuyzen sprinted 70 metres after the break to score untouched from a scrum. The game looked gone, but it was not the death knell it should have been. With 28 minutes to play, Penrith raced from 26-0 down, reducing the margin to six with three seconds remaining and one final play to level it from the kick-off after a late Cleary try. But after a cross-field back and forth the ball landed in Felise Kaufusi’s hands to wrap up Melbourne’s fourth title. “This is unbelievable,” Papenhuyzen said being named player of the match. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history.”
2||Possible Veronica Guerin murder weapon found in Spanish drug raidSpanish and Irish police are examining a revolver found during a raid on the Alicante villa of the convicted Irish drug trafficker John Gilligan to determine whether it was the weapon used in the murder of the journalist Veronica Guerin. Gilligan, whose gang murdered the campaigning reporter on the outskirts of Dublin in 1996, was never convicted in connection with her killing. He did, however, threaten Guerin and her young son when she investigated his wealth and lifestyle. A Dublin court acquitted Gilligan of ordering Guerin’s murder in 2001. Despite the judge having “grave suspicions” about Gilligan’s involvement, the uncorroborated evidence of his former criminal associates was not enough to convict him of murder. Spain’s national police force said in a statement on Friday that the weapon, a Colt Python, had been recovered during a series of raids in Torrevieja and Orihuela Costa. Gilligan and five others were arrested following the operation, which was carried out in collaboration with officers from Garda and the UK’s National Crime Agency. “Those arrested were led by a known Irish criminal and were part of a group of violent drugs and arms traffickers and were specialists in shipping illegal merchandise to the UK and Ireland from Spain,” the Policía Nacional said. The investigation led to the seizure of three 9mm pistols, eight kilos of marijuana and 26,000 pills, and a more unexpected discovery. “In one of the searches carried out in Alicante as part of the investigation, a Colt Python, the same model of revolver that was used in the journalist’s murder, was found buried in a garden,” said the statement. “Spanish officers are working with the Irish police to determine whether it is the same weapon.” At the end of Gilligan’s trial almost 20 years ago, Judge Diarmuid O’Donovan said he was responsible for a “haemorrhage of harm” and for which he had shown no remorse. “Never in the history of the state has one person been responsible for so much wretchedness to so many,” he said. The judge, however, told the no-jury court that he had no choice but to acquit Gilligan of murder because the main prosecution evidence, from one of his former accomplices, Russell Warren, a state-protected witness, was unreliable and uncorroborated. Gilligan was jailed for 28 years for importing 20,000 kilos of cannabis resin worth £32m, but found not guilty of four charges of possessing weapons and ammunition. Gilligan was released from prison in October 2013. He fled Ireland the following year after being the target of two gun attacks.
22||Saturday Night Live: Adele hosts as cast pulls off the Jeffrey Toobin gagsThis week we kick off with a send-up of the second and “praise Jesus, final” presidential debate. Donald Trump (Alec Baldwin) tries to play nice by complimenting moderator Kristen Welker (Maya Rudolph), although he’s his usual unhinged self when directing nutty personal attacks and lies against Joe Biden (Jim Carrey), who struggles to keep his temper in check. From the get, the sketch is riddled with awkward pauses, missed cues and bungled lines – a frustrated Carrey exclaims ‘Damnit!’ – and it quickly devolves into a mug-off between the guest stars (Carrey’s rubber-faced caricature captures almost none of the real Biden’s idiosyncrasies, serving instead as pure ego trip). Puttering to a weak end, it’s the worst of the election cold opens so far, which is really saying something. Adele hosts for the first time, talking about how her 2008 performance on the show was the catalyst for her breakthrough in America. She thanks Sarah Palin directly. She then addresses confusion over why she’s not pulling double duty as host and musical guest – “I’d rather put on a wig, have a glass of wine or six and see we happens” – tabloid obsession with her weight loss, and her penchant for cursing when nervous. There’s little in the way of humor, but Adele comes off as laid back, which is a nice change of pace from a couple of noticeably nervous hosts. The first sketch is set in 2019 and sees a group of friends visiting a fortune teller, Kate McKinnon, who relays blurry visions of the hellscape that is 2020, which none can comprehend. (She tells one, “In 2020 you do something so terrible none of your friends will ever speak to you again … you eat inside a restaurant!”) The best sketch of the season thus far, it really sticks the landing with a final revelation that one of the friends is Jeffrey Toobin’s daughter. A new Chad sketch finds Pete Davidson’s laconic slacker visiting a haunted house and being confronted by a restless ghost, who tries to confide in him about her murder but accidentally kills him. It’s slight even by Chad standards, but Adele acquits herself well as the spirit. On a new season of The Bachelor, Adele is a contestant. Looking for love after a series of public heartbreaks, she refuses to pace herself emotionally, breaking into song at the drop of a hat, much to the chagrin of the bachelor and the other contestants. It’s a mostly lazy excuse to have Adele belt out some her hits, but it’s hard to complain since she gives it her all. A campaign commercial for Trump Addicts of America sees Biden voters admitting their fear of a post-Trump world: “My entire personality is hating Donald Trump. If he’s gone, what am I supposed to do? Talk to my kids?” The premise is solid, since previously apolitical anti-Trumpers definitely deserve to be mocked, but SNL is absolutely no position to sit in judgement. It’s impossible not think, “The lady doth protest too much.” The night’s musical guest is HER, who performs the soulful Damage. On Weekend Update, Colin Jost compares Biden’s performance in the debate to Giants quarterback Daniel Jones much-memed trip at the 20-yard-line earlier this week (a comparison that doesn’t seem to bear out the post-debate snap polls, but whatever). In another bit of SNL’s patented both-sidesism, Jost laments how old and out of it both candidates are: “This election is the equivalent of a baseball team giving a four-year deal to Willie Mays NOW.” Melissa Villasenor joins the desk to talk about her summer quarantine. She quirkily rolls through a number of random impressions – the little Rascals, Link from Zelda, Stevie Nicks and Sia. Then, following another solid dig at Toobin, this time courtesy of Michael Che – “He’s from the New Yorker, so you know that jerk was dry as hell!” – they welcome the Village People, who respond to Trump’s playing their music at his rallies by singing “Cease and Desist” to the tune of YMCA. Next, Rudolph plays a grandmother paid a socially distanced visit by her grandchildren. They try to sugarcoat their struggles with jobs, money and marriage with millennial jargon, but her constant refrain of “WHA?” breaks them down until they’re forced to air their failures in the most basic terms: “We had a three-way and he liked the other girl more!” It’s good to see Rudolph playing a purely silly character again. A message from the tourism board of Africa sees Adele and McKinnon playing horny divorcees hot for the “tribesmen”. It’s a seemingly problematic bit – let’s see if it provokes the same outrage Bill Burr got for calling out white women a few weeks ago – but it’s hard to focus on anything other than Adele’s full-bodied breaking throughout. Then HER takes the stage for a performance of Hold On, taking a break from crooning for a solid guitar solo. The final sketch sees Adele and Rudolph in a commercial for Ass Angel Perfume Jeans – women’s jeans that use a dangerous amount of chemicals to cover up embarrassing “lady smells”. It hits all the beats of a modern-day prescription drug ad, despite being set in the 80s. This strikes me as indicative of one of the major problems of current-day SNL– half-decent ideas fail to land because the writers can’t commit to a basic premise. This episode was about on par with the last three, although it contained a few more laughs. H.E.R. put in a very good performance and Adele held her own, save for breaking in the penultimate sketch. Mercifully, we’ll only have to weather a few more election cold opens, although we can only pray a Biden victory won’t result in Carrey sticking around like Baldwin did.
7||Labour vows to force another Commons vote on free school mealsLabour has thrown down the gauntlet to Downing Street by pledging to force another Commons vote if it does not U-turn on its refusal to provide free school meals in England during the holidays, as a senior Conservative MP admitted the government has misjudged the country’s mood over the issue. In a fresh intervention that will boost the campaign being led by the footballer Marcus Rashford, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said on Sunday his party would push for another vote if there is no change of course before Christmas. Labour was defeated by the government in a vote on the policy last week, prompting businesses and councils – some of them Tory-led – to step forward to offer to feed children in the October half-term break, but the government has so far dug in to defend its position. In an apparent softening of tone after a No 10 spokesman last week refused to praise councils and firms offering help, the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, said Rashford deserved “huge credit” for his work on the issue although he stood by Downing Street’s line. It comes as Sir Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative chair of the influential Commons liaison committee, said the government had “misunderstood the mood of the country” on free school meals. As the government continues to resist appeals to reverse its move, Jenkin told the Sophy Ridge on Sunday programme on Sky News: “I think we have to admit that we have misunderstood the mood of the country here.” Highlighting that the government had funded local councils to provide support, he added: “The public want to see the government taking a national lead on this and I think the government will probably have to think again on that, particularly if there’s going to be more votes in the House of Commons. “I think when you have got the chairman of the education select committee [Robert Halfon] not supporting the government on this – and he’s a Conservative – I think the government has to listen to the Conservative party.” Asked how he would vote in any further Commons divisions, Jenkin said: “I shall wait to see what the government says and how they respond to the situation.” Halfon, who voted against the government on the free school meals motion on Wednesday, wrote in the Spectator on Saturday: “Combating child hunger should, therefore, be a cause that all Conservatives can embrace. That should include the temporary extension of free school meals over the holidays while (and only while) the economic impacts of the pandemic continue to be felt.” Downing Street has already been forced to perform a U-turn once on the issue, deciding to provide £15-a-week meal vouchers to eligible children over the summer after Rashford campaigned on the issue, but it has refused to do so for the holidays ahead. Asked what had changed, meaning children who got them then should not get them during the autumn or Christmas holidays, Lewis told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday: “There’s a couple of things [that] have changed. Obviously, back in the summer we had all the schools were closed, we had that full lockdown period. Things have moved on, we’ve now got about 99% of schools and children back at schools … that’s really good. So we are in a different place but there’s more than that.” He added: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over a £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.” Dr Rosena Allin-Khan, Labour’s shadow mental health minister, told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: “We are honestly hoping that the Conservative government dig deep and look introspectively and perform a U-turn on this, but we certainly will be pushing for a vote before Christmas.” The children’s commissioner, Anne Longfield, told the same programme she thought the government should provide free school meals over the holidays, adding: “I’ve been horrified by the debate, really disappointed about the debate over recent days. We’re a wealthy country, it’s 2020.” “To have a debate about whether we should make sure that hungry and vulnerable children should have enough to eat is something which is strikingly similar to chapters, I think of you know, what we’d expect to see in Oliver Twist, a novel published in the 19th century. So let’s stop the divisive and distracting conversations, and start focusing.”
12||On Connection by Kae Tempest review – persuasive and profoundKae Tempest has added one more string to an already crowded bow: On Connection is the first nonfiction work by this Mercury prize-winning musician, Ted Hughes award-winning poet, acclaimed playwright, novelist, and chief creative chronicler of the last decade. It’s also Tempest’s first publication since changing their name from Kate, and using they/them pronouns. On Connection is a book-length essay whose subject has been somewhat overtaken by recent events. Its thesis – that our need for connection can be fostered by creativity in general and live art in particular – has become all the more compelling since lockdown. Who hasn’t missed the electric charge that crackles between artist and audience? Or felt frustrated at how live music and theatre are undermined and dismissed by a government that fails to recognise their immense value? But Tempest isn’t talking about merely missing a good night out at a gig or show. On Connection looks at creativity as a means of counteracting the numbness of the modern world. We get so caught up in an ever-spinning consumerist hamster wheel that we neglect what is true within ourselves and one another. “In a disconnected state, self-awareness is one of the first frequencies to be scooped out and muted,” they write. “When this happens, I need creativity to reconnect me.” Throughout, there are familiar shades of mysticism and mindfulness, of anti-capitalist theorising and the hippies’ tune-in, drop-out arguments. More explicitly, Tempest writes about being inspired by Carl Jung’s The Red Book and his theory that we possess a wild, inner “spirit of the depths” as well as a “spirit of the times”, the everyday ego that’s concerned with more immediate goals and ambitions. Both are needed, Tempest feels, but we’ve got them way out of whack. “In order to regain our balance, we need to remaster the ability to go deep, to ‘turn away from outer things’. To face what is in ourselves.” Each chapter is prefaced by William Blake quotations, and it’s no wonder his writing appeals to Tempest: both artists’ work is concerned with tapping into something ancient and mythic. Tempest’s call to reconnect with what Blake terms the “infinite” within ourselves proves persuasive and profound. Anyone who has seen Tempest live has likely witnessed their talent for sparking connection, even if they insist this is a mysterious, unreliable thing. But when it does come, it is wondrous: “I am granted access to a freedom so resolute it leaves me shining head to toe… Looking out at the crowd, I see reality at last. People really feeling things.” While some of their thoughts may not be new, they are surely worth repeating in this disconnected, distracted world. And Tempest, as you’d expect, delivers them gorgeously, rhythmically, but also with clarity and a fierce grace. I drank On Connection down like a fresh glass of water. • On Connection by Kae Tempest is published by Faber (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
19||Cordelia review – atmospheric but uneven thrillerIn Adrian Shergold’s uneven thriller, actor Cordelia (Antonia Campbell-Hughes) continues to suffer the aftershocks of trauma from an event that took place 12 years prior. When her twin sister (also played – though less convincingly – by Campbell-Hughes) leaves her alone in their London flat for the weekend, the fragile Cordelia begins to spiral, convinced a stranger has been rifling through her knickers. Johnny Flynn is fun to watch as sleazy upstairs neighbour and violinist Frank, and with its flocked wallpaper, claustrophobic hallways and dingy paisley curtains, the flat helps create a creepy atmosphere. Still, tension is frequently punctured by clunky dialogue. “I got mired in real life, and Rada was useless,” Cordelia says wistfully.
20||How are restaurants going to survive the winter? Outdoor heatersIt’s been a tough year for many small businesses, particularly restaurants and retailers. But they’ve been doing their best to survive, despite all the restrictions. In my home city of Philadelphia, many restaurants have moved their operations outdoors – and some with success. Tables are filled. And just last night I walked by an entire spin class going on outside a local fitness center. People are doing their best to adapt. That’s good news and I’m happy for them. But there’s a looming problem: winter is coming! Can these businesses keep operating even as temperatures begin to drop? “For sure,” a friend who owns a diner told me recently. “As long as we can get more heaters. Know where I can find a few?” The pandemic has created some booming markets in games and puzzles, cleaning products, technology tools, pools, organic cat food and just about anything you can buy online. When the pandemic began people were desperate for toilet paper. But now there’s a craze affecting many desperate business owners: outdoor heaters. “We couldn’t get any at Lowe’s, Home Depot, Ace Hardware – the only place where we were able to source them is [party rental company] Tablescapes, and they charge thousands for rentals,” a Chicago restaurant owner told Eater Chicago. “It doesn’t make sense financially to spend $8,000 on four heaters.” It’s not just restaurants that need the heat. My local fitness center wants to continue outdoor classes as long as possible and a zoo in Oregon wants them to keep visitors coming. (“After getting open and figuring out how to operate safely through Covid times, having outdoor space every year, we always have to think ahead,” Portland zoo co-owner Mark Miller told local TV station WGME). Many homeowners are putting in outdoor heaters on their patios as they plan for a winter of potential lockdowns. All of this means good news if you’re in the business of making, supplying, servicing and selling outdoor heaters. The Boston Globe has reported a 70% increase in heater searches on Wayfair’s website and the phrase “patio heaters” has its highest Google search volume, according to a report in USA Today, which also provides a handy list of places where you can try your luck finding one. “We’re ordering as much as possible,” Josh Rookstool, the director of sales for Sunheat outdoor heaters, which are stocked by Wayfair and Home Depot, told the Marker. “However, there are still major backups in production.” Rockstool’s company says that sales have increased more than 400% this year. And it’s not just small businesses selling heaters that are profiting. Companies that provide propane, accessories and repairs are also seeing enormous increases in demand. Can’t find an outdoor heater for your small business? Maybe you should consider what one restaurant owner is doing: building mini igloos for your customers. Yes, that’s right. Igloos. David Lahousse, who for the past 20 years has owned Kay’s Restaurant in Woonsocket, Rhode Island, has added two greenhouse-style igloos to his parking lot and plans to add eight more. The igloos, which cost about $1,400 each keeps the temperature 20-30 degrees warmer than the outside, with one party inside at a time. “I want to make it a winter wonderland, you know?” he told local news station WPRI. “It’s not all about the money for me. I want people to have these jobs. I don’t want to lay anyone off.”
2||'Cycling capital of death': Bogotá bikers battle violence on city's streetsAndy Villalba, a tattooed and scrawny bicycle mechanic in Colombia’s capital, has long been wise to the dangers of cycling in such a chaotic city. Now, amid a boom in both cycling and bike theft, he is giving workshops in road safety and self-defence. “Welcome to Bogotá,” said Villalba, who has lost count of the number of times he has been threatened for his bicycle. “The cycling capital of death.” Cycling in Colombia is thriving. As in other cities around the world, the pandemic has prompted many commuters to forgo taxis or buses, and bike use is up 40% since last year. More than 100km of bike paths were laid in Bogotá during the lockdown. Meanwhile, professional cycling has proven to be the country’s most successful sport: elite riders have won medals at tours across Europe and last year Egan Bernal became the first Colombian to win the Tour de France. But as more people step into the saddle, bicycle thieves and homicidal drivers are forcing them to fight back with self-defence classes and weapons. “The most effective use of violence is to avoid a physical confrontation, but if it comes to it, the D-lock is your best friend,” said Villalba, 33, at a recent workshop. “Hold that in one hand and with the other use the frame of the bike as a shield.” Villalba also advises cyclists to build a network of fellow cyclists, avoid slow bike paths at night, and to cover any expensive branding on their bikes with stickers. Though Bogotá has significantly reduced violent crime over the past two decades, robberies are still a daily reality. From January to September this year, 8,023 cases of bicycle theft have been reported, up 36% on the same period the previous year. Some riders have taken to carrying baseball bats and extendable batons to protect themselves. “Carrying bats and weapons is necessary in some of the rougher neighbourhoods on the edge of the city,” said Jaime Mercho, an enthusiast. “But D-locks and chains are just as good.” Cyclists across the country united in outrage this month after José Antonio Duarte, a 56-year-old security guard, was killed by a van driver while cycling over a bridge north of Bogotá. Footage of the incident went viral, showing the van running straight into Duarte, flipping him over the railing to fall 4.5 metres, landing on his head. “Do me a fucking favour,” tweeted Bernal, when he posted the video. “How easy it is to end someone’s life … I hope there’s justice.” The local governor promised a thorough investigation, though many cyclists said they were unsurprised by the incident. Abdon Bermúdez came to Colombia four years ago from Venezuela, and works as a bicycle messenger. “My bike is my means of transport and work,” he said. “And I see all the time that drivers don’t respect cyclists – they don’t care that we have as much of a right to be on the road as they do.” A common complaint of cyclists is the lack of consideration from other road users. In Bogotá, drivers routinely neglect to use indicators, and all road users run red lights. A law passed in 2016 gave cyclists more rights on the road, though motorists often honk at riders in their lane. Sandy Millares runs a small bike messaging company in Bogotá, covering dozens of miles a day across the city. During her five years as a courier, Millares has seen it all. “People have used their cars to drive into me, motorcyclists have run their hands over me as they pass, and I’ve had bikes stolen,” the 30-year-old said, taking a break after a delivery. “I love my job but I know it’s dangerous,” she said. “And I love my city, but I know there’s certain neighbourhoods and routes that I can’t go to – as a cyclist and as a woman.”
3||'Deep down, he's a terrified little boy': Bob Woodward, John Bolton and others on TrumpBob Woodward: ‘I can’t think of a time I’ve felt more anxiety about the presidency’ Bob Woodward is associate editor of the Washington Post and the author of 20 books on American politics. In 50 years as a journalist he has covered nine presidents. His reporting on the Watergate break-in and cover-up with his colleague Carl Bernstein helped bring down Richard Nixon and won the Post a Pulitzer prize. His latest book about Donald Trump, Rage, is based on 10 hours of interviews, spread over 19 taped phone calls, often initiated by the president himself, in which Trump proved “only too willing to blow the whistle on himself”, as the Observer’s review noted. There is an atmosphere in Washington of high anxiety. Trump is melting down, to put it charitably. His campaign has been about lashing out, about wanting his former political opponents – President Obama and Joe Biden, who’s now running against him, of course – to be indicted then charged. Then there was his announcement that he is not necessarily going to accept the electoral result against him. The idea that the president would put in doubt the basic process of democracy and voting is not only unacceptable, it is a nightmare. Now you have the added factor that Trump’s also had Covid-19 and he’s on steroids, saying things like, “It is a blessing from God that I got the virus”. I can’t think of anything more absurd, or crueller, than calling it a blessing from God. More than 210,000 people have died in the US. For the president of the US to talk like that is unbelievable, but I think people have become numb to it. The outrages pile up, in a way. People have forgotten the risks. I think Kamala Harris put it very well in the vice-presidential debate: what’s happened in the US with Covid-19 is the biggest failure of the president to exercise his responsibilities, perhaps in the history of the US. This is a really dangerous period before the election. I got to know Trump very well in hours and hours of interviews I did with him for my book, Rage, and I think if there were to be some accident, some problem, during the final campaign weeks, he would capitalise on it. Henry Kissinger, of all people, was warning recently that we should worry about some sort of crisis, and reminded people that the first world war started because of an accident. Probably no one’s wanting to start a war right now, but we have a climate in the Middle East, and in the South China Sea, which China has really militarised, where you could have some spark trigger a mild confrontation – not that I think Trump’s going to manufacture that. Trump is not sufficiently tuned into the attitudes and experiences of other people, which is an essential requirement of a leader. After George Floyd was killed, I asked him about the tensions ignited in this country not seen since the heights of the civil rights movement. I said we were men of white privilege, that we’ve got to understand the pain and anger black people feel in this country. That’s when he said something that astonished me: “Wow, you sure drank the Kool-Aid! I don’t feel that at all.” He just rejected the idea that somehow white people have to understand the pain and anger of others. I think that’s one of his chief problems. He thinks in terms of his own pain and anger, and what he wants to do, which is to be re-elected. Trump also told me the US has nuclear weapons that are so devastating even President Putin and President Xi of China don’t know about them. I’m not exactly sure even today whether he was exaggerating or talking about something real. But what’s a really important question to consider here is how much power is in the presidency: when we decide to go to war, whether you look at Vietnam or Afghanistan or Iraq, it’s all been led by the president, essentially, as commander in chief. As we’ve gone into a media environment of impatience and speed because of the internet, the president is also in this position to seize the airwaves. As his son-in-law Jared Kushner said, the news is going along and then Trump tweets something and everyone drops whatever it is. Trump realises this. He uses it. He has that power. He loves being in control. He loves the spectacle. The circumstances have all converged here to give him extraordinary power. Looking to the aftermath of the election, Trump’s set the table to say that if he doesn’t win, he’s going to be suspicious of mail-in votes. I think the question is: if he loses, will his political party get together and go see him and talk to him, and say, you can’t do this? You can’t do it to the Republican party and most importantly you can’t do it to the country. There has to be an orderly transference of power, if that’s what it comes to. This is the level of anxiety I have now as a reporter: I go to sleep and get up in the middle of the night and start checking the news because God knows what might have happened. We are sitting on pins and needles in this country about every moment, every action, every assessment, and it is draining. I think lots of people have got to the point where they are tuning Trump and the political situation out as well as they can. Unfortunately, the impacts on people’s lives carry on, given the virus, given there’s no plan, or organised way of dealing with this. It’s all seat-of-the-pants impulsive decision-making. I can’t think of a time – and I’ve been a reporter for nearly 50 years – where I’ve felt more anxiety about the country and the presidency and the future. JR Mary Trump: ‘If he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over’ Mary Trump is a psychologist and the niece of Donald Trump. Her father, Fred Trump Jr, the president’s older brother, died when she was 16. Her tell-all book about the president and the Trump family, Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man, sold almost 1m copies on the first day it was published in July this year. My theory about the way Donald has run his campaign is that he knows he’s in desperate shape, so he’s going to burn it all down, sow more chaos and division, because that’s where he succeeds. He knows that he’s losing – he’ll deny it mightily – and at some level he understands what’s at stake. If he loses, he’s probably going to prison. So, if he’s going down, he’s going to take us all down with him. I’ve always believed that deep down Donald is a terrified little boy. The amount of fear he’s feeling now has got to be unhinging him. Not only did he get sick with the virus, there’s the tax story and his prospects in the election looking really bad right now. He’s got to be absolutely panicked. Throughout the campaign I thought that the absolute worst scenario would be for him to get the virus and then get well. I know that sounds awful. He’s ignored the severity of the pandemic all year because the idea of illness as weakness is so deeply ingrained in my family, that even an association with it is unacceptable, and that’s why now we’ve got 210,000 Americans dead. But now his statement – you can beat it, don’t be afraid of it – is going to result in more people becoming sick, and many of those will die. Even before he said that, I believed he was engaging in mass murder, but that sealed it for me. Anybody who’s capable of putting hundreds of millions of people at risk to avoid looking bad doesn’t care about you. Since Donald was elected, I’ve been surprised by nothing he’s done or said. But I have been shocked by the wholesale abdication of responsibility by the Republican party during this election campaign and throughout the past four years. I didn’t understand the extent to which they would be willing to enable him in Congress and in his cabinet. If they had done their job and acted as a separate branch of government, he would have been contained. By siding with him 100% of the time, they have ensured we are now faced with several concurrent disasters that are getting exponentially worse. No other president in history has been able to push the envelope the way Donald does. He’s always trying to see what he can get away with and, as I have seen through the course of his life, he’s always got away with everything. No one holds him accountable. He constantly gets rewarded for failing. The Republicans understood what he was capable of and have allowed him to push through an agenda that is completely at odds with what the majority wants. In Donald, I see somebody who is afraid, lonely, desperate, unloved. I hesitate to paint a compassionate portrait of him because he’s so culpable. However, I do have compassion for the three-year-old who was without his mother for a whole year when she was sick. That loss of affection and having no one to soothe him was deeply harmful. And when she recovered to the extent that she did, she did nothing to heal the wounds of that separation, and that’s before we get to my grandfather, who was always an awful person, capable of such abject cruelty and sadism. So now we have an adult Donald who is sad, lonely, ignorant but who also has immense power – and that is a terrifying prospect. People need to stop worrying about what might happen if he loses but doesn’t accept the results and laugh in his face. That’s the best way to undermine him. If he wins, it won’t be legitimate. He’s already using the powers of his office to shake people’s confidence in mail-in voting at a time when people want to be voting by mail during the pandemic. He’s telling his followers if Biden wins it will have been rigged, telling them to show up at the polls to make sure there’s no fraud, which is voter intimidation. If you’re a black person in America and a bunch of white guys with automatic weapons are standing outside the polling station you won’t want to vote, which is exactly what Donald wants to happen. If he stays in the Oval Office, I’m going to try to get a British passport because I don’t think I’ll fare well. He’s an extraordinarily vindictive person surrounded by people who are willing to help him be vindictive. But that’s personal: in terms of the country, if he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over. The western alliance is over. We’ll be entering an incredibly dark period of autocracy on a global scale. JR John Bolton: ‘He was envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan’ John Bolton was US national security adviser under Donald Trump from 2018 to 2019. Having started his career as a lawyer, he held senior roles in the state department and justice department during the administrations of Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush and George W Bush, who appointed him 25th US ambassador to the United Nations. His book about the Trump presidency, The Room Where It Happened, was published in June this year. People complain that Trump has a short attention span, myself included. But when it comes to his own re-election he has an infinite attention span. Decisions are made not on the basis of the pros and cons of the policies being debated but on what the domestic political blowback could be. Every president takes politics into account but with Trump it’s qualitatively different. It’s not just a factor. It’s the factor. Everything is a distinct transaction – maybe that’s how you’re successful in the real-estate business. If he doesn’t see the immediate bottom line impact, he wants to move on to something else. For example, with our close allies, he says things like: “Here we are defending you and you don’t pay for our bases and you have trade surpluses with us.” Well, we’re not there to defend them. We’re there because we have a mutual defence alliance. We think it’s in our interest as much as the allies’ interest to be forwardly deployed. We’re not there as mercenaries. And we wouldn’t want to be there as mercenaries. But he doesn’t get that. I think his election campaign is in deep trouble. Because of what happened in 2016, when everybody thought Hillary was going to win, he can say the polls are fake news and that he’ll win anyway. And he’ll say that right up to election night and probably after it. But unless the pollsters have done absolutely nothing to try to fix their methodology since 2016, you have to say that he’s in trouble. Each day you get closer to the election, by definition it’s that much harder to make up the gap. Nothing in life is certain but it looks like he’s heading for a pretty substantial defeat. He’s trying to turn his Covid-19 infection to his advantage. I assume that’s what he thought he was doing with his grand entrance to the White House, posing on the balcony like Il Duce. I think it had the opposite effect. One thing I’ve been waiting for is the wave of sympathy that you would expect from the American people when their leader is taken ill. Maybe it’s out there but there isn’t any evidence of it at this point. I had certainly heard all the criticisms of Donald Trump before I took the job of national security adviser but I felt that the gravity of the presidency, the weight of the responsibility, would have an effect on him the way it’s had on every contemporary American president once they took office. It turned out I wasn’t right. The transition and opening six months were bungled and a lot of Trumpian habits and attitudes were formed in that period. Although I had aspirations to create more orderly policy processes in the national security area, it was too late to do it. I was in retrospect overly optimistic that I could correct problems that were inherent in Trump’s approach to the job from the get-go. It became clear in ways that I previously found impossible to contemplate that he had no philosophy, no grand strategy, he didn’t think in policy terms. Every day was a new adventure. And the way I think successful foreign policy is laid out is by careful analysis and deliberation, careful implementation, review and persistence. All of these are things that basically don’t exist in the Trump administration. There was so much that he didn’t know and he has very little inclination to learn it. It’s hard to have an evolving conversation when his data base never changes. I don’t regret taking the job. I went in and lasted for as long as I could and then I came out and wrote a book so everybody would know exactly what was going on. There are still people in there now who are trying to get him to do the right thing. One thing I worry about in a second term is that people like that will simply not join the administration. Up until now, it was reasonable to say, I’ve got enough confidence I can make a difference. It’s very hard to make that argument now after four years. I don’t think he has the character or fitness to be president. I once said to a psychologist that Trump doesn’t have character and the psychologist said, sure he does, he has a character defect. So I’ll leave that to the shrinks. We never should have nominated him. Nobody ever said that politics ends up with the best people for government. But there’s something wrong when someone like this can prevail. I think he was kind of envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan. They are big guys and they do big guy things and he wants to be a big guy too. I can’t explain why he has this affinity for authoritarian leaders but there’s no doubt he does. I don’t believe he was reluctant to employ me because of my moustache, as some people say. Would he have made a flip remark about it at some point? Sure, that’s entirely possible. Whatever his flip remarks – and he’s derogatory about almost everybody, sooner rather than later – he did hire me and I actually lasted 17 months. If Trump loses and leaves on 20 January, of the four national security advisers, I will be the longest serving. It’s not like there was a battle between us over two competing worldviews, because he doesn’t have a worldview. And that was the hardest thing for me to understand and appreciate. AA Anthony Scaramucci: ‘He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world’ Anthony Scaramucci was a little-known New York financier when Donald Trump made him the White House director of communications in July 2017. He was fired just 11 days later after a string of public relations gaffes but remained a vocal Trump loyalist for the next two years. However, the president’s racist attacks on four Democratic congresswomen of colour led Scaramucci to withdraw his support. Since then he has become an outspoken critic of Trump, who frequently lashes out at Scaramucci on Twitter. His book, Trump: The Blue-Collar President, was published in 2018. In our country we’re so polarised now you have to hate the person you disagree with. But I don’t hate Donald Trump. If anything I’m somewhat sympathetic to him because there’s obviously something wrong with him. There’s a screw loose and you don’t have to be a psychiatrist to see that. You just have to look at the manic behaviour, the absurdity, the lack of maturity. He’s not a fully developed adult. He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world and I fear for the country. There’s something wrong with him and the people around him are too afraid of him to intervene on his behalf. He talked about “draining the swamp” but the swamp is now like a gold-plated hot tub. He’s taken the corruption up to a whole new level. I think if he loses the election, it’s over for him. I don’t see how he can survive this. He’ll probably get indicted. However, if he does, he probably won’t serve in jail – I don’t think America likes putting its ex-presidents in jail. So he’ll most likely get prosecuted with his sentence commuted. He likes to mud-wrestle his opponents but he can’t do that with Joe Biden because Biden is an old-school disciplined politician. His positive-negative differentials are 20% higher than Hillary Clinton’s. But I’m smart enough to know that the polls are closer than people think. If Trump wins, there is going to be a further destruction of American society. He’ll start to dismantle the institutions of our democracy, and the country will become weaker as a result of it. There’ll be more disorder, more protests, more racial tension. The move back to the White House, after hospital, tried to create these optics that he’s a superman. But you’ve got 210,000 Americans dead, so if you do a matrix, there’s about 9 million Americans who have had family or friends hurt by the virus, so that’s not going to play with them. He’s a minority politician, he’s a minority president. He’s never had the popular vote; he will have won the electoral college twice, and lost the popular vote twice. The fact is he’s an idiot. He’s unfit to serve in the office of the president. He doesn’t have the management capability. He doesn’t have the ability to empathise. He’s not a leader. He’s an un-American bully. You could say he had a lot of those attributes as a candidate in 2016 so why did I support him? And I would say, yes, I chose to overlook that because I was trying to be loyal to my party and its nominee. I started out disliking him. Then I thought, OK, I’m in the Republican party, he’s going to be the Republican candidate and now he’s won the presidency, so he’s going to be the first Republican president since George W Bush, let me figure out a way to like him. I worked for him and I have to own that for the rest of my life. I’ve acknowledged my mistake, I’ve apologised for it, and I’ve admitted that I was wrong in my political judgment and assessment of him as an individual and as a political leader. People say to me, he hasn’t changed at all, and I accept that. But I’ve changed. I’m way more psychologically minded. I’m more aware of the pain and trouble he’s causing people. I’m very happy I got fired. It probably saved my marriage and my business career. I was loyal to him for two years but the year after my book came out he told four women who were democratically elected to Congress – three of whom were born in the US, the other a naturalised citizen – to go back to the countries they originally came from. They told my Italian-American grandparents that 100 years ago. When I said that he was being racist, he started going after my wife on Twitter. I told Mayor Giuliani: “You’re disavowing your personal integrity and your family’s history by supporting this man.” You can’t talk like that as the American president in 2020. He’s a despicable guy. I don’t think most of his supporters think he’s the best man for the job. They see him as a culture warrior, though. The conservative news outlets have told them that we have a full-on culture war going on in the United States, and he is the last white man standing to protect America from the black and Hispanic latte-drinking transvestites who are going to take over their government and culture. The president’s strategy is let’s see if I can turn out every racist in America, and he hopes there are enough to beat the non-racists. The secretary of state Mike Pompeo’s supporting him because Pompeo looks in the mirror and sees a future president. We have 63 million people in the US who have voted for Trump for one reason or another, and what I can do is explain my change of heart. We now have almost four complete years of data on his ineptitude. It’s nothing personal, he’s not the right person to be president of the United States. AA
11||Tory leader’s £1bn office buying spree ‘leaves dangerous legacy’ for councilIan Harvey cannot help but chuckle when recalling how easy it was to borrow £385m from the Public Works Loans Board to buy BP’s vast Sunbury-on-Thames research centre soon after he became Conservative leader of Spelthorne borough council, Surrey, in 2016. “I found it laughably easy, to be honest with you,” he said. “There was no real control over it. I’m told it was pretty much a phone call. It took about three days.” Harvey, who was ousted as leader of the council in the summer, went on to borrow millions more from the PWLB, a Treasury agency, to purchase seven other commercial buildings, including £170m on an office in west London and £285m on three offices in the Thames valley. By the end of his four-year reign, the council had borrowed £1.1bn – about 100 times Spelthorne’s core spending power of £11m. “There were other local authorities that did small-scale things before us, but BP broke the mould because it was so much bigger than anything else,” he said. Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spree is just the most dramatic example of how councils have been encouraged to make commercial investments to offset budget cuts during a decade of austerity. Richard Watts, the chair of the Local Government Association’s resources board, said some councils are now faced with mounting losses: “Ten years of massive cuts to local government forced councils to look elsewhere for money, but as a result of the pandemic some of these new sources of income are drying up . “If the government doesn’t step in to make up the shortfall, the losers are going to be ordinary residents because we’re going to see another very deep round of local council austerity.” The latest local authority financial returns to the government – which have not yet been published – show English councils have already lost £372m of income from market investments, including commercial property, since the country went into lockdown in March and expect to lose a total of £541m by March 2021. While many councils have invested within their boundaries to improve local areas, some smaller councils – like Spelthorne – have poured millions of pounds of borrowed public money into speculative property acquisitions much further afield. This has prompted concerns that authorities dependent on rents from largely empty office blocks and struggling shopping centres may find it increasingly difficult to service the huge debts they have built up, and ultimately be forced to cut services. Councils are supposed to base their investment strategies on a statutory code, which prohibits borrowing to invest solely for profit. Don Peebles, the head of policy at the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, which is responsible for the code, said public money is being misused: “It is like somebody going to a building society to borrow money to buy a house, but instead of buying the house they put it on a horse.” Peeebles adds that councils are taking huge risks: “It means public services are exposed to the vagaries of the market. If there is some volatility in the market, then it could impact adversely on their ability to deliver those essential services – and that is what we are seeing at the moment.” The backdrop to Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spending spree was the tight squeeze on local government budgets after 2010. Harvey argues he was forced to look for other sources of revenue because the council’s funding from central government was forecast to sharply fall. “We were basically living on reserves and selling things off. Morale was on the ground because [council officers] couldn’t achieve much,” he said. “It was hugely unfair.” However, nearly 30% the council’s budget for services is now dependent on rent from properties purchased by Harvey, who resigned from the Conservative party after he was deposed. While the financial figures so far released indicate the vast majority of the rent has been collected, the council admits: “Covid poses the most extreme economic stress test for more than two centuries”. Since the beginning of the pandemic it has already agreed £1.27m worth of rent deferrals. Restricted council papers seen by the Observer show that Harvey, in one of his final acts as leader, agreed to another deferral, worth £4.46m, with the troubled workspace firm WeWork to help “absorb the difficulties brought about by the Covid crisis”. Harvey admits this is “not ideal” but insists the council is performing better than other commercial landlords. “There is risk in anything, but it is negligible,” he said . Not everybody in Spelthorne is reassured. Lawrence Nichols, a Liberal Democrat who chairs the council’s audit committee, said Harvey left a “potentially dangerous” legacy for the borough that could unravel in 10 or 15 years when all break points in the contracts come up. “High-value decisions are not getting the scrutiny they need. The financial acumen here is really thin,” he said. “It is a rotten borough.” This month it emerged that KPMG, the council’s auditors throughout most of Harvey’s leadership, warned in August that the investment properties the council purchased in 2017-19 might be unlawful because the authority failed to have regard to the statutory code prohibiting borrowing purely to profit from investments. Spelthorne council said it had complied with all legislation and guidance, including having regard to the prudential code. It said it was completely transparent, with the council’s investments listed on its website. It added that it had assembled an experienced team to manage its commercial investment strategy and had built up a £20m sinking fund to protect services from fluctuations in rental streams: “Even on the worst case modelling, the figures indicated that we have more than sufficient sinking funds to ensure that the revenue budget is not adversely impacted at any point over the next 10 years.” The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government said it had provided councils with £6.4bn worth of support during the pandemic. It added that councils must properly consider the risksand opportunities when they made investment decisions: “We share concerns about a minority of councils that continue to expose themselves and taxpayers to unnecessary risk. We have a set framework which councils must observe and we will continue to monitor this,” said a spokesperson.
0||Chelsea dig in to foil Manchester United in a game that felt out of timeOle Gunnar Solskjær can do one big thing well, and that is sit his side deep and attack on the counter. Frank Lampard has one big thing he has struggled to do well, and that is set his side up to defend well against the counter. That’s why when these sides met at Old Trafford last season, Chelsea had 54% possession, won the shot count 18-10 and lost 4-0. Everything Lampard did on Saturday seemed aimed at avoiding a repeat. And it worked. As in last season’s FA Cup semi-final, Chelsea set up with a back three, left no space behind their defensive line, and successfully thwarted United. At Wembley, individual errors from United players handed Chelsea victory; here the arm Harry Maguire hooked around César Azpilicueta’s neck should at the very least have handed them a penalty. Personnel, of course, helps. Thiago Silva was a calm and authoritative figure at the heart of the back three, while Édouard Mendy made three very good saves. He looked lively, sharp and, crucially, didn’t radiate the sort of panic Kepa Arrizabalaga has recently. But having failed to keep an away clean sheet since December, this was at heart a tactical victory for Lampard. The next stage, as he acknowledged, is to add goals to successive clean sheets; given the quality Chelsea have in the front half of the team, that should come, even if it takes time to forge the sort of coordinated attacking patterns that characterise the very best sides. To which there is one very obvious caveat: Solskjær’s United habitually struggle to break down teams who sit deep against them. It’ll be a long time before a goalless draw at Old Trafford ceases to be a decent result, and in context it has a specific value for Lampard, but it is not the prize it once was. Solskjær’s results fit a pattern. United have won their last 10 away games in all competitions but none of their last five at home. This is why he has beaten Paris Saint-Germain twice at the Parc des Princes, why he has three wins against Pep Guardiola, why United were the only team to take league points off Liverpool last season until the end of February. He can organise the rearguard and United have the speed and talent up front to expose teams who operate high up the pitch. But against teams who drop off, United are far less adept. That’s why home defeats to Crystal Palace feel just as emblematic of Solskjær’s reign as away wins against PSG. It’s why the defeat to Sevilla in the Europa League semi-final was so crushing: it wasn’t just that United had missed out on a European final, it was that they had done so in such a characteristic way, flailing hopelessly like Scrappy Doo meeting a longer-armed opponent able to keep him at bay with a calm hand on the front of his head – and that despite taking the lead. The biggest tactical criticism of José Mourinho at Real Madrid from his own players was the way he left them to improvise in the final third: his refusal to do what Guardiola and Jürgen Klopp do and work relentlessly on attacking cohesion. Over the past decade, the ability to create cohesive attacking patterns has probably been the single biggest factor that distinguishes the very best coaches from the tier below. United have consistently failed to achieve that fluency. In the opening quarter of the game, in particular, there were constant diagonals from Maguire, Fred and Scott McTominay aimed at the space in front of Daniel James. Except there was no space, because Chelsea had a deep-lying back five. Reece James advanced only rarely and when he did, Azpilicueta, as a regular right-back, was perfectly equipped to cover behind him. The barrage did eventually stop, but it was replaced by safety-first sideways passing. Solskjær, never shy of appealing to romantic myth, spoke of how a full Stretford End might have sucked in Marcus Rashford’s late effort; more likely they would have been groaning in frustration at the witlessness of much of what had gone before. United created four meaningful chances: snapshots from Rashford and Juan Mata, a break by Rashford after a Jorginho error and Edinson Cavani’s improvised flick into the side-netting after some sharp movement. None of them were the result of coordinated play. Against diligent opponents, that can happen, but it is happening to United every time they meet a team that sits deep. In that sense, this was a logical fifth step in the sequence. Solskjær had won his first three meetings against Lampard, who in the past two has found a way of correcting what had been going wrong before. Given Chelsea’s continuing defensive problems and the fact United had let in nine in their previous two home games, the caution was understandable. The outcome was a game that felt oddly out of time, like a top-six clash from 15 years ago. But given the wildness that has characterised the start to this season, the obvious risks of operating a high line with a lack of time properly to organise the press, it may be that more sides adopt a more traditional approach. There were specific reasons for the conservatism of both sides but, in a highly unusual environment, it could be a glimpse of a broader immediate future.
17||Police investigating Grenfell Tower fire make first arrestPolice investigating the Grenfell Tower disaster have arrested a man on suspicion of perverting the course of justice. The unnamed 38-year-old was arrested on Saturday in Sussex and taken to a local police station, Scotland Yard said. Detectives released him the same day under investigation. The arrest is the first by police investigating the June 2017 fire that claimed 72 lives. It follows fury among bereaved and survivors at revelations emerging from the public inquiry about the handling of potential evidence. Scotland Yard said in a statement on Saturday the arrest in Sussex did not relate to events heard at the Grenfell Tower inquiry this week. They did not name the arrested man. The inquiry is not scheduled to finish hearing evidence until December 2021 at the earliest, after which the inquiry panel is likely to need several months to produce a report.
23||Joe Trivelli’s recipes for lamb chops, panada, bagna càuda and apples cakeThese are dishes with which to warm up. Hearty, simple, warming food that I like to share. It’s time to stoke the fire, or the bonfire, and treat yourself well. Arrivals from the south of Italy have asked me why there isn’t a friggitoria (fry shop) in London. I pointed them to the chippies, to demonstrate there wasn’t the gap in the market they thought. The fried vegetables and lamb here is something that I am adding to the menu at my fantasy friggitoria. Something to eat with your fingers and worth the bother of disposing of the oil the following day. Panada is also something of a fantasy dish. Pure comfort food, a savoury bread pudding with a Renaissance touch of grapes. It’s a great way to use up some of the extra bread you’ve been baking. It’s also a good one to prepare ahead and then pop in the oven after a march around, if not the countryside, the block. Lucky me, I often find myself in Piedmont for a few days at this time of year. I know of no other place that excels at winter food as much. Bagna càuda is a regional highlight and this recipe is the traditional one. Once you’ve spent a good hour making it, you could be forgiven for thinking that dunking vegetables in this mostly oil sauce has lost its appeal, but the flavour is like nothing else and the experience not half as heavy as you expect. It is the best dipping dish in the world, the variety of the raw and boiled vegetables spicing up each bite. Fried vegetables and lamb chops Frying at home is to be undertaken when you have no distractions. You may like to feed these to your guests “à la minute”, frying in batches, or keep everything warm until all is ready. This recipe makes a lot and takes patience to fry. Serves 6 plain flour 150g olive oil celeriac ½ sprouting broccoli 300g sage a bunch caperberries 40g lamb cutlets 12 thyme a few sprigs eggs 2 semola flour 200g egg whites 2 sunflower oil for frying salt, pepper chilli flakes lemons 2 To make the batter, sieve the flour into a bowl. Add 3 tbsp of olive oil and whisk in 230ml of water until smooth. Cover and set aside for at least 30 minutes. Peel the celeriac and cut into irregular pieces, a few centimetres thick. Blanch these in boiling water for 4 minutes and then the broccoli for 2 minutes. Set aside. Pick the sage leaves. Soak the caperberries in water. Trim the fat from the lamb cutlets and bash them with a rolling pin until they are 1cm thin. Make a couple of incisions into each and insert some thyme leaves and sprinkle with a little salt. Whisk the eggs and, holding by the bone, dip each cutlet into this wash, then dredge in the semola, then back to the egg and once again the semola to make sure it’s well coated. Set aside on a plate ready for frying. Whisk the egg whites until stiff and fold into the batter. Drain the caperberries and dry with kitchen towel. Now you are ready to heat the sunflower oil. Do so in a pan that is at least double the height of the oil – a large, stable wok is ideal. Use a thermometer or a dollop of batter to check the temperature; 180-190C is ideal. In batches, put the lamb straight in and then fry the vegetables and sage leaves dipped first into the batter. Place carefully into the oil so that they don’t splash. Use tongs or a slotted spoon to turn everything over. Please don’t try to cook everything at once, but do so in batches, ending with the caperberries. Drain on a serving plate lined with kitchen paper. Season with salt and pepper and dust all with a sprinkle of dried chilli – I like to pound it very well in a mortar and pestle until it’s like powder – and serve with lemon wedges. Eat with your fingers. Panada with grapes and Gruyère I think that’s what you call this. I’d eat it with a bitter winter green salad for supper in front of the fire. Serves 6 savoy cabbage ½ (about 250g) onion 1 salt fennel seeds 1 tsp Muscat grapes 250g olive oil pepper bread wholegrain, 3 doorstep slices Gruyère, fontina or similar 100g parmesan 1 tbsp grated Shred, wash and blanch the cabbage in salted water for 4 minutes. Don’t throw the water away. Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Slice the onion and fry over a medium heat with a pinch of salt in a pan you can move to the oven. Add the fennel seeds, and add dashes of water if you think the onion may catch. Once the bottom of the pan is browned but not burned, add the grapes. Stir for 2 minutes, scraping the bottom of the pan as you do so, allowing the grapes to burst but not squishing them. Turn off the heat, add the cabbage and combine with another couple of tbsp of oil, and a liberal amount of roughly cracked black pepper. Use several ladles of the cabbage water as stock to loosen. You could use meat stock instead if you prefer. Cut the bread into thick doorstep slices, 3 will probably do. Tear these over the top of the pot and sink into the cabbage and grapes. Make sure some of the grapes and cabbage show through. Cut the cheese into slivers and dot around, following with the parmesan and a drizzle of oil. Bake for 25 minutes until golden. Bagna càuda The way to serve this is to give everyone a small amount of sauce in their own hot bowl and serve the vegetables separately: raw and boiled. Use the vegetables to stir the sauce. Serves 6 garlic 1 head extra virgin olive oil 200ml salted anchovies 125g unsalted butter 80g, softened potatoes 3 large carrots 6 celery 1 head red chicory 3 white chicory 3 fennel bulbs 2 Peel the garlic. Cut it in 2 and remove the central new green growth. In your smallest saucepan, over the lowest heat, add half the oil and the garlic. (On a gas cooker, adding a heat diffuser might be your best bet.) The garlic needs to cook without frying or browning until completely soft – 30 minutes at least. Should the garlic start to fry, take the pan off the heat for a moment. While this is happening, wash and dry the anchovies. If they are under oil, just drain the fillets, but do make sure you have enough actual fish, as they will include the oil as part of the total weight on the tin. Add the anchovies to the oil and continue stirring with your wooden spoon, encouraging them and the garlic to “melt” into the oil. Then add the rest of the oil and continue stirring until a thick sauce is achieved. There is no need to adjust the temperature. Then add the butter and mix in. The sauce needs to be kept warm until served. Boil the potatoes, then cook the carrots and celery as much or as little as you like – with a bit of crunch or a whole lot of give. Cut the potatoes into fat fingers. Wash and slice the chicories and fennel. You’re ready to go! Get dipping! Apples, walnuts and ricotta This simple and delicious pudding is the ideal way to finish a meal. Serves 6 shelled walnuts 100g golden caster sugar 40g, plus extra for sprinkling sea salt olive oil apples 6, medium-eating, not too soft, (about 600g) ricotta 500g, fresh cinnamon ⅛ of a stick brown sugar 2 tbsp Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Blitz the walnuts with the sugar and a good pinch of salt until they are fine crumbs, but not so much that they are paste. Scrunch up a large sheet of baking paper and flatten it out again. Barely oil the centre and then sprinkle with extra sugar. Use it to line a small 20cm loaf tin. Peel the apples and bob in a bowl of cold water so they don’t discolour. Slice the apple into ultra-thin 3mm slices, turning through 90° to avoid the cores. (You can use a Japanese mandolin if you have one and are good at that sort of thing.) Make a layer in the bottom of the tin with some of the apples and sprinkle over some of the walnuts. Add another layer of apples and walnuts and so on, building it up like a lasagna. It takes me 4 layers to come out even – it’s nice if the last layer is apple, but with some walnuts peeping through. Bake for 25 minutes. Remove from the oven, turn the heat down to 160C/gas mark 3. Sprinkle with a little more sugar and return to the oven for an hour. Allow to cool before serving. Reheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Without ceremony, turn the ricotta out on to a nonstick baking sheet. Grind the cinnamon in a mortar and pestle and sprinkle it on to the ricotta with brown sugar and a tiny pinch of salt. Bake for 20 minutes. Slice while still warm and serve with the cold apple flan. Joe Trivelli is co-head chef at the River Café
5||Republicans want to open pristine Alaska wilderness to logging. It's a tragedyForests are the lungs of the Earth. Around the world, every minute of every day, trees perform magic. They inhale vast amounts of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, and exhale oxygen, the stuff of life. They keep things in balance. And no single forest does this better – contains more living plant life per area, or stores more carbon – than the 17m-acre Tongass national forest in coastal Alaska. Take a deep breath. The oxygen you just pulled into your lungs that entered your bloodstream and nourished your mind was once in a tree. The Amazon of North America, the Tongass is mostly a roadless, wilderness kingdom of mosses, lichens, salmon, deer, bald eagles and bears – all beneath ice-capped mountains, ribboned with blue glaciers, blanketed with green, shaggy stands of Sitka spruce, western red cedar and western hemlock. Trees up to 10 feet in diameter, 200 feet tall, and 800 years old. But while the Amazon is a tropical rainforest, the Tongass, found at the mid-latitudes, is a temperate rainforest, one of the rarest biomes on Earth (found only in coastal Alaska and British Columbia, the Pacific north-west, the southern coast of Chile, and the South Island of New Zealand). A true old-growth forest, the Tongass represents a council of ancients. Indigenous Tlingit elders say it is rich with answers – even wisdom – if we ask the right questions and show proper restraint. And what does the Trump administration intend to do with it? Open it up for business. Their plan, more than two years in the making and spearheaded by the Alaska senator Lisa Murkowski, secretary of agriculture, Sonny Perdue, and Alaska governor, Mike Dunleavy – all Republicans bereft of a science education and an ecological conscience – is simple and wrongheaded: put the Tongass back to work as a so-called “healthy” forest, according to Mr Perdue. How? By re-introducing large-scale clearcut logging and extensive road building on 9.3m acres. To do this, they must exempt Alaska from the 2001 US Forest Service “Roadless Rule”, an enlightened conservation initiative that applies to 39 states. In short, the Tongass would no longer be protected. A final decision is likely to be released later this month. Never mind that 96% of thousands of recent public comments say the Tongass should remain roadless to protect clean water, salmon streams, wildlife habitat and old-growth trees. Never mind as well that logging the Tongass would create few jobs while adding to an already bloated federal deficit. Logging in Alaska is heavily subsidized. Back in the 1970s, 80s and 90s, taxpaying Americans anted up an average of $30m a year. One deficit sale offered every 1,000 board feet of timber for less money than the cost of a cheeseburger. All while many of the trees were shipped “in the round” (as whole logs) to Asia to become rayon, cellophane and other throwaway consumer goods. Another sale generated only 2.5 cents on every dollar the Forest Service spent building roads and preparing paperwork. And today? To build roads in the Tongass would cost taxpayers up to $500,000 a mile. Anthropologist and former Alaska writer laureate Richard Nelson, who lived in Sitka, on the edge of the Tongass, once said he wasn’t bothered when he found a stump in the forest. What broke his heart was when he came upon a “forest of stumps”. Entire mountainsides, valleys and islands shorn of trees. Yes, parts of the Tongass can be responsibly cut, and are. Many local Alaska economies use second-growth stands to harvest good building materials. And yes, a ravaged forest will return, but not for a long time. The Alaska department of fish and game estimates that large, industrial-scale Tongass clearcuts need more than 200 years to “acquire the uneven-aged tree structure and understory characteristic of old growth”. That is, to be truly healthy and robust again. This according to scientists, not politicians. The wholesale destruction of our imperiled planet’s most life-sustaining forests has to stop. How? A good first step: vote for politicians who make decisions based on solid science. Between 2001 and 2017, 800m acres of tree cover (an area nearly 50 times larger than the Tongass) disappeared worldwide, all while global temperatures climbed, wild birds and mammals perished by the billions, and fires, hurricanes, tornadoes and droughts intensified. And since 2017? Witness Australia and California. What few large, primal forests remain intact today, such the Tongass, become increasingly valuable for their ability to mitigate climate change. Scientists call this “pro-forestation”: the practice of leaving mature forests intact to reach their full ecological potential. The Tongass alone sequesters 3m tons of C02 annually, the equivalent of removing 650,000 gas-burning cars off the roads of the US every year. The better we understand science and indigenous wisdom, the better we’ll recognize the living Earth as a great teacher that’s fast becoming our ailing dependent. We each get three minutes without oxygen, and we’re not the only ones. It’s a matter of having a deep and abiding regard for all life. Call it respect. “What makes a place special is the way it buries itself inside the heart,” Nelson wrote in his memoir, The Island Within. “[N]ot whether it’s flat or rugged, rich or austere, wet or arid, gentle or harsh, warm or cold, wild or tame. Every place, like every person, is elevated by the love and respect shown toward it, and by the way in which its bounty is received.” Kim Heacox is the author of books including The Only Kayak, a memoir, and Jimmy Bluefeather, the only novel to ever win the National Outdoor Book Award. He lives in Alaska, on the edge of the Tongass
15||The lynx effect: Iberian cat claws its way back from brink of extinctionSpotty of coat, tufty of ear, and teetering on the verge of extinction less than two decades ago, the Iberian lynx is continuing to claw its way back across Spain and Portugal. According to the latest survey, the lynx population on the peninsula has increased ninefold over 18 years, rising from 94 in 2002 to 855 this year. Experts say that if the current conservation and reintroduction efforts can maintain their momentum, the species could be out of danger by 2040. The 2019 census, carried out using camera-traps and large reserves of patience, revealed that more than 80% of the lynx population is in Spain, that 311 kittens were born on the peninsula last year and that there were 188 females of reproductive age. There are populations in the Sierra Morena and Donaña national park. At the end of the last century, however, things looked decidedly bleak for the bearded cats – and for rabbits, which make up 90% of their diet. Government efforts to get rid of creatures considered to be vermin, which lasted until the mid-1970s, took a terrible toll, as did a catastrophic drop in rabbit numbers following the arrival of myxomatosis in the 1950s and then rabbit hemorrhagic disease in the 1980s. Both those factors were compounded by the destruction and isolation of habitats that came with motorway building and a greater human presence. Miguel Ángel Simón, a biologist who spent 22 years conserving and building up lynx numbers before retiring last year, remembers the daunting scale of the task he and his colleagues faced.“When we started back in 2000, we didn’t even know how many lynxes were left,” he says. “We found out from the first census that there were 94 and we thought that they were going to disappear. We just didn’t know if there was any way to save them – they were right on the edge and in critical danger of extinction. Back then, they were the most endangered felines in the world. Our first aim was just to stop them becoming extinct.” Their strategy of seeking money and engagement from politicians, and cooperation from landowners and the public, gradually paid off. A series of projects, coordinated by the Andalucían government in conjunction with other Spanish regions, the Portuguese authorities and conservation NGOs, has arrested the decline, expanded populations and seen lynxes reintroduced to other areas. “Today, the situation is pretty good and I think we can be optimistic and fairly calm because we haven’t just recovered the population in Andalucía, we’ve also built populations in Portugal – where the lynx was extinct – and in Extremadura and Castilla-La Mancha,” says Simón. The latest phase of the programme, the five-year Life Lynxconnect project, has a budget of €18.8m, 60% of which comes from the EU. Javier Salcedo, the project’s new leader, said the main aim was to join up existing populations and increase their genetic diversity. “We need to see an exchange of animals that will give us an exchange of genes,” he says. Ramón Pérez de Ayala, the large carnivores coordinator for WWF Spain – one of 21 partners in the latest project – warns that lynx populations are in danger of developing genetic problems if they remain isolated. “We’re going to do some genetic tracking so we can monitor the situation and see if we need to move individuals artificially.” Pérez de Ayala is also upbeat about the future of the lynx and hopes to see it move from the endangered category of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of threatened species into the vulnerable category. He estimates it will take another 20 years of hard work before Spain and Portugal can claim to have saved the lynx. “If we carry on, if we can maintain the population growth momentum, and if luck stays on our side, we’ll have at least 750 females of reproductive age – which means more than 3,000 lynxes in total – by 2040,” he says. Between now and then, existing populations will have to be blended and increased, and new ones established in rabbit-rich habitats. Equally important will be the mapping and marking of blackspots: in 2019, 34 lynxes died after being run over. For Pérez de Ayala and many others, protecting the lynx is a moral and ecological imperative. “Every species has an intrinsic value that can’t be lost – it would be like demolishing a cathedral,” he says. “And you’re talking about an animal that does a really good job of balancing out the food chain of the Mediterranean ecosystem.” In the absence of lynxes, medium-sized predators that eat rabbits – such as foxes and Egyptian mongooses – put prey species under a lot of pressure. When a lynx comes along, explains Pérez de Ayala, the density of foxes and mongooses goes down and rabbit populations increase. But, he adds, environmental harmony is only one of the many reasons why the peninsula’s unique wild cat must remain well spotted. “On a more emotional level, the lynx is a jewel and a thing of beauty to behold.”
17||Windrush man wrongly classified as illegal immigrant left destitute for a yearAn electrician who was wrongly classified as being an illegal immigrant, despite living in London for more than 45 years, was destitute as he waited a year for the Windrush taskforce to decide on his application to stay in the UK, the parliamentary ombudsman has ruled. Applications to the taskforce were meant to be processed within two weeks. The year-long wait was described as “shocking” by the ombudsman in a detailed report published this week – the latest of a series of highly critical reviews into the performance of the Home Office over the Windrush scandal. The parliamentary ombudsman has ruled that the Home Office should apologise and pay Mr R £5,000 in compensation for “maladministration and delay” in processing his case. Officials wrongly told him that he would be able to claim benefits while he waited for a decision, but he found himself unable to claim any support. “He could not work, had no money and could not buy food,” the report stated. “He said he was destitute and felt ‘worthless, broken, with no hope or prospects’. “He told us everyone slept in the same room at the homeless shelter and he had no privacy. He was not allowed to stay in the building during the day; he spent his time walking the streets or going to the library. All he wanted to do was get his status confirmed so he could work again and begin to rebuild his life.” Mr R arrived in the UK in 1970 from Nigeria aged eight, but had no way of proving that he had arrived at that time. He lost his home and job as a result of being wrongly classified as an illegal immigrant by the Home Office in 2014. When the government apologised in April 2018 for wrongly categorising thousands of legal residents as immigration offenders, he applied for his right to remain in the UK to be formally recognised. His case was complicated because, like many applicants to the scheme, he struggled to find documents proving that he had been in the UK since the early 1970s; staff told him it could take six weeks to come to a decision. Although a decision was made internally on his case after about two months, officials waited 10 months to communicate the decision to him, the report found. Mr R was not granted status under the scheme because of ongoing difficulties finding documents proving his arrival but was eventually advised about how to make a different application to remain on the grounds of long-term residence. The ombudsman’s report found that UK Visas and Immigration was “well aware” of Mr R’s “desperate situation yet it repeatedly refused requests to expedite its decision”, and that “UKVI gave responses on the delay that were not in line with our principles of being ‘open, accountable and truthful’”. The report concludes: “The Windrush scheme was set up to rectify past wrongs and do so with urgency and purpose. It has fallen well short of that in this case.” Emily Thornberry, the Labour MP for Islington South and Mr R’s MP, said: “It is appalling that this man, who was particularly vulnerable, remained homeless for more than a year due to disgraceful delays on the part of the Home Office. The hostile environment has caused enormous hardship, and the Windrush scheme has let so many people down – the Home Office should be ashamed of themselves.” The parliamentary and health service ombudsman provides an independent and impartial complaint handling service for complaints that have not been resolved by the NHS in England and UK government departments. Rob Behrens, the ombudsman, said he was handling a number of other Windrush complaints. “We encourage anyone who has complained about their treatment under the Windrush scheme to come to us via their local MP if they are not happy with the response they have received.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Mr R’s application under the Windrush scheme was refused and the decision has been upheld following independent review. UKVI apologises for the delay in issuing a decision.”
5||Since we’re talking fantasy Brexit deals…In 1981, tarnished by a legacy of nuclear embarrassments, the leaky Cumbrian atomic power plant Windscale was rebranded as Sellafield and the problems of public perception simply melted away, like hot uranium seeping into a water table. Likewise, we are no longer about to embrace a similarly contaminated no-deal Brexit. We are instead welcoming a nice, new Australia-style deal. But Australia doesn’t have a deal with the EU (even though it wants one). We are embracing a no-deal Brexit in all but name. It is, as the secretary of state Alok Sharma admitted to an unusually uncooperative Nick Ferrari on Monday, “just a question of semantics”. Ah yes. The Conservatives’ old enemies! Words! And their actual meanings! On Monday evening, I opened my Anglo-Asian tandoori lamb vindaloo delivery and found a request to contribute to one of Dominics Cumming’s blue-sky, out-of-the-box think-boxes inside it, written on my poppadum in mango chutney. Cumming’s omniscient net-lords knew my every move. As usual, Cumming was looking for hot-ass cyber-freaks and batshit Ballardian head-jobs who could furnish him with shamanic sci-fi solutions. Apparently I was such a person because I had both written a comic book about a ghost and sung in 10th-century Anglo-Saxon on a dance record. Cumming needed a way to avoid identifying the incoming no-deal Brexit, which no one had wanted or expected, as the no-deal Brexit it clearly was. Sharma’s public admission that the Australia-style deal rebrand was linguistic smoke and mirrors had proved potentially problematic and threatened to unravel a number of other flimsy, fictional Conservative constructs, the implausible public persona of Boris Johnson having been deemed the most vulnerable to a moment’s scrutiny. Normally I wouldn’t sell my skills to a Tory brainstorming session, but I am principally a live comedian and I haven’t worked since March. Under lockdown, my principles, like my trousers, inexplicably became elasticated and I was to be offered the usual £25,000-a-day consultancy fee, as long as I worked through a company run by an old schoolfriend of any current cabinet member. I was picked up and taken to the agreed secret location – a boarded-up, underground, art deco gentleman’s convenience on Shepherd’s Bush Green – where I joined four other futurist-warlocks round a socially distanced, circular marble table. One had blue-lensed granny specs and a green parrot on her shoulder; another was dressed as a kind of disco Rudolf Hess; a third wore tracksuit bottoms, espadrilles and a plain brown Primark T-shirt, but his bangle was festooned with runes. All were inscrutable, carried satchels and had produced incendiary content for opaquely funded libertarian blogs. They regarded Laurence Fox as a Trojan horse, Michael Gove as a stink bomb and Boris Johnson as an unpleasant but useful clump of sausage meat that could be animated to mouth whatever words were necessary, within its limited capacity. In the centre of the table, Cumming’s head appeared inside an illuminated glass crystal ball full of pink gas. Initially, I assumed it was a three-dimensional holographic projection, like Laurence Olivier’s head in Dave Clark’s Time musical, Cumming broadcasting his image from elsewhere. He had previous form in being in two places at once, such as Islington and Barnard Castle, for example. But every now and again, Cumming’s face would groan and the head would shift uneasily and I realised the eyesight-anxious political fixer was actually crouching uncomfortably beneath the table with his skull through a hole, gas pumping into the simple goldfish bowl that encased it so it looked mysterious, like a shit Wizard of Oz. If any of my fellow situationist-idea-terraformers realised his ruse, they didn’t let on, fearful of dismissal. “Sharma’s careless breakfast lips have exposed the semantic hollowness of the ‘Australia-style deal’ language virus, immunising some sections of the electorate against its charm,” Cumming’s head began, his voice condensed behind the glass, like someone speaking into a plastic cup to do an impression of Melvyn Bragg. “We must use our sock puppets in the internet, the press and the BBC to obscure it, flood the info-sphere with synonymous ideas, fabricating post-Brexit deals with nonexistent places and creating plausible backstories to stiff any grots that would verify them. Be about it!” And with that Cumming popped down beneath the table again to conceal himself. By Wednesday lunchtime, the airwaves were abuzz with our distractions, expendable loyalist MPs swamping Sharma’s indiscretion with expedient lies. On 5 Live, Banbury MP Victoria Prentis said she was looking forward to an Eternia ™ ® style deal with the planet Eternia, He-Man ™ ® having already promised timber from the Skytree ™ ®; on Talk Radio, Torbay’s Kevin Foster spoke enthusiastically of our Equestria ™ ® style deal and of the untapped financial value of the manure of his magic Little Ponies ™ ®, especially the thick dung of Pinkie Pie ™ ®; and on Sky News, West Suffolk’s Matt Handcock nervously commended a Gor ™ ® style deal to Adam Boulton, while explaining it wasn’t his place to criticise the fantasy kingdom’s human rights violations, most notably the compulsory sexual captivity of all women, when it offered such valuable access to the slave markets of the Insectoids ™ ®. By midnight, I had helped publicise fictional deals with the nonexistent realms of Atlantis, Plutonia, Pellucidar ™ ®, Lemuria ™ ®, Skartaris ™ ®, Etheria ™ ®, Lyonesse and Wakanda ™ ®, whose coveted metal, Vibranium ™ ®, did not exist either. And by the time Cumming spat me out into the Shepherd’s Bush night, I was so disoriented I almost believed it all myself. I drank a few cans of strong cider alone on the darkening green. All-but-empty night buses circled me, masked passengers staring out. “Everything will be OK,” I thought, “we have a Fantasy Island-style trade deal. The Plane! The Plane!” Stewart Lee contributes 10th-century Anglo-Saxon poetry to a track on the new album by Asian Dub Foundation, Access Denied, out now
18||Swing out, sisters: the nuns singing through lockdownSocial distancing and lockdown come naturally to the Poor Clares of Arundel in West Sussex: after all, they’ve been doing it for 800 years. “In our day-to-day life the pandemic has hardly affected us at all,” says Sister Gabriel, who joined the order of enclosed nuns in 1994, aged 23. “The biggest sadness for us is that we’ve not been able to have visitors – we’ve hardly seen any outsiders for months.” Now, though, the outside world is hearing from the Poor Clares, because on the eve of lockdown, back in March, the nuns were in the final stages of recording their debut album. The sisters hope it will bring some of the simple, balanced principles of cloister life to those struggling with the fallout from Covid. “It’s been a time of great anxiety and stress, and people really need to zone out and find a place of peace,” says Sister Gabriel. The Poor Clares – who wear long brown habits, beige-coloured veils and sandals – practise a kind of ancient mindfulness: they focus on the present, and other than visits to the doctor or dentist, they stay within the confines of their monastery. At the height of lockdown, says Sister Leo, who’s in her 60s and entered the community in 1976, people would contact her to ask for advice on how to cope with having to stay in the same place, day after day. “I always said the same thing: pay attention to regularity in your life, and do things by a timetable. That’s how it works for us. And I think it’s helped others when I’ve said, ‘We live like this the whole time, and we have done for many years.’” All the same, the sisters acknowledge there’s a world of difference between choosing to live separately from others and having it forced on you. “We’re very conscious that for many people the last few months have been truly hellish,” says Sister Aelred, who’s in her 70s and entered the community in 1961 aged 18. “I’ve got friends in their 80s who are self-isolating, and I know how lonely and difficult it’s been for them.” We’re talking around a big table in the nuns’ parlour, which, due to Covid restrictions, is the only part of the convent I’m allowed to enter. And though they’re a largely silent order, with speaking restricted during the day other than at recreation, and strictly adhered to from nightfall to dawn, the sisters certainly know how to chat. Assuming them to be meek and mild and reticent is one of the many mistakes people make, says Sister Gabriel. “People expect us to be sombre, whereas there’s a lot of fun and laughter in our lives. They think we’re not in touch with politics – they think we’re not ordinary women, when in fact we very much are.” “People would be surprised to hear we fall out,” says Sister Aelred. “And they would also be surprised that we enjoy a glass of beer or wine, from time to time.” What’s different about life in the community isn’t that nuns are a different species, they explain, but that they’ve bought into a simpler life. In a complex, upside-down world, could it be that their daily routine has wisdom to impart to the rest of us? The sisters rise at 5.30am (5am in summer) to embark on a day that follows more or less the same structure Poor Clares and other monastic orders have followed for hundreds of years. After breakfast and an hour’s meditation (“to centre ourselves”, says Sister Gabriel), the nuns gather in their chapel for prayers and, two days a week, for mass. “Then we have a period for work, which might be anything from cooking to working in the vegetable garden, to doing our paid work, which is spiritual direction – we’ve switched that to Zoom,” she says. Lunch, the main meal of the day, is eaten in silence while one sister reads aloud from a spiritual text; the same happens at supper, but the text is what Gabriel describes as “a lighter book – it might be a biography, for example”. After lunch comes a rest period and more work, before (on three days of the week) “recreation”, where the sisters are free to chat and catch up with one another’s news. “The thing about structure is, it helps you to use your time more wisely,” says Sister Gabriel. “We often waste time: if you’ve got an eight-hour window for work, you dissipate and end up on the phone or computer. But if you’ve only got two hours, it forces you to use the time wisely. Structure creates space, to achieve what you want, and to simply be.” Music is at the heart of the nuns’ worship – but the idea of recording an album, explains Sister Aelred, came about initially as a bit of a joke. Music producer James Morgan got in touch to ask whether he could come to vespers – one of the offices of the day – to hear the sisters sing. “We thought once he’d heard us that would be it, and we’d never hear from him again.” “We were sure we wouldn’t be good enough,” adds Sister Gabriel. “But then he got back in touch and said he wasn’t bothered about the mistakes we’d made – we could be trained not to do that. What he liked was the tone of our singing.” For many singers, the idea of a contract from a record company is a dream come true, but the Poor Clares had a different take on it – as they would on many elements of becoming recording artists. “We said we don’t want auditions. You have to include everyone who wants to be included,” says Sister Gabriel. “The people who hear it will have to accept the ability of all of us – we’re not going to tell any of our sisters, ‘You can’t sing, so you’re not in.’” Of the 23-strong community, all but two sisters eventually took part. “We have sisters who sing tunefully and beautifully, and we have others who sound tone-deaf,” says Sister Leo. “And we’re all on the album.” For their part, the sisters hope the album will allow them to share what matters to them with the outside world. “We certainly didn’t do it to become famous,” says Sister Gabriel. “We want people to know the essence of our lives, what we believe in and what brings us joy.” The music on the album – which includes a traditional Ave Maria, Psalm 27 (O Lord, Hear My Voice) and In Paradisum, sung by the nuns at their funeral liturgies – also features the words set to music of St Francis and St Clare, the order’s founders. “They lived eight centuries ago”, says Sister Gabriel. “But they knew many things we still struggle with today, including how important it is to understand our relationship with the environment. So we live as sustainably as possible. We grow what we can – not everything, but certainly lots of our own vegetables. We’re very careful about waste – anything not eaten at lunch one day will be supper the next.” “And we share with others – we support the local food bank,” says Sister Aelred. “We’ve not felt called to be on Twitter,” says Sister Leo. “We’ve taken a vow of poverty and we don’t own anything. And we believe that’s what needs to happen with the world. We all need to use less, so people with less can have more.” Each sister wears a Tau cross, based on the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet and worn by St Francis. “Of course, we know many people don’t believe in God, but many of them recognise some kind of higher power. I think being connected to something bigger than ourselves stops us being narcissistic.” Do they, I ask, worry about the future? Like most religious communities in the west, numbers of enclosed nuns are falling, and their own convent is top-heavy, with the youngest nun aged 47 and the oldest in her 90s. Surprisingly, Sister Gabriel says she’s not bothered what happens next. “I think we have something to share and something to speak out about, but things happen in waves and if this has reached full circle, that’s OK. We’ve still got our lives to live, and this isn’t just about numbers. The truth is, it’s a wonderful way to live.” Light for the World by the Poor Clares of Arundel is out now on the Decca record label (£12.75 for the CD)
15||'It feels like a nightmare': Sussex villagers aghast at road plan“It’s like they are torturing us. Each step, it just gets worse.” Gilly McCadden is in tears. She has just learned that the route chosen for the £250m dual carriageway around Arundel in West Sussex will bring four lanes of 70mph traffic within metres of her house and garden. The new route of the A27, bypassing a bypass built in the 1960s, has been planned – and resisted – since the 1980s. Now Highways England has unexpectedly chosen the “grey route” – a longer, more expensive plan that slices through three villages but avoids the South Downs national park. For locals in the village of Binsted who fought previous iterations of the plan for destroying ancient woodlands, it means the proposed road will crash through their gardens and peaceful meadows. “We are glad the wildlife is getting saved,” said McCadden, a garden designer. “But you learn a lot about how these roads are constructed. You learn that the one element that doesn’t matter is people.” The new road has been portrayed as a deeply polarising issue, with support in Arundel and opposition from residents of three affected villages – Binsted, Tortington and Walberton. But in Highways England’s latest public consultation, just 7% of the 5,000 respondents chose the grey route, while 64% of people called for no road to be built or for “online” improvements only, closely following the existing route of the 1960s single-carriageway bypass. “That’s an absolutely astonishing result,” said Emma Tristram, a Binsted resident. “Highways England tried to stack the dice in their favour and they failed. They’ve shown the consultation is democratic rubbish.” Mike and Diane Evans bought their dream home – with orchards, paddocks and a small ancient woodland – two years ago after careers in the armed forces. It had been anticipated that the road would pass relatively harmlessly behind their wood, but the grey route cuts across their front garden. They will have to sell up. “I’ve served pretty much everywhere – Northern Ireland, the Falklands, Iran, Afghanistan. I’ve been in some pretty nasty places,” said Mike Evans. “This [house] has been just total heaven. I don’t know what we’ve done to deserve this. It feels like a punishment of some description.” For McCadden, the “punishment” of the new route was compounded when she was informed that Highways England would not purchase her home, which she designed and built 21 years ago, nor consider it blighted. She must now prove she needs to sell for a reason other than escaping the bypass outside her front door, and try to sell the house herself for up to 20% beneath her asking price before the government’s roadbuilding company will consider buying it from her. “It feels like we’re living in a dystopian nightmare now,” she said. “They keep adding layers of horror.” The proposed route avoids the national park but now crosses the edge of an estate in Walberton and close to the village primary school while bypassing a mile and a half of existing dual carriageway. Despite the reprieve for the national park and ancient woodland, environmental groups including the Woodland Trust, the Campaign to Protect Rural England and the Wildlife Trusts continue to oppose the new road, arguing that it will fragment habitat for dormice, endanger bat populations and ruin rare flushed fen habitat. In Binsted, villagers say it will destroy the tight-knit community of 38 homes and pass within metres of Binsted’s 850-year-old church – built on a 2,000-year-old iron age embankment – and the scenic village pub. Mike Tristram said: “This is a place where people can step into a life that was sustainable before industrialisation brought us into the climate and ecological emergency that we’re in.” Maggie Moore Alexander said her ill husband, Christopher, 84, a renowned architect and theorist of human-centred design, chose their Grade II-listed house after observing the peace of its garden, and now faced having the highway cross their land. She said the anti-bypass campaigners had barely heard a familiar charge. “Somebody mentioned ‘nimby’ the other day and I thought: that’s interesting, I haven’t heard that in a while,” she said. “We’ve done a terrible job of protecting the world we live in and the natural systems around us that keep us afloat. One of the Highways England people said they didn’t consider Covid because it was just a blip. But there’s more and more evidence that this bypass is a stupid thing to do. The economic situation says it’s a stupid thing to do. There’s less and less traffic here.” Tony Hunt, the mayor of Arundel, said the town council welcomed Highways England’s plan. “For over 40 years the A27 has run straight through the town, dividing our community into two halves,” he said. “With the growth of traffic, Arundel has become a bottleneck, with 21,000 journeys made each day on the single-lane section of the A27 that bisects the town.” Andrew Griffith, who was one of Boris Johnson’s first appointments as chief business adviser before he became Arundel’s MP in 2019, said he had worked with the government to “secure the necessary support for Highways England to proceed” with the new road. “It will reduce congestion, enhance air quality, improve road safety and support much-needed employment and economic growth,” he said. “Some question whether we need to improve our roads at all. Whilst I support a rapid switch to cleaner and quieter vehicles – and the UK is a leader in this respect – they will still need roads to drive upon and there is nothing environmentally friendly about pollution caused by congestion.”
3||Can California’s top wine region survive the era of megafire?The Silverado Trail, a two-lane road that weaves through the bucolic hillsides in the heart of California’s wine country, is the quintessential vision of Napa Valley. Home to dozens of wineries, it is a destination within a destination – one that welcomes both vacationing imbibers and oenophiles from around the world. But recently the amber hillsides have been laced with the ashen aftermath of wildfires that have torn through the region, leaving behind charred rubble that is fast becoming as much a part of the landscape as the neatly trussed rows of vines. It is a sign of an increasingly uncertain future for the crown jewel of California’s $43bn wine industry – one in which vintners must adapt to a changing climate and increasingly unpredictable fire seasons in order to survive. Devastating wildfires have pummeled Napa and Sonoma over the last five years, most recently this summer’s Glass fire, which torched close to 67,500 acres and destroyed 1,555 structures, including damage to numerous wineries. Annual evacuations, smoke-filled skies and the existential threat posed by higher and drier temperatures have taken a toll. This year Covid-19 has compounded the impact on tourism, restaurants and labor, with losses from the crisis expected to total close to half a billion dollars. Yet even with the risks, California’s wine industry is growing, with the market rising roughly 42% in retail value over the last decade. Napa has attracted a steady flow of newcomers who may not be willing to withstand the obstacles ahead. But many winemakers and growers, some with generational ties to the region and its industry, are counting on research, innovation and sheer determination in a race against the changing climate. “We are resilient,” says Nicole Bacigalupi who runs Bacigalupi Vineyards with her twin sister, Katey. Bacigalupi, the third generation in her family to farm the land, is finding ways to mitigate the threat of fires. Speaking under a giant oak tree, the sound of cow calls ring out from an adjacent pasture. The animals are there to help keep the vegetation down. The vineyard is also building its own fire truck, she says, adding that a friend helped protect them when the Walbridge fire, which morphed into the sprawling LNU Lightning Complex fire, got close last month. Bacigalupi admits that three terrifying fire seasons in a row have prompted tough questions about the future. “You get to a point where you are so overwhelmed that you are not sure if it’s worth fighting for,” she says. Winemaking in the era of wildfires Since 2015, California Alcohol Beverage Control has received roughly 170 new wineries registries a year – up from roughly seven registered annually in the 1990s. Some critics have called for crackdowns on the continuing expansion, and have concerns about how crowding affects safe and sustainable land use practices, especially in the face of faster-moving flames. “It has gotten to the point of absurdity now, there are so many wineries in that little valley,” says James Conaway, the author of Napa: The Story of an American Eden. “Global warming is here and the changes are not going to turn around in anybody’s lifetime,” he adds. “Napa is going to have to alter what it is doing.” He champions the idea that newcomers might move out, and make room for those most dedicated to sustainable winemaking. “Some of the people who have been there a long time are doing it – there are some really nice wines still being made in Napa,” he says. “But, it is not the nice sociable agrarian dream that it was back in the 80s.” Kirk Venge, a third-generation veteran of the wine industry who was born and raised in Napa Valley, is optimistic, and says he’s not going anywhere. “We just have to be patient and not give up,” he says with a smile during a bustling day on his namesake vineyard, Venge, housed on the Silverado Trail. He has faced the dangers of Napa Valley’s new normal up close. On this sunny afternoon in October, it would be hard to tell just how close the Glass fire came to his property, were it not for the surrounding scorched hillsides. Venge describes watching embers rain down from the sky and treetops and explode on the horizon, feeling certain he’d say goodbye to his winery that morning. “The whole valley was starting to go up,” he says, pointing at the blackened landscape. But his vineyard was spared and within hours, Venge and a small crew got back to work. “We have to keep making the wine,” he says. “People depend on us for their livelihood and we can’t just stop, we can’t run away.” Now, he’s better preparing the property by increasing its “defensible space” – areas without debris or vegetation that can serve as a natural fire break. “No more bark around the building!” he laughs. Venge is also dealing with another major challenge – the effects of persistent wildfire smoke, which is dangerous for workers to breathe and can also be absorbed by the grapes, altering the feel and flavor of the wine produced from them. A 2015 study by the Australian Wine Research Institute found that just a half-hour of smoke exposure was enough to have an impact. This year, some areas were cloaked in the grey haze for weeks on end. “Smoke taint” has affected harvests in Napa already after bad fire seasons, and this year’s was no different. Venge says he lost more than two dozen tons of grapes as a result. “We didn’t pick any pinot this year at all,” he says. “Anything picked after the Glass fire is going to have smoke taint.” To make up for the loss, Venge and his team are getting creative, replacing the unusable year with new products from the 2018 and 2019 stock, and hoping they are spared in 2021. Searching for solutions California’s wine country has always been disaster-prone, the land primed for floods, fires and earthquakes. Now, with winemakers around the world facing similar climate-related issues, the region is looking elsewhere for answers. California has already benefited from lessons learned in fire-prone areas such as Australia and Chile. Resources are being shared up and down the west coast – Oregon and Washington are dealing with the same threats – and the winegrowing associations are collaborating on a taskforce to study smoke taint. There are also robust research centers based locally, including UC Davis, where viticulturalists are working to develop more resilient vines, and Sonoma State University, where there are studies into strategies for better sustainability and risk mitigation. “The one thing we know about California farmers and ranchers – and I view the wine sector as a real leader in this – is they are all trying to look around that curve and trying to get ahead of that curve,” says Karen Ross, the secretary of the California department of food and agriculture, who also spent more than a decade serving as the president of the California Association of Winegrape Growers, and helped usher in a sustainable winegrowing program. Ross admits that the effects of the climate crisis have descended on the region sooner than anticipated. “We have always talked about these kinds of impacts as the future – but the future is now,” she says, adding that Golden State growers are relying on research and science to navigate new obstacles. “It may look different but I think it will still be an important and leading part of what California agriculture is all about.” Still, there is a long road ahead, and adjustments will have to be made quickly. Already, winemakers are predicting warming weather will mean the end for some wines in the region in the future, including favorites like pinot and chardonnay. Even cabernet, the valley’s most prized varietal, is under threat from the changing climate. Because vines can take years to cultivate, the wine business is by nature future-facing, but Dr Judith Ford, a sustainability and resilience fellow at Sonoma State University hopes the latest fire season spurs a sense of urgency. “There is a saying to never let a good crisis go to waste,” says Ford, who evaluated the wine industry’s preparedness following 2017 North Bay Fires, which hammered the region, and found that those who were directly affected were more likely to make changes. “Right after 2017 there was a real drive to do some things and then it got back to business as usual,” she says. Speaking at a wine industry conference at the beginning of this year, she was dismayed to see that only a dozen people showed up for a panel on disaster preparedness. “Our region feels like it has been hit with crisis after crisis after crisis – and that can really freeze you,” she says. “But this is escalating and it is important to keep moving forward.” Despite the obstacles, many longtime residents like Bacigalupi are determined to stick it out. She says she could see how less-dedicated hobbyists might be driven away from the crisis-stricken area, “but we will stay”, she says, resolutely. Her 95-year-old grandmother is still alive to see the legacy she built continue to grow. Bacigalupi says that is a big part of what keeps her going. “I feel strongly that you are given a gift in a generational family,” she says. “You are supposed to take the land, make it better, revive it if you need to and continue to make it healthier to pass down to the next generation.”
24||The dementia that can be curedWhen John Abraham began to lose his mind in late 2019, his family immediately feared the worst. Abraham had enjoyed robust health throughout retirement, but now at 80 he suddenly found himself struggling to finish sentences. “I would be talking to people, and all of a sudden the final word wouldn’t come to mind,” he remembers. “I assumed this was simply a feature of ageing, and I was finding ways of getting around it.” But within weeks, further erratic behaviours started to develop. Abraham’s family recall him often falling asleep mid-conversation, he would sometimes shout out bizarre comments in public, and during the night he would wake up every 15 minutes, sometimes hallucinating. To his son Steve, the diagnosis seemed inevitable, one which all families dread. “I was convinced my dad had dementia,” he says. “What I couldn’t believe was the speed at which it was all happening. It was like dementia on steroids.” Dementia is not just one disease – it has more than 200 different subtypes. Over the past decade neurologists have become increasingly interested in one particular subtype, known as autoimmune dementia. In this condition, the symptoms of memory loss and confusion are the result of brain inflammation caused by rogue antibodies – known as autoantibodies – binding to the neuronal tissue, rather than an underlying neurodegenerative disease. Crucially this means that unlike almost all other forms of dementia, in some cases it can be cured, andspecialist neurologists have become increasingly adept at both spotting and treating it. At the John Radcliffe hospital, University of Oxford, neurologist Sarosh Irani is one of the world’s leading experts in treating neurological conditions caused by a malfunctioning immune system. When Abraham was admitted under his care in early January 2020 following a seizure, Irani soon realised that the source of his problems was an autoantibody which targeted a protein in the brain named LGI1. The main telltale clue was the speed of onset, one of the key distinguishing features of autoimmune dementia. “The symptoms usually come on very quickly,” Irani says. “Over a few weeks or months, patients develop memory problems, and change their behaviour and personality. Patients with neurodegenerative forms of dementia can develop movement disorders or seizures, but this typically happens later in the illness once degeneration has set in. In autoimmune dementia, these are early problems.” Abraham underwent a treatment called plasma exchange, which aims to wash the blood of the disease-causing antibodies. The impact was almost instant. “For me it caused a complete transformation, in one or two days,” he says. “My family came in to see me in the hospital, and they just looked at each other in amazement.” Such dramatic improvements are often reported as soon as treatment – which can also include steroids and other immunotherapies – begins. “Patients can go from being in a nursing home, unable to communicate, to returning to work, being able to drive again,” says Eoin Flanagan, a neurologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, one of a handful of centres in the world along with Irani’s research group, that is actively studying autoimmune dementia. This is one reason why the condition, though rare – Mayo Clinic neurologist Sean Pittock estimates that it makes up less than 5% of all dementia cases – is so important to identify. The data available suggests that it is often missed. Among autoimmune dementia patients who were successfully treated at the Mayo Clinic between 2002 and 2009, 35% had been initially misdiagnosed with either Alzheimer’s or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. “A lot of patients over 60 are misdiagnosed,” says Flanagan. “That’s a concern because if you miss these cases, you’re committing them to a presumed neurodegenerative course when they could respond to immunotherapy, and their symptoms resolve.” But autoimmune dementia is also an illustration of a broader trend. Over the past 15 years, treatable diseases have been identified across an entire spectrum of neurological illnesses from epilepsy to multiple sclerosis and psychiatry, all caused by autoantibodies binding to different parts of the brain and central nervous system. “It’s become one of the most exciting areas of neurology,” says Irani. “There are subgroups within all these illness groups that have very treatable diseases. If you’re a dementia doctor, a small percentage of your patients will have this condition, the same if you’re a psychiatrist or a multiple sclerosis doctor. And with these patients you can actually directly treat the underlying cause by suppressing the immune system.” The rise of treatable neurology In October 2019, another patient was admitted to the John Radcliffe hospital.Pippa Carter, aged 19, had just begun an English literature degree at the University of Leeds when she noticed that her vision seemed to be strangely distorted. “I would be in lectures and I was really struggling to focus with my eyesight and with concentration in general,” she says. “I was trying to audition for a university play, and I had to stop because I couldn’t really read at all. Initially, I thought it was just nerves because I was starting a new chapter in life.” Within weeks, she found herself unable to get her words out properly, before she was taken to hospital after suffering a large seizure. Just like Abraham, it was the speed of her decline which alerted doctors to a potential autoimmune cause. “Within a week she was hallucinating, shouting things,” remembers Irani. “In her hospital room, which she was in for several weeks, she drew these bizarre childlike pictures on the wall, like the sorts of things a four-year-old would draw. It was like something was causing her to regress in her behaviour.” Carter was suffering from a neuropsychiatric syndrome caused by an autoantibody binding to the brain’s NMDA receptors, proteins which play a key role in learning and memory formation. Soon after she began treatment, first with steroids, and then an immunotherapy called rituximab, she began to improve. Now more than a year on, she is hoping to resume her university studies soon. Since 2004, scientists have been steadily discovering the autoantibodies behind these various neurological conditions, making it possible for clinics to test for them. Irani says that so far they have discovered approximately 25, with one or two new autoantibodies detected every year. “There are probably many more out there still,” he says. “We’re not at the tip of the iceberg, but I think we’re probably nowhere near the base either.” Precisely what stimulates the body to produce these autoantibodies remains unclear, but it is thought that there can be a variety of environmental triggers ranging from viral infections to tumours, along with an underlying genetic susceptibility. Due to the number of patients who can be successfully treated, specialists are looking to raise awareness of the importance of keeping an eye out for them. “It’s really a not-to-miss set of conditions,” says Irani. “Our clinic runs a diagnostics lab where we receive UK-wide samples for many of these diseases. One in 100 are positive, and these patients clearly get better with steroids and similar medications.” There are signs that the interest is growing. In November 2019, data was published from the first clinical trial looking at the effectiveness of different treatments for patients with a type of epilepsy caused by LGI1 autoantibodies. Two more trials are under way looking at new experimental therapies aimed at trying to stop the body from producing these damaging antibodies. Irani is hoping that this will yield many benefits in years to come. “There’s definitely an under-recognition of these conditions,” he says. “But as the field continues to expand, there will be more and more of these patients who get picked up. I’m sure that if you look hard enough in acute psychiatry wards, and in nursing homes, there are patients out there with treatable conditions who are being missed.”
20||Why China's dramatic economic recovery might not add upBeijing prompted envy, admiration and not a little resentment when it released data last week confirming that it was the first major economy to start growing again after the devastation caused by Covid-19 in the first half of the year. China appeared to have achieved the V-shaped recovery being chased by finance ministers around the world, after pioneering mass lockdowns to contain the virus that had taken hold in Wuhan, then shutting its borders to stop it filtering back in from abroad. With the country largely virus-free, people could return to something like normal life in offices, schools, shops and restaurants, and the government encouraged a splurge in investment across infrastructure and new manufacturing. Government data showed growth of 4.9% between July and September, slightly lower than economists had expected, but still an astonishing achievement. Analysts have warned, however, that apparent data manipulation, and the details of how China returned to growth – relying more on investment than consumption – raise questions about the strength and durability of the economic revival. Nick Marro, lead analyst on global trade at the Economist Intelligence Unit, said the figures appeared to show a shuffling of some data to boost the overall GDP growth rate for the third quarter, although he cautioned there was no direct evidence of any data fabrication. “The Chinese statistical agency is opaque about their methodology, and unless we get more details about their adjustments, we’ll never know the full story. But there does seem to be evidence of a targeted adjustment to help lift that headline figure,” he said. “The September figures were smoothed by quietly altering the historic basis of comparison; basically, some of the numbers from September 2019 were re-apportioned into October of that year, in order to lower the comparison base. That led to a statistical distortion where the September 2020 growth figures might’ve been artificially inflated.” The difference in growth rate was not huge, Marro said, but the manipulation suggested the economy might not be as strong as Beijing would have liked people to think. “The bigger implication is that the investment landscape might be more fragile than the official numbers suggest heading into the last quarter of 2020. That’s perhaps the bigger risk for companies to be aware of.” Leland Miller, chief executive of the China Beige Book consultancy, which tracks the Chinese economy with data it collects itself in addition to government statistics, flagged up what he considered a far more disturbing alteration in the data. China recorded growth of 0.8% in fixed-asset investment for the first three quarters of the year, compared with 2019, but the absolute figures for the same period showed a drop of several trillion yuan. “This is not toying at the margin. This is making 2.5 trillion yuan in fixed asset investment disappear,” he said. The only explanation given by Chinese authorities for the discrepancy was that the data had been adjusted to reflect “results of the fourth national economic census, statistical law enforcement and regulation of statistical programmes”, so economists have no way to assess how accurate the revisions are or compare them to other data. If fixed-asset investment had actually fallen, as the raw data suggested, while consumption was also down, overall GDP growth could be much lower than the headline figure, Miller said. “There are very big lessons here, because people think that China’s back. They’ve done a pretty good job but ... they’re not anywhere near being back to where they were before.” Meanwhile the pandemic has pushed many western companies to reconsider their dependence on Chinese factories. And while Beijing has for several years called for a “rebalancing” of the economy to boost domestic consumption, it has struggled to make it a reality. Other long-term challenges including debt and an ageing population have been overshadowed by coronavirus temporarily, but remain no less problematic. “Even if growth leaps from a low base next year there are still underlying structural problems,” said George Magnus, former chief economist at UBS, and an associate at the China Centre, Oxford University. “These include growing debt, demographics, poor productivity, a much more hostile external environment for trade, commerce and investment. All of these things are going to weigh on China’s potential for expansion and development.”
2||Dread of history repeating itself grows in Italian town as infections rise againThe well-tended graves are neatly lined up one after the other, each with a photo of the dead. The youngest was in his mid-30s, the rest from their 40s to their 90s. What distinguishes the plot from others in Bergamo’s Monumental cemetery is that they all died between March and May. “The dead arrived in force – 50 or 60 a day – they didn’t stop coming for two months,” a cemetery manager, who asked not to be named, told the Observer. “It was horrendous. And now infections are rising again. Young people are infecting older people, and so soon the dead will start arriving again.” When the pandemic struck Bergamo, mortuaries and cemeteries quickly filled up. Haunting images of army trucks carrying coffins away from the same cemetery to be buried or cremated elsewhere in March, when the northern Italian province was at the centre of the unfolding pandemic and funeral services struggled to cope, gave a hint to the rest of the world of what was to come. Now, after Italy took a dramatic turn for the worse following months of relative calm, nowhere is the fear of history repeating itself more palpable than in Bergamo. Covid-19 is estimated to have killed more than 7,000 across the province during the first wave. Speak to Bergamo residents, and everybody knows somebody who either died or was infected. This wasn’t so much the case beyond the surrounding Lombardy region, which accounts for the lion’s share of Italy’s almost 37,000 coronavirus deaths, because the tough two-month national lockdown shielded the south from the ravages of the first wave. “I don’t think people really understood what happened here,” said Luca Remondini, the owner of i-Lounge bar. “My aunt died – she was in her late 60s but otherwise healthy – and my mum, who is recovering from cancer, was infected but survived. Many of my customers became infected or lost loved ones.” Nationally cases rose by 19,644 on Saturday, of which 4,956 were in Lombardy, followed by Veneto, Campania and Lazio. The economic hub of Milan, about 30 miles from Bergamo, is Lombardy’s new epicentre, with caseloads tripling over the past week. Bergamo and other provinces in Lombardy that were hit early on in the pandemic, including Lodi, where Italy’s first locally transmitted case was detected in February, are recording among the lowest daily rates in the region. But knowing how quickly the tide can change, people in Bergamo are absorbing news from Milan with a chilling sense of deja vu – overstretched hospitals, health workers getting sick, outbreaks in care homes. And deaths creeping up. “We’re afraid the nightmare will return,” added Remondini. “Things are calm right now, but we are so close to Milan, and the nearby regions of Piedmont and Liguria are not in great shape either.” Lombardy was the first of Italy’s 20 regions to impose an 11pm to 5am curfew, beginning on 22 October, after scientists warned that without the measure, intensive care admissions would increase sixfold by the end of the month and general hospital admissions would quadruple. Temporary hospitals set up in conference centres during the first wave have reopened in Milan and Bergamo, initially providing Lombardy with an additional 201 intensive care beds. Campania, in the south, and Lazio, the region surrounding Rome, imposed a similar curfew from Friday night amid rapidly increasing infections and hospital admissions. Other regions have introduced a variety of targeted restrictions while the government is mulling tighter national measures. “The second wave is different from the first,” said Giorgio Gori, the mayor of Bergamo. “In March it was concentrated in the north, now it’s everywhere. For some people it’s the first real experience of the pandemic, so they might live the same experience we lived.” A big concern is the ability of hospitals in poorer southern regions, where healthcare cuts have been deep in recent years, to cope. “Lombardy hospitals are superior to those in other regions, so if the same phenomenon happens in Campania, Puglia or Calabria, it would be much worse,” said Gori. However, despite Lombardy’s wealth and expertise, medics say nothing has been done to better prepare hospitals for the expected autumn resurgence. In a recent letter to regional authorities signed by more than 600 health workers, they claimed the same mistakes were being made as in March. “For example, we should have had a plan right from the beginning that separated Covid patients from non-Covid,” said Pietro Brambillasca, an anaesthetist at Bergamo’s Papa Giovanni XXII hospital. “That’s what they did in China, they built Covid hospitals. We should have done the same, and be ready by now to treat all Covid patients outside of main structures to be able to control the contagion within them while being able to treat other illnesses.” One explanation for the relative calm in Bergamo province is that a significant proportion of the population may have built up immunity. “Thirty per cent have been exposed to the virus, either they were symptomatic or asymptomatic,” said Gori. “Together with our heightened awareness, maybe this is why we are better protected than others right now.” Gori and other leaders across Italy have renewed their appeals to people to stick to basic safety rules – wear a mask, maintain distance and frequently wash hands – while encouraging them to stay home as much as possible. “In a few days the government will probably introduce new restrictions,” he said. “But we can’t wait for things to happen, we need to plan ahead.” The sound of ambulance sirens still torments residents of Bergamo province and other badly affected areas. “You would hear 10 ambulances an hour,” said Diego Federici, who is from the town of Martinengo and lost his parents to Covid-19 within days of each other. “You don’t hear as many any more, but the sound is returning, it’s horrible.” Federici is sceptical of Italy’s capacity to face a second wave. “I worry it will end in another massacre, mostly because of ignorance,” he said. Only a few days ago, a man from Milan told him “the virus doesn’t exist”. “I told him I watched my mum struggling to breathe. Only then did he seem to change his mind,” he added. “There are so many virus deniers, only getting their information from social media. I implore them to not be stupid – I wouldn’t wish what happened to us on anyone.”
23||How a canny Kilmarnock grocer took whisky from the glens to the worldJohnnie Walker has come a long way. Two centuries ago bottles of the blended whisky were confined to the shelves of John Walker’s modest grocery store in the little town of Kilmarnock in west Scotland. Today it is the planet’s best selling scotch and is sold in bottles by the billions. It is an extraordinary success story – and it was achieved by a small family firm whose members were notable because they were “stubborn, thrawn and as hard as nails”, according to a newly published study of the Johnnie Walker blend. Written by Nick Morgan, A Long Stride, published by Canongate, reveals the extraordinary pains the Walker family went to in order to ensure bottles of their brand, above all other whiskies, was the one that sold in the greatest numbers. As family diaries and papers reveal, it was a relentless effort to promote and advertise their product and to make technological improvements to its distillation to ensure previous, wildly inconsistent levels of taste and quality were subdued. In this way, the Walker family dragged Scotch “kicking and screaming from illicit bothies in sequestered glens onto the world stage”, says Morgan. Crucially the story reveals how scotch whisky become Scotland’s gift to the world. “And it is a gift that keeps on giving to a remarkable degree today,” adds Morgan, a former historian and head of outreach for Diageo, the current owners of Johnnie Walker. The Walkers took a cottage industry, made massive improvements in its manufacture, launched national promotions and laid the foundations for an industry that today has a massive impact on the Scottish economy. In 2018, the nation’s whisky industry sold the equivalent of more than a billion bottles of scotch – vastly more spirit than is exported by any other nation on Earth. And while Johnnie Walker sells the most, many other leading blends also sell vast quantities abroad. These include Ballantine’s, Chivas Regal, Grant’s, Dewar’s and several other hugely popular whiskies that are drunk in bars from Hong Kong to Manhattan and from Rome to Buenos Aires. This output is now worth £4.7bn a year, representing 70% of Scotland’s food and drink exports and 21% of the United Kingdom’s. (Scotland’s second largest food and drink export is seafood – in particular salmon – and earns about £950 million a year.) Yet the beginnings of the Johnnie Walker enterprise were modest and can be traced to John Walker’s decision to sell the family farm after the death of his father and to set up a shop in Kilmarnock in 1820 to sell tea, sugar, soap and, of course, whisky which he would have blended himself from casks of malt and grain whisky. Most grocery businesses went bust within a couple of years in those days, says Morgan, so Walker – who appears to have led a life of studied reticence – did well merely to thrive as a shopkeeper. One myth even suggests he was a teetotaller. Morgan is unimpressed. “I have found absolutely no evidence for this, and given he ran a thriving grocery business which specialised in blended whisky and other wines and spirits, I am pretty sure he would have taken a dram himself.” Walker died in 1857 and left it to his eldest son Alexander to promote the family business which he did with remarkable, focused energy. “He was driven by an urge to make constant improvements, to make his blends better and better. He also realised he could only do so much in west Scotland to sell whisky. By contrast, London was a shop window for the world. Fashions were made here, he realised.” In London, Alexander Walker launched advertising campaigns and promoted his whisky at international trade fairs, while constantly driving for improvements to his distilleries. And by the 1880s and 1890s, Walker had succeeded in making whisky the most fashionable drink of the day, with the Johnnie Walker blend in the vanguard. In some ways, he was lucky. Brandy had until then had been a hugely popular drink but in the wake of the grapevine pest phylloxera’s arrival in France in the late 19th century, the country’s vineyards were devastated, triggering a collapse in the production of quality French brandy. Scotch filled the void very neatly. On the other hand, there were hard times which the Scotch market managed to survive, from the Boer war to the first world war to the Great Depression. “Johnnie Walker went up and down every time but it always came back stronger. It has been a remarkably resilient brand, if nothing else,” says Morgan. Yet the whisky we drink today is not quite the one that the Walkers would have perfected, he reveals. “Today’s whiskies, and not just the Johnnie Walker blends, are slightly lighter, fresher, and fruitier than they would have been in the 19th century. “We don’t have a bottle of 19th-century whisky to study to prove this point but we know scotch was drunk differently then. It was usually combined with lemon and sugar to make toddies and would have had to have been heavier and oilier for its taste to survive the mixing.” Habits changed, however, and in late Victorian and Edwardian times, soda became popular and whiskies became lighter in responses to being mixed with it. “It was a little thing but the soda syphon had a big impact on whisky,” says Morgan.
2||Tier 2 lockdown rules in England: latest Covid restrictions explainedThe government has announced that in England, areas deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. Places in tier 2 include London, parts of Essex, Elmbridge in Surrey, Barrow-in-Furness, York, North East Derbyshire, Erewash in Derbyshire, Chesterfield, Cheshire West and Chester, Cheshire East, and Warrington. Leicester, Nottingham, the West Midlands and Tees Valley are also in tier 2. The restrictions also cover West Yorkshire including Leeds, Bradford, Kirklees, Calderdale and Wakefield, and the north-east including Newcastle, North and South Tyneside, Gateshead, Sunderland, Durham and Northumberland. Coventry, Stoke and Slough moved into tier 2 restrictions on Saturday 24 October. These local restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart (or 1 metre with a face covering or other precautions). For areas in tier 2, the additional Covid restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody outside their household or support bubble in any indoor setting. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply for socialising outdoors, for instance in a garden or public space like a park or beach. Businesses and venues can continue to operate, but pubs and restaurants must ensure that customers consume food and drink only while seated, and close between 10pm and 5am. Takeaway food can continue to be sold after 10pm if ordered online or by phone. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open, but people may not mingle in groups of more than six. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the numbers attending (15 and 30 respectively). Exercise classes and organised sport can continue to take place outdoors but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with those they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travel is permitted to amenities that are open, for work or to access education, but people are advised to reduce the number of journeys where possible. If you are living in an area that is in tier 2, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in “Local Covid alert – high”. You can also check your area’s alert level by using the government’s postcode-checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
14||The moment that Daddy became ‘Sheemiss’It started last week, amid gales of laughter. ‘Sheemiss!’ my son cried from the stairs. I drew nearer to find my son pointing at me as he said one more time; ‘Sheeeeeemisssss’. He was calling me by my first name, in an adorably sincere little act of rebellion that reduced him to dribbling, full-bellied hysterics. I laughed along, struck by the effect that this, the smallest possible act of defiance, was having on the 3ft-tall comic in front of me. The idea that the man he calls ‘Daddy’ might also be Séamas had broken him so entirely that it broke me, too. At the very least ‘Sheemiss’ is a pretty good attempt at the name by my son, who may know me very well, but is also an English person. I’ve had Same Ass, See-Ya-Mass and Seems. After six years, a guy I played football with admitted he’d been calling me ‘Shameless’ all that time. Worst – or best – of all, however, was the driving instructor who spent the entire six months of our acquaintance referring to me as Semen. But I digress. The root of my son’s joke is that it’s somehow ridiculous for a child to call a parent their own name. I say ‘somehow ridiculous’ when it is, in fact, plainly ridiculous. No matter how you rationalise it, any other way of thinking is just bizarre. Think of someone who addresses their parents by their first name and tell me you wouldn’t go to great lengths to avoid them at a wedding. It started me thinking what I’d actually like to be called, since my wife chose this moment to tell me that she expects ‘Daddy’ will be retired eventually. She’s from Dublin and has called her parents Mum and Dad since she was about seven. I, on the other hand, am from Derry, where we obey different rules, which she claims are confusing. It’s simple really. For as long as you live, your parents are Daddy and Mammy when spoken to directly, or referred to in conversation with your family. They’re ‘me ma’ and ‘me da’ when speaking to Irish people and then ‘mum and dad’ when speaking to those further afield. Moreover, I can comfortably refer to my dad as ‘my dad’ in these columns, because that’s his job title, but his name is Daddy, and addressing him in person as Dad would not just be unusual, but a near psychotic breach of family protocol and basic human decency. I mean, what’s so hard to understand? I suppose the issue is that, in England, ‘Daddy’ is only used by a) small children b) the very posh, or c) those deploying its numerous kinky uses that I won’t be exploring here. I may call my father Daddy and exhibit an unflappable air of faultless cool, but my son is from London and the idea of a grown Londoner calling his father Daddy brings to mind an adult baby, complete with silk bonnet and giant lollipop. It’s one rule for me and quite another for him. Given the choice, maybe Sheemisss would be best, after all. Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeats
17||Asylum seekers sue UK over unlawful detentionA group of asylum seekers, including victims of torture, who were illegally detained in the UK are suing the Home Office. More than 20 people have launched a claim for compensation, which lawyers believe could be owed to thousands held unlawfully between January 2014 and March 2017, a time when concerns about the government’s “hostile environment” policy towards migrants were paramount. The claimants were arrested and detained by the UK Border Force under Home Office guidance and the Dublin III regulation, which states that refugees must claim asylum in the first EU country in which they arrive. The regulation permitted the detention of asylum seekers before they were returned to the country of their arrival in Europe – but only if there was a significant risk of them absconding and if it was proportionate. In November 2019 the supreme court found that the Home Office policy was unlawful and ruled that the claimants were entitled to substantial damages. Among the claimants is a Sudanese national arrested and tortured in Sudan on suspicion of being loyal to an opposition political party. Another is an Iranian national arrested and tortured in an Iranian prison for his political activities. “Many of our clients are vulnerable individuals who were forced to flee their countries not out of choice, but due to the most horrific experiences which most of us in the UK will fortunately never witness, let alone experience,” said Waleed Sheikh, a solicitor at the law firm Leigh Day, who is representing the claimants. “Having made the brave and perilous journey from across the world, in the hope of finding safety and a secure future in a free country, they were instead put into detention centres.” He said it was likely that thousands of other asylum seekers in Britain are also entitled to make a claim. Sheikh added: “But it is difficult to trace them. Some are now abroad and many do not speak English. And there is no obligation for the Home Office to contact those who were held illegally.” It is estimated that the department may have to pay £8,000-£10,000 for each month a claimant was held. Other factors, such as the detention’s contribution to any health problems, could increase the payouts. A Home Office spokeswoman said: “The individuals in question were only detained to facilitate removal to a safe European country. We took immediate corrective action in March 2017 to ensure that we remain able to detain those in a similar position, who we determine are at risk of absconding.” The spokeswoman stressed that the department was committed to fixing a “broken asylum system, to make it firm and fair”. But Sheikh questioned this commitment. “The hostile environment has not just been tolerated but nurtured and championed by successive home secretaries. That it should then foster a culture within the Home Office of dehumanising asylum seekers, of detaining almost by default and without proper checks, should surprise no one.”
22||The week in TV: Roadkill; DNA; The Same Sky; Out of Her Mind and moreRoadkill (BBC One) | iPlayer DNA (BBC Four) | iPlayer The Same Sky (More4) | All 4 Out of Her Mind (BBC Two) | iPlayer Count Basie: Through His Own Eyes (BBC Four) | iPlayer At least Roadkill isn’t as bad as Collateral, David Hare’s last big-budget BBC outing. It doesn’t water-cannon us with message – asylum seekers good, security services bad – or strain so hard to avoid cliched cops that it creates an unbelievable one. And it’s blessed with Hugh Laurie and Helen McCrory, who almost redeem it from itself. And it doesn’t, for once, wear its Tory-hating credentials on its ragged academic sleeve; indeed, Hare has said that he tried, for once, to get to grips with the mindset of a “good” or at least maverick Tory. And Laurie plays Peter Laurence MP with a superb credibility: a corrupt Tory MP, yes, with secret plans to carve up the NHS to benefit American privatisation, but a charmer of a man, too, with the common touch and a genuine zeal to make a difference for the better, particularly in prisons, against the stultifying hand of the civil service. Because of this, the promise of a crusading reformist PM in the making, with a secret (and secretly charming) daughter in one of his own prisons, I could forgive the tick-boxing – the spiky journo, the corrupt prison private-security firm, the haughty plotting between Tory chairman and arms-dealer cartoon villain. But I can’t forgive the many plot impossibilities. Laurence’s own defence lawyer, having won a famous case, getting an anonymous call saying “look into him” and somehow agreeing. The driver to the justice secretary, presumably having signed something or other, being asked who his mistress was and just blurting it out. Laurence himself saying with wicked glee, early on after a prison riot: “Let’s hope there are injuries. Better still, fatalities”, which, after you’ve watched the whole, sits entirely against his character. Collateral was, oddly enough, Hare’s first-ever TV serial after a life of rightly garlanded plays and screenplays. And I’m sadly reminded of little so much as the time Dorothy Parker and pal Robert Benchley decamped from New York to California, to write B-movie plots under that golden sun and make some easy money: surely such talents, such wits, could outwrite formulaic by-numbers stuff? After a slew of rejections and flops, they fled back to the rain and Parker ruefully concluded: “Seems shit has its own integrity.” DNA, in Danish, French and Polish with subtitles, is, I’m convinced, our new The Bridge for double-bill Saturday-night autumn binges. It’s not as if we’ve anywhere else to go, but, quite apart from that, it’s every bit as enthralling as the Saga Norén chiller – indeed, this eight-parter is from the imaginarium of the co-creator of The Killing, Torleif Hoppe. A happy Copenhagen cop gets a ferry, in a rancid storm, to Poland, with his infant daughter, to chase a child abductor. Leaves the pram on deck to be, briefly, seasick. Guess what? Cut five years forward: a once-happy Copenhagen cop chances on a crucial flaw in the Danish DNA database of offenders and curdled hope flutters into life. Four episodes in, I too am truly, appallingly, gripped by hope, and it’s also got Charlotte Rampling as the incroyably chic older French investigator. Barely less captivating is The Same Sky, a Paula Milne creation for German TV, which rather disappeared into the maw of Netflix three years ago. Happily resurrected by C4’s sainted Walter Presents strand, it’s a genuinely exciting 1974 true tale, of a young East German “Romeo agent” sent west to honeytrap and pillow-talk an ageing single mother working for a western listening post atop Teufelsberg (Devil’s Mountain) in Berlin. Talking of Saga, this also has Sofia Helin as you’ve never seen her before: dowdy, lonely, old before her time, vulnerable. It’s hooksomely, toothsomely watchable: how swiftly recent history can become moral anthropology within a generation or so. I was mystified by the new Sara Pascoe thing, Out of Her Mind, and can only conclude that I am of the wrong gender or cultural sensibility to review it. Relentlessly, scattily modernist, with tricks such as meta-references to its own sitcom-ness, the breaking of the fourth wall, the “real” Sara Pascoe commenting on the “fictional” Sara’s disaster of a life, it also felt very dated, just not in a good way. Fictional Sara, who couldn’t seem to decide whether she was bitterly life-cynical about being dumped 15 years ago or childishly, naively, irritatingly self-obsessed and rude, had to cope with the twin outrages of her sister becoming engaged and her best friend being pregnant, apparently events on some manner of end-of-days scale. Cue some stock catty rudeness about rings, dresses, weight, pinkness. The real Sara, meanwhile, got on with making some decent points, albeit while rollerskating in a pink leotard, about, say, how advertising makes women feel inferior in order to sell them stuff or how fairytales offer girls false stereotypes, yet both points agreed on, surely, in the last decades of the last century? The show is almost saved by Juliet Stevenson as the mother, utterly lacking in self-awareness: indeed, the entire supporting cast are strong, though I could have done with more Cash Holland. Yet such things have been done better, in the last couple of years alone, by This Way Up, Catastrophe, I May Destroy You, even Motherland… hence my mystification, because so often Pascoe, a wise author in her own right, is the wittiest thing going on any panel show. Some rather marvellous insights into the life of Billy James “Count” Basie snuck unheralded on to our screens, courtesy of a remarkable little film, Through His Own Eyes, from Jeremy Marre. It told the story of the boy from Red Bank, New Jersey, who went on to become one of the famous people on the planet, yet who managed to keep his private life remarkably unrevealed. With grand access to interviewees and forgotten footage, it related seamlessly how the lad who stood in at 14 for an absent cinema pianist would achieve greatness. Aided only by a quasi-magical gift of understanding every wrinkle and flounce and offbeat and sway of what “swing” is – and it must help, too, when you have Lester “Prez” Young on tenor sax and Quincy Jones as your band arranger – he went on to become the first musician on the moon (Buzz Aldrin took the Basie/Sinatra/Jones ’64 recording of Fly Me to the Moon with him on tape). Unshowy and even-handed, this also related how much he loved his daughter, Diane, born with cerebral palsy; yet she, hardly able to walk, able to speak, would become something of a muse to him. He wrote endless loving letters to her, talking about music, places, weather, blues – and 50 years on the road, on a hired Greyhound bus with the band, 48 weeks a year, that’s a shedload of letters. We heard how deeply he loved his wife, Catherine, yet how he was in the doghouse for much of his early life thanks to on-the-road, um, affiliations. Above all, we got a measure of the man, a bugger for gambling and the ladies yet unfailingly unpompous, controlling the band with a whip hand, yet a subtle and steady one, immensely popular with all his musicians to the end. I could have watched eight hours of this.
2||Tier 3 lockdown rules in England: latest coronavirus restrictions explainedThe government has announced that areas in England deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. South Yorkshire, Greater Manchester, Lancashire and Liverpool City Region including Knowsley, Wirral and St Helens are all at the highest level of restrictions. These local lockdown restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, the use of face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart. For areas in tier 3, the additional restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody they do not live with, or have not formed a support bubble with, in any indoor setting, private garden or at most outdoor hospitality venues and ticketed events. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply to outdoor public spaces, such as parks, beaches, public gardens or sports venues. Pubs and bars are only permitted to remain open to operate as restaurants, in which case alcohol can only be served as part of a substantial meal. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open but household mixing is not permitted. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the number of people attending (15 and 30 respectively), but wedding receptions are not allowed. The rules for exercise classes and organised sport are the same as in tier 2. They can continue to take place outdoors, but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with others they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travelling outside, or entering, a tier 3 area should be avoided unless for work, education or youth services, to meet caring responsibilities, or if travelling through the area as part of a longer journey. Residents of a tier 3 area should avoid staying overnight in another part of the UK, while people who live in a tier 1 or tier 2 area should avoid staying overnight in a tier 3 area. If you are living in an area that is in tier 3, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in Local Covid Alert – Very High. You can also check which level your area is rated at using the government’s own postcode checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
16||Sacha Baron Cohen: After Borat, what’s left for the savage satirist?Thirteen years ago Sacha Baron Cohen announced that he was retiring the character of Borat Sagdiyev, the Kazakh journalist in the ill-fitting grey suit and Saddam moustache. It was a logical step in what is, as Baron Cohen has called it, a “self-defeating” line of work. Borat’s satirical power was dependent on being unknown. But the global success of the 2006 mockumentary feature film Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan, for which Baron Cohen won a Golden Globe, rather blew the fake Kazakh’s cover. Hence his discontinuation. Unlike most celebrity retirements, this one appeared to be permanent. And aside from a brief appearance a couple of years back on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Borat was as good as buried. Now, however, he’s back in Borat Subsequent Moviefilm: Delivery of Prodigious Bribe to American Regime for Make Benefit Once Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan. Borat, his fans will be relieved to know, hasn’t changed much, but the world has. In 2006, when the first film came out, George W Bush was president, Iraq was in flames and North Korea claimed to have conducted its first nuclear test. No garden party but, looking back, it seems almost a golden era of sanity. The thought that Donald Trump would become president would have seemed only slightly less ridiculous than Borat ending up in the White House. Like Shakespeare’s proverbial coward, satire has died many times, but seldom has reality made it look quite so redundant as over the past four years. Baron Cohen is keenly aware of the shift in the political culture. “In 2005,” he recently said, “you needed a character like Borat, who was misogynist, racist, antisemitic to get people to reveal their inner prejudices. Now those inner prejudices are overt. Racists are proud of being racists.” They have been empowered, he explained, by a president who is “an overt racist, and overt fascist”. That president, who walked away from a TV interview with Baron Cohen’s Ali G character after less than a minute in 2003, is no fan. “I don’t find him funny,” Trump said last week. “To me, he’s a creep.” Trump’s America, as it appears in the film, is a familiar one from the Louis Theroux genre of documentary-making, richly peopled with faultlessly polite freaks and likeable rednecks with unpalatable opinions. If making fun of conspiracy theorists and antisemites doesn’t break any new ground, it’s not going to upset anyone, except for conspiracy theorists and antisemites. The watching world, however, has become much more ready to take offence and Baron Cohen’s brand of humour is not ideally suited to modern woke sensibilities. He is from the generation of comedians, including Steve Coogan and Ricky Gervais, who invented winningly grotesque characters to ventriloquise the unsayable. By this method, a shocking racist comment could be transformed into a stinging comment on racism. Some critics saw it as a dishonest transgression, arguing that Ali G, the wannabe black character who brought Baron Cohen’s initial fame, was little more than a postmodern version of The Black and White Minstrel Show. That seems a rather crude reading, but it’s hard to imagine that in an era of righteous cancellation, in which cultural appropriation is a cardinal sin, Baron Cohen would “get away with it” today. That Borat is from Kazakhstan, a country with a tiny expat community in the UK and about which censorious Generation Z’ers know very little, has afforded Baron Cohen some protection from the Twitter mobs. But cracks about the Kazakhs’ backwardness, sexism, homophobia and antisemitism hark back to a more robust understanding of irony. Younger audiences may not bother with any layered interpretations and just decide that it’s racist. There is no doubt that the Kazakhstan government was not amused. It threatened him with legal action in 2005 and removed his Kazakhstan-registered website. In the character of Borat, Baron Cohen replied: “I’d like to state that I have no connection with Mr Cohen and fully support my government decision to sue this Jew.” In any case, this is almost certainly Borat’s last outing. Baron Cohen has plenty of other projects to keep him occupied. The signs are that he is expanding into drama, after sporadic ventures in the past, including Tim Burton’s Sweeney Todd and Tom Hooper’s Les Misérables. While Borat Subsequent Moviefilm is released on Amazon Prime, over on Netflix the big hit of the moment is Aaron Sorkin’s The Trial of the Chicago 7. It’s about the court case involving leading figures of the counterculture arrested after protests at the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago. Baron Cohen is quite brilliant as Abbie Hoffman, an early advocate of flower power. Aware that Hoffman’s provocative style was heavily influenced by Lenny Bruce, Baron Cohen portrays him as a kind of natural standup comedian. Having played the surrealist prankster and buffoon throughout the trial, Hoffman is called on to make a rousing speech on the witness stand. Baron Cohen has to prove his acting chops in this big climactic scene. Sorkin has said that the sense of anticipation around the set before the Londoner filmed the scene reminded him of when Jack Nicholson performed his famous courtroom scene in A Few Good Men. “Everyone wanted to watch. One hundred and twenty extras didn’t care that the camera wasn’t on them, they stayed to watch.” And, despite wrestling with a tricky Boston accent, Baron Cohen nails it. Nor is it the only speech that has brought him attention in recent times. Upset by the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017, he offered his services to the Anti-Defamation League, whose director, Jonathan Greenblatt, asked him to give the keynote speech at last year’s ADL summit. Though wary of celebrities who use their fame to promote their political views, Baron Cohen delivered what he has said was his first “major speech in my own voice”. One of his main targets was Facebook. Had the social media platform been around in the 1930s, he said, “it would have allowed Hitler to post 30-second ads on his ‘solution’ to the ‘Jewish problem’”. The speech led to the Stop Hate for Profit campaign that caused hundreds of companies to temporarily remove their advertising from Facebook. It was a high-profile stance for a star who, when not in character, likes to stay out of the public spotlight. The reticence is a mixture of natural shyness and professional pragmatism – the more he’s seen as himself, the less, he thinks, he’ll be believed as someone else. This reservation has left a slight air of mystery around Baron Cohen. His biography has a credible spine but is lacking in animating flesh. Brought up in Hampstead Garden Suburb by Jewish parents, a dance teacher mother and a journalist father who went into menswear, he attended the Haberdashers’ Aske’s boys’ public school. At Cambridge, where he studied history, he joined the Footlights and appeared in Fiddler on the Roof. Legend has it that on leaving Christ’s College he gave himself five years to make it as a comedian. After a brief stint as a male catalogue model, he began performing at a comedy club in Hampstead, and worked for a couple of small satellite channels. At one of them he created a spoof character based on the hip-hop DJ Tim Westwood, the bishop’s son who speaks like he’s down wiv ver kidz. From there Ali G was born and, as the five-year deadline was closing in, he grasped his opportunity on Channel 4’s The 11 O’Clock Show in 1998. The rest is hysterics. Now ensconced in Los Angeles, Baron Cohen forms half of that most rare of Hollywood entities – a long-lasting joint-celebrity marriage – with the Australian actress Isla Fisher. They have three children. Baron Cohen has been mining excruciating moments of comedy gold for over 20 years. There is another collector’s item in the latest film featuring Rudy Giuliani and Borat dressed as a woman, offering the Trump adviser and former New York mayor anal sex. There are only so many times that he can be the subject of a sentence like the last one. Next year he turns 50. Enjoy him while you can.
11||Legal loophole allows children to get free vape samplesHealth campaigners have expressed alarm after it emerged that a loophole in the law means it is legal for marketing companies to hand out vapes to children for free. British American Tobacco (BAT) is investigating after a 17-year-old was offered a free sample of the company’s Vype brand. The minor was not told that the product contained nicotine and was not asked for proof of age. Vape companies regularly distribute free samples to adults using paid, third-party promotional companies operating in city centres and at festivals and transport hubs. The promotional teams are young, personable and sport the livery of the vape brand they represent. Some use additional free offers – such as soft drinks – to engage with passersby. Action on Smoking and Health (Ash) said teams working for Vype had been recently promoting the brand in Brighton, Bristol and Bath, where a 17-year-old girl working on a market stall was approached and offered a free sample, in return for her email address and with no attempt to establish her age. “The hypocrisy of BAT is staggering,” said Deborah Arnott, chief executive of Ash. “The company’s website piously states: ‘It’s essential that any tobacco or nicotine products are not marketed to youth. Given the nature of our products, we take seriously our commitment to market them responsibly and only to adults.’ “How can they say that doling freebies out like sweets to children counts as responsible marketing?” When it was alerted to claims that minors were being offered free vapes, Ash approached National Trading Standards and was shocked to learn that a loophole in the law means it is not illegal to hand out free e-cigarettes to children. This is because e-cigarettes are not covered by the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act “prohibition of free distribution” rules as they are not considered a tobacco product. And Ash said that the wording of the relevant sections of the Tobacco and Related Products regulations pertaining to e-cigarettes was too vague when it came to prohibiting the distribution of free products to minors. Pushing e-cigarettes on young people is a concern for health experts, who fear that the UK will go the way of the US, where vaping’s popularity among teenagers has reached epidemic proportions. In 2019, a quarter of high-school students in the US reported using electronic nicotine products within the past 30 days and 11.7% reported daily use. But youth takeup in the UK has been much slower. Regular use among teenagers doubled from 2.4% in 2015 to 4.9% last year. “A review of the regulations is required by law and is expected to be launched imminently,” Arnott said. “We have written to the public health minister to make her aware of this gaping hole in the government’s e-cigarette regulations and to urge her to use the review to plug this legal loophole. This is yet another example of Big Tobacco saying one thing and doing another, living up to the letter of the law but not the spirit.”,” Arnott said. BAT said: “We take our responsibility to prevent underage access to vaping products extremely seriously and are clear that they are intended for adult smokers and nicotine users only. “Our one-to-one consumer engagement activities in the UK market are conducted by a third-party supplier who has been extensively trained to ensure that the only people who are engaged are over 18 years old, are an existing smoker, and are informed that the product contains nicotine. We are speaking to our third-party supplier about this alleged incident.”
2||Australia demands answers after women taken from Qatar Airways flight and strip-searchedThe Australian government has registered “serious concerns” with Qatari authorities after women on a flight from Doha to Sydney were ordered to disembark the plane and subjected to a strip search and a medical examination. Flight QR908 to Sydney was due to leave Hamad International airport at Doha at 8.30 on Friday 2 October, but was delayed for four hours, apparently after a newborn infant was found dead in the airport. Among the 34 passengers on board was Dr Wolfgang Babeck, who was returning to Australia after spending a month in Germany with his ailing father. Babeck told Guardian Australia that, after about three hours of waiting on board the plane, the airline requested that all the women on board disembark. They returned some time later, and “most of them were very upset”, he said. “At least one of them was crying, they were discussing what had happened and saying that it was unacceptable and disgusting.” The plane was then allowed to take off. Babeck said he then spoke to some of the female passengers, who said they had been taken off the plane and led into a non-public area of the airport and subject to a medical examination. “They were taken by security personnel into the cellar, not knowing what was going on,” he said. “And then they were presented to a female doctor and they were basically strip searched and had to take everything downwards off, all their clothes, even their underwear. “And then the doctor would try to feel in the uterus and stomach area or lower abdomen to see whether they may have given birth recently. “Someone had been told that a baby had been found in the toilet and they were trying to find out who the mother was.” Channel Seven, which first reported the story on Sunday, said the inspections involved 13 Australian women, and took place in an ambulance on the runway. A spokesperson for the Australian department of foreign affairs and trade told Guardian Australia earlier the department was “aware of concerning reports regarding the treatment, in Qatar, of passengers on a Qatar Airways flight to Sydney”. “DFAT is seeking further information from the Qatari authorities and Qatar Airways.” On Sunday night an updated statement from the department said the Australian government had “formally registered our serious concerns regarding the incident with Qatari authorities and have been assured that detailed and transparent information on the event will be provided soon”. Qatar Airways told Guardian Australia it had not been contacted by any of the passengers on the flight and said it could not comment. “We appreciate the concerns and distress expressed to you by the Australian passengers who you have spoken to, and will be investigating these matters with the relevant authorities and officials,” a spokesperson said.
23||Chocolate meets liquorice in a Danish treatWhen I was growing up, Sainsbury’s bonbons were coveted. We rarely had sweets, except when we went back to Italy where every aunt south of Rome had a crystal bowlful of boiled choking hazards. So bonbons were special. Though I loved them, two was the limit, because pure sugar, unless it’s mixed with fat – yum – has never really done much for me. But it was the shape of them that appealed: the imperfect sphere, the self-containment, the dusting of icing sugar. This is what attracted me to chocolate-coated liquorice balls by Lakrids by Bülow (£8/125g, lakridsbybulow.co.uk). Lakrids means liquorice in Danish, whence these babies come. As I’ve said before, I don’t mind liquorice in small quantities, but I don’t go mad for it like some. I’m sure many of us have read the terrible news about a man dying due to excessive liquorice consumption – and you should be careful not to eat too much of it – but that’s hard to do with these. Not because they aren’t delicious, but because they are incredibly satisfying and also not cheap. They come in core flavours: the original is just a liquorice piece at its heart, liquorice powder and coated in 35% cocoa milk chocolate. But there’s also salt-caramel, some fruit flavours and coffee. Specials appear seasonally, in limited edition, such as the newly arrived cinnamon-sugar coated Christmas cookie. For those who really love liquorice there’s the Christmas Advent calendar (£36), which counts you down to Christmas Eve in liquorice treats. Just as the baby Jesus would have wanted.
25||Arctic: Culture and Climate review – visions of a vanishing worldThere is a vision, in this magnificent show, of the strange hinterland where Arctic ice melts into the snow-covered ocean. There is no obvious distinction, indeed the water’s edge is all but invisible. What you see is a series of dark boats drawn on sledges across a white plane dotted with walruses and long-legged birds. All the images are inky black, exquisitely carved into the tusk of one such walrus, caught on exactly this kind of boat. Its ivory is beautifully used to stand in for the all-encompassing Arctic whiteout. Carved around 1900 by a celebrated Iñupiat artist known as Happy Jack, this is not just a graceful engraving-cum-sculpture. It shows life as it was lived on Alaska’s freezing Seward Peninsula, long lines of huskies pulling kayaks, tents and vessels across the gliding ice. Children learned from these images, elders discussed them and now here we are in the future looking back at this body of knowledge carved into the tusk of a long-dead walrus that once swam in those dark seas. Man and beast, life and art: all are fused in this object. The British Museum’s new exhibition plunges deep into the mysterious icescapes of the Arctic, where 4 million people still live in a culture shaped by the climate. There are fragments of ancient bone jewellery, discovered in newly thawed ice; sculpted figures of reindeer and caribou so sinuously streamlined as to be almost abstract. There are needles made of walrus bone and monuments of balanced stones, a kind of ancestral land art that abides for centuries, marking memories or indicating reindeer paths through the wilds. The monument in this show, made by Piita Irniq in 2019, is titled Silent Messenger. Enthralling period films show summer festivals, where thousands of Inuit gather in immense circles that revolve like wheels in the continuous daylight. Contemporary video celebrates the stupendous skill of an artist who scrapes seal skins into ultra-fine fabric for the pleating of shoes. Watercolours imagine seals beneath the ice-bores, prints depict human beings inside walruses, like Jonah in the whale. A pair of 19th-century Russian snow goggles takes the form of an eerie face, described in glass and uranium beads. The people of the Arctic live in the circumpolar regions of Greenland, Canada, Alaska, Russia and parts of Scandinavia. There are more than 40 ethnic groups. This is made marvellously apparent in the opening gallery, which is nothing less than a catwalk of spectacular costumes from the different groups, including a navy and scarlet Sami coat with a four-cornered hat (representing the four winds that blow across the ice) and an Alaskan child’s parka of brilliant blue, embroidered in red, its hood lined with soft wolverine that never freezes outside. A team of huskies appears to be drawing you onwards into the snowbound landscape, the dogs’ fierce beauty a marvel projected into infinite white space. This illusion is orchestrated by the brilliant Opera Amsterdam, who have designed something akin to the experience of Arctic light in the old London museum. Walk out of one gallery and you are confronted by a lone figure rising against a pink-tinged twilight: the only surviving sealskin suit for hunting whales, waterproof, inflatable and made centuries ago, standing stark and upright as the hunter. Everything is used and in every way. Seal skins, worked upon with fine blades for many months and stitched together with seal gut, become sails so strong yet diaphanous that it is easy to imagine moonlight shining through them as mariners crossed dark waters. And sure enough, there is a drawing of just such a scene, made by a Victorian explorer. The seal’s meat is made into a hundred different dishes. Its bone becomes the embodiment of itself: finely carved into captivating silkies. The art has a characteristic combination of delicacy and strength that seems to reflect the whole society. It runs all the way from 17th-century engravings of fur-clad drivers merrily bowling across the snow in reindeer-drawn sleds to the terrific photographs of the Alaskan artist Brian Adams, large as life and presented on lightboxes. Who could not love the powerful portrait of an Inuit woman surrounded by what might almost be fallen leaves, in glowing colours, but are in fact chunks of whale meat: a worker shown in her professional element? Knowledge of snow is lightly scattered throughout. Here is an ancient Sami sled, shaped like a boat so that it can float, almost, through the deep powdery snows of Scandinavia. Here are snowshoes made from wood to distribute the wearer’s weight so that they do not sink into the grainy snowdrifts of western Alaska. Boots fitted with walrus-ivory crampons give vital stability on snow that has thawed and then frozen again into a luminous but frightening slipperiness. The reindeer-fur soles of Sami boots were sewn with the fur ends pointing towards the toe to create a friction that stops the wearer from slithering. A breathtaking film of a woman making such boots shows her powerful hands forcing a needle through two layers of reindeer pelt as if it were thin as silk. Her white boots, embroidered with stars, are wondrous to behold. The soundtrack stealing through the galleries takes you straight to the Arctic – the cracking of ice, wind blowing across water, the barking of huskies and, occasionally, the singing of historical roundelays. And there are stories everywhere you look. A wooden visor, made around 1778 to block out the sun’s blinding glare, doubled as a seal’s head, acting as an ingenious decoy. A strange soapstone sculpture condenses a whole narrative in one semi-abstract medallion, telling of a family who became stranded on pack ice. They hunted seals for food and then used the skins to build the kayak on which they eventually paddled to safety. You might think of the Arctic as a barren, white expanse. But summer brings sea algae and plants spring into life, spreading their greenness. A wonderful wall hanging is embroidered all over with the multicoloured leaves that bud forth in the tundra. Sami men appear in a silent movie, leaping and wrestling in a meadow like some gleeful Arctic Olympics. But there will come a time when the ice no longer forms. The Arctic is heating more rapidly than anywhere else. A devastating projection of the north pole and its great white landmass is shown vanishing fast on the floor beneath your feet. Arctic peoples are literally on the shoreline of the climate crisis. Nothing could give a greater sense of the threat to their society than this exhibition, so revelatory of their art and their lives. And the show ends at the very edge of that ice, fading away on film, as dark figures moving about in the dusk try to haul in a fish from the rising waters. You watch with your heart in your mouth, as they stand upon this curious line – water lapping away at the ice, something solid returning to its liquid self. Arctic: Culture and Climate is at the British Museum, London, until 21 February
18||Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review – playful and potent collaborationThe Now Now (2018) was one of those Gorillaz albums that dispensed with the hip hop-led collaborations that have often defined this band of ink and flesh. Guests are in full effect, though, on its follow-up: what’s billed as Season One of the band’s Song Machine concept, compiling the tracks Gorillaz have released monthly via their YouTube channel since January, plus extra helpings. Everything that has ever been engaging about Gorillaz is present in spades here. Playfulness and conceptual ambition are all anchored by Damon Albarn’s melodic melancholy and his side-eye at the suboptimal state of things. His Bowie fixation waxes hard on unreleased tracks – such as The Lost Chord – as well those already in the public domain (Aries). Lifers might miss the very old school flows of the band’s earlier hook-ups, but the dizzying array of present voices – from 6lack to Octavian via US producer Mike Will Made It – renews Gorillaz’ relevance as beat merchants, while the assured application of other talents (from Robert Smith to Fatoumata Diawara, Peter Hook to St Vincent) ensures textural breadth. A strangely cogent album for wildly unstable times.
12||That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry review – wild, witty storiesKevin Barry’s darkly glimmering third collection of short stories arrives prefaced with a quote from the film-maker Jane Campion, all about the romantic impulse. “It’s a heroic path and it generally ends dangerously,” she cautions. That isn’t always the case for the protagonists of these 11 tales. One character, himself a writer, steps back just in time. Another’s lot turns out to be happiness – the single outcome he professes himself unable to handle. But by and large, passion proves hazardous for the loners and oddballs who drift through Barry’s forceful landscape. This is the west of Ireland, its wild emptiness teeming with lore and legend. As a publican says of his 10-streetlight town: “the winter bleeds us out here”. Come fairer weather, there’s the billowing whitethorn blossom to worry about, laden with doomy superstition. And what of the romance of the place? That gets short shrift, too. “The silly, silly moonlight,” sighs one man, rueing the calamity that comes from its enchantment. He is Sergeant Brown, whose forebears all “drank themselves into the clay of the place”. He appears in Ox Mountain Death Song, a story whose steady momentum carries it to an unexpected climax as he pursues a felon named Canavan, himself one of long line of ferret-grinned good-for-nothings. As Brown notes of the Canavans: “they had for decades and centuries brought to the Ox elements that were by turn very complicated and very simple: occult nous and racy semen”. And there it is, that canny laughter – vital, knockabout and unpredictable, it grounds in earthy reality the folksongs and fables that flit through the gloom here. Elsewhere, it adds a soulful complexity, enabling truths to disguise themselves as throwaway lines. Here’s the heroine of the title story, for instance, 17 years old and pregnant by her mother’s shiftless lover, gazing at herself in a car mirror: “She had a face on her like a scorched budgie. She detested herself.” Written over the course of eight years, these stories aren’t quite of equal strength, but throughout, their language is exhilarating, its verve evoking the very best of Barry’s compatriots while further carving out a territory that’s all his own. • That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry is published by Canongate (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
26||Would you trust your teenager with an online bank account?Cash is far from king for teenagers. And as society moves away from paper and coins, banks and tech companies are ramping up the competition to get children aged between 13 and 17 to manage their spending online. Last week saw the launch of an account aimed at teenagers from gohenry, a pre-paid card provider that lets kids manage their money within controls set by parents. The online account tells parents when, where and how much their offspring are spending, and sets tasks to earn pocket money. It’s the latest product in a busy market – and there are other apps offering similar features to gohenry. How to spend it Along with gohenry, other companies such as RoosterMoney, nimbl and Osper operate apps and prepaid cards. They all work in a similar way: money is loaded on the cards and both parents and the child can monitor how much they spend via the app. Money can be divided into various “pots” to allow for saving; limits on spending can be applied, and blocks put on places, such as where there is alcohol or cigarettes on sale, or on gambling sites. Parents can restrict spending and ATM use, and limit exactly where the cards can be used – online, on the high street and at cash machines, for example. There’s a monthly fee, up to about £3 per child. Gohenry says 720,000 children use its existing app – which is aimed at six- to 18-year-olds – mostly in the UK, with some in the US. The new account, specifically for teenagers, offers the same features as the existing account but lets employers pay wages on to the card. The banks have their own range of current accounts for children, although they typically start later than the apps at age 11. Some, such as Barclays Young Person’s Account, start at 16. Usually parents will have to open the account for those under that age and there are no overdraft facilities, so they cannot go into the red. But if the card is used aboard, they may be liable for withdrawal fees. A review of the accounts on the market by consumer group Which? named Nationwide, Metro Bank and the Co-Operative Bank the best performers of the high street banks. When is too young? Many parents may be concerned that the new-found independence of a teenager having their own bank card, even one with limits, could lead to the child burning through their money quickly on online games or impulse spending. Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk, says contactless cards can result in teenagers spending without realising how much is leaving their account. “We never see or psychologically feel the money leave us, and this can easily lead to uncontrolled spending on short-term whims,” he says. “This is a problem for all of us, but likely to be exacerbated in teenagers, for whom impulsivity is often higher, and focus on long-term habits lower.” However, the various limits and monitoring that the apps can offer can teach children how to spend, adds Davies. “If there is sufficient functionality over and above what you’d get from a bank account with regard to education, spending management tools, nudges and prompts on overspending, etc, then there is certainly a case to be made for them,” he says. Educating without paying MoneySavingExpert’s Martin Lewis has said that financial education has a huge impact on the future wellbeing of young people. In 2018, he donated £325,000 so that all 3,400 state-funded secondary schools could get 100 free copies each of a financial equation textbook. A survey from the Money &amp; Pensions Service showed that children from low-income families were much less likely to receive education on their finances at home. But providing a financial education does not necessarily mean parents have to spend almost £3 a month per child on an app. The Money Advice Service suggests one way to start children’s education on budgeting is to use three containers – one for immediate expenses, one for savings and one for a fund for rainy days. As the child gets older, this idea can be transferred to the bank, where they can have a few accounts for the same needs. As children start to use cards for their spending, they should be keenly aware of limits. From April of this year, the spending limit for contactless went from £30 to £45. Monzo and Starling Bank have contactless debit cards for 16- and 17-year olds. “It’s vital that when kids tap their cards they realise that the money they’re spending can drop quicker than they realise. Also, if a card is pinched, or leant to a mate, it can be maxed out very quickly by people spending just under the limit on contactless,” says Martyn James of complaints website Resolver. A key part of a financial education for a teenager is to allow them to develop maturely with money, says Davies. “The key is a safe environment – limits on the available amounts to spend, the size of individual purchases and the spend within given time frames,” he advises. “And making sure there are trade-offs and that these are visible and that they need to choose between things: If you buy this now, you can’t also buy that other thing; or if you buy this smaller thing now, you won’t be able to save for the larger, more important thing you will otherwise be able to get later.”
5||Mayors are a force for good. And it's time Johnson recognised thatLike so many around the world, the people of Greater Manchester and London have suffered terribly as a result of Covid-19. Thousands have died and years of hard-won economic progress has been undone in a matter of months – with businesses closed, jobs lost and unemployment predicted by some to hit 1980s levels. We must be honest that things are likely to get worse before they get better. The nations and regions of the UK should have been the government’s biggest ally in the battle to control the spread of this virus and to protect jobs and livelihoods. We are uniquely well placed to help. As mayors, our focus is exclusively on the city regions we run. But the Westminster Punch and Judy show struggles to relate to this more grown-up and pragmatic “place before party” approach. Proof of this is the cross-party coalition that stood up for Greater Manchester over recent days; the joint decision by the mayor and council leaders from all parties in London to go into tier 2; and the genuine collaboration and support shown by metro mayors, whatever their political colour, throughout the crisis. Mayors work hand in glove with local NHS leaders and regional public health experts. We have a deep understanding of the complexity and diversity of our communities. We have strong links with local business leaders and understand the strengths of our local economies. Crucially, we have shown ourselves capable of reacting to events more quickly and devising more innovative solutions than national government. However, instead of treating us as part of the solution to the pandemic, the government has at times treated us as the enemy. Westminster has sadly shown it is not mature enough to deal with devolution. The government may have all the money and power, but ministers simply cannot cope with differences, disagreements or compromise. Rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation. The prime minister has taken decisions with huge consequences for our regions. Offers of help on everything from the still-failing test and trace system to supporting vulnerable residents have been ignored. Increasingly desperate appeals for the funding we need have been rebuffed – and not just from us, but from Conservative mayors too. Now in London, meanwhile, the government must urgently come up with a deal that keeps TfL services running and doesn’t punish Londoners. While the government acted too late in March to save thousands of lives in London, it began lifting the national lockdown in the summer too early for the people of Greater Manchester – while the virus was still spreading too quickly. The region was then left languishing in restrictions similar to tier 2 from late July – with catastrophic consequences for local businesses, but no additional support for employers and workers facing those restrictions. Having underfunded places to deal with tier 2, they are now doing the same with tier 3. Though Greater Manchester succeeded in getting backdated support from the government, it won’t be enough to deal with the consequences of a crude tier 3 formula that penalises cities. The chancellor takes no account of the number of businesses in an area and the fact that busy city centres like ours have more hospitality enterprises. But there is a class issue here too: the businesses being forced to close are concentrated in the poorest communities. They will be hurt most by tier 3. This isn’t about wanting preferential treatment. It’s about basic fairness. It’s about treating cities fairly – wherever they are – given they are hit harder by lockdowns. The problem with money and power being concentrated in Westminster is that Whitehall doesn’t see the direct impact of policies in Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield or even parts of London. Ministers want us to bite our tongues. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London. It doesn’t have to be like this. Other countries have shown that with strong co-operation between regional and national authorities, it’s possible to get the virus under control and protect the economy. As we approach a difficult winter, we invite the prime minister, as a former mayor himself, to sit down with us to chart a better way forward. Levelling up will fail if it’s dictated top-down. So let’s now draw a line over the arguments of recent days, work together to control the virus and lay plans for a recovery led by the regions. Mayors are here to stay. It’s time for Westminster to grow up and work with us, not against us.
2||Coronavirus symptoms: how to tell if you have a common cold, flu or CovidWith winter approaching, the UK is entering the traditional seasons for colds and flu, with the additional complication this year that symptoms of those two illnesses can be broadly similar to those experienced by people who have caught the coronavirus and may be at risk of spreading it. The NHS in England has produced online Covid-19 advice and a guide to differentiate between the three types of illnesses, which health experts hope will make it clearer to people whether they have an illness they would have most likely brushed aside last year, but which this year might lead them to think they need to self-isolate or seek to have a coronavirus test. • If you are in any doubt and are concerned about your wellbeing or the health of someone you are caring for, you should seek medical assistance in the UK by dialling 111 or by following the Covid-19 advice on the NHS website. The NHS says that if you have any of the main symptoms of Covid-19 you should obtain a test as soon as possible and self-isolate. Coronavirus or Covid-19 The most common symptoms of coronavirus or Covid-19 are a fever – a temperature of 37.8C (100F) – a new persistent cough (usually dry), and a loss of their sense of taste and/or smell. Patients may also sometimes suffer from fatigue, aches and pains, sore throat, headaches and shortness of breath. Diarrhoea and a runny or stuffy nose are rare. The NHS says symptoms can range from mild to severe. Colds The most common symptoms of a cold are sneezing, aches and pains, a runny or stuffy nose and sore throat. A mild cough can be experienced. There is sometimes fatigue, and it is rare to experience a fever or headaches. Colds do not cause diarrhoea. The NHS states that with a cold there is usually a gradual onset of symptoms. Flu Flu most commonly consists of a fever, fatigue, a dry cough, aches and pains and headaches. Patients will sometimes experience a runny or stuffy nose or a sore throat. Diarrhoea can sometimes occur in children. There is usually no sneezing with flu, but a severe shortness of breath can develop, and the NHS notes there is usually a rapid onset of symptoms. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy. • This article was amended on 19 September 2020 to include a loss of taste and/or smell as a common symptom of people with coronavirus.
2||Covid world map: which countries have the most coronavirus cases and deaths?Since first being recorded late last year in China, the Covid-19 coronavirus has spread around the world, and been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. However, differences in testing mean that the number of cases may be understated for some countries. Obviously, larger countries tend to have higher numbers both of cases and of deaths. But there are many other factors in play, such as the demographic profiles of the countries; countries with ageing populations may be hit harder because the disease is more dangerous to older people. The number of deaths is a more dependable indicator. The disease has hit certain countries, including the US, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK with particular cruelty. Johns Hopkins University publishes cases and deaths data for most countries in the world (a notable exception being North Korea, which claims to have had none). But JHU concedes that it collects data from many sources, some of which disagree with each other. Even where the collection is less contentious there are significant differences in the ways countries test, and in the way they report cases and deaths. Belgium, for instance, attributes deaths to Covid-19 if the disease is a suspected cause, even if no test has been carried out. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
2||Fighting tyranny with milk tea: the young rebels joining forces in AsiaThe language, the demands and the backdrop were different, but the protests across central Bangkok last week would have looked familiar to anyone who followed the mass demonstrations that roiled Hong Kong for a year from June 2019. Crowds of young protesters, dressed in black and wearing hard hats, poured through the streets to locations announced at the last minute on social media. As the police closed in and the protesters prepared for confrontation, hand gestures and human chains ensured supplies including protective masks and water reached the front lines. Tactics adopted from Hong Kong demonstrations have helped the movement survive both the jailing of most of its leaders and direct attempts by the prime minister Prayuth Chan-ocha to ban the demonstrations. But Hong Kong has not only provided inspiration in Bangkok. In recent months an unexpected solidarity has developed between young protesters and activists across Thailand, Taiwan and Hong Kong, at first online but increasingly now in protests on the streets, in law courts and in the corridors of power. Their fights are serious ones, against governments with a ruthless track record of crushing dissent. But the symbol of east Asia’s informal coalition is playful, a simple beverage enjoyed in all three places, leading protesters to dub their unlikely cross-border support the “Milk Tea Alliance”. Milk tea is drunk differently in each place, just as their individual battles vary. Cold with tapioca bubbles in Taiwan, hot and strong in Hong Kong, iced and sweetened with condensed milk in Thailand. But the basic ingredients are the same, just as the protesters’ basic aim – democracy – is shared. “When you have to go against a big power you have to be creative,” said Netiwit Chotiphatphaisal, a prominent student activist in Bangkok. “The name is very cute – it’s appealing and people [see] it’s not aggressive.” Protest art posted online shows three teas raised together in a toast. Other images depict the drinks as sweet cartoon figures holding hands in solidarity, with love hearts floating above. Alliance supporters are keen not to overstate what the different members can do for each other, or minimise the differences between their struggles. Thai students are battling a powerful monarchy, demanding greater democracy and accountability. In Hong Kong, protesters are fighting the Beijing-backed government for rights and freedoms they were promised during the handover from British colonial rule. They were abruptly curtailed this year by a draconian national security law imposed from the mainland. And in Taiwan politicians and activists are engaged in an existential struggle with China, which considers the self-ruled island part of its territory and has not ruled out using force to bring it under Beijing’s control. But supporters of the unlikely coalition say protesters and politicians across the disparate milk-tea territories share practical challenges, ideological values, and increasing concern about the power of China – a key ally of Bangkok’s military-backed government. Thai protesters inspired by the Hong Kong movement see direct parallels between their own political experiences and that of activists opposing China’s authoritarianism, said Janjira Sombatpoonsiri, assistant professor of political science at Thammasat University. “When you look at Hong Kong as a Thai citizen, what you see is a repetition of another autocratic rule – repression, doublespeak, lies and propaganda, disinformation and abuse of power,” said Janjira. More than 80 protesters in Thailand have now been arrested after taking part in protests, and key leaders remain in detention. Three were charged under an obscure law banning “violence against the queen” after her motorcade was heckled, and could face a death sentence if her life is thought to have been in danger. Some Thai protesters see not only a shared goal of democracy but a shared enemy in Beijing, including Thachaporn Supparatanapinyo, a Thai student activist living in Taiwan, who describes the alliance as a “perfect example” of a regional movement. “For the CCP [Chinese Communist party], there will always be the next and the next,” she said. “If not territorial expansion then they will seek to commodify our sovereignty by buying off (Thai) leaders like they have already done in Cambodia and Laos.” Jerry Liu, director of international affairs for Taiwan’s New Power party, which grew out of the student-led Sunflower protest movement of 2014, admits that for many in Taiwan the Milk Tea Alliance is just a “vague and fancy slogan”. But the island’s own relatively recent history of democratisation and its perpetual fight to preserve self-rule should make pro-democracy activists elsewhere natural allies, he says. “If we think about this issue from the perspective of human rights, liberty and democracy, then we should find many things in common,” he said at a press conference organised by the Taiwan Alliance for Thai Democracy – a practical incarnation of the alliance. The origin of this modern alliance of young pro-democracy activists is almost as unlikely as its symbol. It began in the spring after a Thai celebrity and his girlfriend shared pictures on their social media accounts that – apparently unintentionally – could be read as backing independence for Hong Kong and Taiwan. China’s army of hyper-vigilant nationalist trolls responded by attacking Thailand, trying to dent nationalist pride with slurs on the monarchy and economy, but they misjudged their target. Thai Twitter users are known for their outspoken criticism of their country’s establishment, and the attacks came after months of anti-government protests. Rather than being offended, many embraced the attacks, and deflected them back with sarcasm and dark humour in an escalating online battle that gradually drew in peers in Hong Kong and Taiwan. A volley of memes ricocheted around the internet, but an “alliance” that began as a joke also began to take real form on the ground. A protester facing charges in Hong Kong flashed a Thai protest symbol to a packed courtroom this summer. Thai students looked to the experienced, effective Hong Kong organisers for examples of how to more effectively defy and protest against their government, copying graphics and advice about staying safe at protests and keeping digital data private. “Online users in Asia are realising there is strength in numbers and in the shared experiences of resisting and fighting back against authoritarian governments,” said Tracy Beattie, a researcher at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, who has closely followed online political activism in Thailand. In Taiwan, the milk tea hashtag even popped up on the vice-president’s Twitter feed on National Day, 10 October, although a government spokesman had previously claimed Taipei took “no position” on the alliance. Over the past six months, online activists aligned with the group helped drive a boycott of Disney’s live-action remake of Mulan, drawing attention to human rights abuses by Chinese authorities in Xinjiang, where some filming took place, and to the lead actor’s controversial support for police in Hong Kong. It has also been used to share anything from reports of China’s exploitation of the Mekong, a river relied upon by tens of millions of people, to petitions calling for states to stand up to China over its persecution of Uighur Muslims. Sitthiphon Kruarattikan, director of the Institute of East Asian Studies, at Thammasat University, said that although there is no expectation of the alliance driving political change, it reflects and amplifies growing concern about Beijing’s political agenda and its regional projection of power. “China is still unsuccessful in cultivating soft power or winning hearts and minds of their ‘Taiwanese compatriots’ and people in neighbouring countries,” he added.
2||Covid cases and deaths today: coronavirus UK mapPlease note: 3 and 4 October totals include cases from previous days published late owing to a technical fault on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Cases from between 24 September and 1 October have been added to the totals for 3 and 4 October. Please note: these are government figures on numbers of confirmed cases – some people who report symptoms are not being tested, and are not included in these counts. Coronavirus has hit the UK hard, with the country recording hundreds of thousands of cases and over 40,000 deaths linked to the disease. England faced Europe’s highest excess death levels during the first wave of the pandemic. Where are the UK’s current coronavirus hotspots? At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact. Since then, however, the centre of the virus has shifted northwards and to areas in Northern Ireland. England now operates a three-tier system, with different areas facing different restrictions. Details of the English lockdowns are listed here, Scottish lockdowns here, Welsh here and Northern Irish here. How is the disease progressing in the UK? Cases in the UK first peaked in early April, before beginning to fall from May to early July. Since August, however, daily cases have once again and the UK is now in the grips of a second wave. Numbers passed the earlier peak in September and have continued to rise in October – although some of this can be attributed to increased testing and targeted testing in coronavirus outbreak areas. The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March, peaking in April. That figure has now been rising again in September and October. Deaths were at their highest during the first peak of cases, with over 1,000 daily deaths seen on some days in April. They started to once again increase in October, following the earlier rise in cases. How much of the second wave is due to more testing? Some of the sharp rise in cases in September and October can be attributed to increased testing. Many more tests were done in autumn than during the first wave in the spring. In March and April, there were relatively few tests available and these were given to people with severe symptoms – mainly in hospitals. Most people with milder symptoms were not tested, so these cases were not recorded, meaning the actual number is likely to have been much higher. Sir Patrick Vallance has said the daily case number may have been over 100,000 on some days in the first wave. During the start of the second wave in September, more tests were available and the majority of people took tests in the community. This means that people with milder symptoms were being tested and recorded in the official figures. The real number of cases will still be higher than the recorded count, but the testing will be picking up a greater proportion of the total. However, given Covid-19’s potential for exponential growth, the shape of the cases curve is critically important, and the effect of increased cases can be seen in the hospitalisation and mortality curves above. Find coronavirus cases near you The chart below shows the areas that have had the highest daily peaks of new Covid-19 cases. Many parts of the UK now have a number of cases that surpasses the first peak of the pandemic. Other areas have had less dramatic peaks of infection. Find the cases curve in your own area by typing into the search bar below. In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic. About this data This data comes from a variety of sources: the headline figures come from Public Health England, working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Local authority data for England and Wales also comes from Public Health England. Historic data for Scottish regions is only available by health board and comes from Public Health Scotland. We exclude 15 June for Scottish data owing to the fact that new historic data was added on that day. The most recent Northern Irish data used in the maps and table comes from the NI Department of Health, but for the line charts above it comes from Public Health England, which has historic data for Northern Ireland. There are differences in the data collection practices and publishing schedules of the sources that may lead to temporary inconsistencies. About Covid-19 Since first being identified as a new coronavirus strain in Wuhan, China, late last year, Covid-19 has spread around the globe. The virus can cause pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. You can find out more about the symptoms here. There are things you can do, such as wearing a face mask, to protect yourself and slow the spread of the virus. Chief among them are regularly washing your hands for at least 20 seconds with soap and water, and catching coughs and sneezes in tissues. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
17||Priti Patel kept up anti-lawyer rhetoric after Met warning on terrorThe UK home secretary, Priti Patel, is under fresh pressure after it emerged that she appeared to have dismissed intelligence briefings from counter- terrorism police to the Home Office over an alleged far-right terror attack. Officers from S015, the Metropolitan police counter terrorism command (CTC), notified the Home Office in mid-September that it was suspected that a far-right extremist had attempted to carry out a terror attack at a solicitors’ firm in London. Weeks later, on 4 October at the Conservative party conference, the home secretary intensified her criticism of “do gooders” and “lefty lawyers.” On Saturday night, Nick Thomas-Symonds MP, the shadow home secretary, said: “The home secretary has fallen short of the high standards that the role demands. The use of such reprehensible and inflammatory language undermines the most important part of her job, which is to keep people safe.” Officers from SO15 were drafted in to investigate the attack on law firm Duncan Lewis, which occurred on 7 September after it became evident that extremism might be involved. Accounts from the firm, including eyewitness statements, formed part of the investigation. On Friday, alleged far-right extremist Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow in north-west London, was charged with attempting to launch a terror attack at the law firm last month. The Old Bailey heard that Medlock arrived at Duncan Lewis’s offices armed with a knife, handcuffs, a Nazi flag and a US Confederate flag with prosecutors saying he appeared to target the firm because of its involvement with immigration cases. Previously, the Observer has revealed that Patel ignored warnings from senior colleagues including the lord chancellor and attorney general as well as officials from the Bar Council and Law Society to stop targeting immigration lawyers following the incident. Sources say the Met notified MI5 and the Home Office last month of the incident and its far-right links. Separately, senior Home Office officials involved in its counter-extremism portfolio have said they were made aware of a suspected far-right attack before Patel resumed her attacks on immigration lawyers at the Tory party conference. A spokesperson for the Met confirmed that it was protocol to share intelligence and details following a suspected terrorist incident with the Home Office: “Counter terrorism policing works closely with colleagues from MI5 and the Home Office in the course of our investigative activity. This includes sharing, as and where appropriate, certain information and intelligence relating to our work with these partners.”They added: “There are well established protocols in place to brief government on the police response following major incidents, including terrorist attacks.” The chronology of events raises questions as to why Patel chose to keep attacking the legal profession. According to government documents, her remit is being “responsible for making sure our communities, in all [police] force areas, are kept safe and secure”. An online Home Office fact sheet on rightwing terrorism pledges that the department is committed to tackling far-right attacks, stating: “The threat from rightwing terrorism has evolved in recent years and is growing. That is why this government is taking urgent action to tackle it.” In addition, Patel has oversight of the security service MI5, which last year was given responsibility to take the lead in tackling rightwing terrorism, officially designated as a major threat to national security. This month, the new head of MI5 warned of its growing threat. Out of 27 terrorist plots disrupted in the past four years, eight have involved rightwing extremists. In addition, Patel’s department presides over the government’s counter extremism strategy, Prevent, which aims to help vulnerable individuals people from being radicalised to supporting terrorism. “With any case of domestic terrorism you need to look at the reasons behind it, its inspiration. This is why this is so serious,” said a source with knowledge of the case. They added: “If you had a dubious politician abroad inciting hatred and then a UK terror incident was traced back to what this politician had said then you can only imagine the measures that would be taken.”
2||How CBBC's 'Dr Xand' learned surviving Covid isn't child's playBest known as half of the twin-presenter duo of CBBC’s Operation Ouch!, Dr Xand van Tulleken’s impeccable credentials – a medical degree and qualifications in public health and tropical medicine – have also seen him front documentaries on everything from male suicide to the science of dating. But earlier this year he found the tables turned when he caught Covid while he and his brother Chris were making a programme on the pandemic. Being a doctor didn’t stop him panicking. “I was properly anxious, and frightened at the prospect of spending two weeks completely on my own when I was ill,” he told me. “I was quite tearful speaking to my twin about it all.” By the end of week one, he thought he was out of the woods. Then, on day 12, he woke with his heart racing: a condition called “atrial fibrillation”. He went into hospital, where doctors stopped and started his heart to regularise its rhythm. He has had this done three times since, once while cameras were rolling as his brother looked on during filming for their BBC documentary Surviving the Virus. How did it feel to go so publicly from presenter to patient? “I had all the anxieties you’d expect – I didn’t want to look frail or vulnerable on the telly,” he admits. But he’s glad he did it, and not just because it might reduce the stigma around illness: “My favourite thing was seeing people replying to things on social media about Covid being made up with ‘why don’t you ask Dr Xand?’ Because even as someone quite young, I had a relatively severe experience of it.” The producer sent over a rough cut, warning it was tough viewing. “We didn’t believe him, we thought we’re both doctors, we’ve seen this stuff before, so we had Mum and Dad over and put it on, and everyone was in tears. I found it hard to watch, mainly because I didn’t like seeing Chris upset.” It also can’t have been easy doing lockdown while living alone and recovering from Covid, with a tough work schedule thrown into the mix: he filmed a whole series of Operation Ouch from his kitchen, and co-presented BBC1’s Health Check Live. He survived it by getting to know his neighbours better – including the squirrels in his garden, whose appearance during our interview prompts him to jump up and feed them (“I can’t have a cat or a dog, so they’re my pets!”). But the hardest thing was not seeing his 11-year-old son, Julian, who lives in Canada, as much as usual. “At this point we’d normally be talking about Christmas but it’s possible this year I won’t get to spend it with him.” His own experience of Covid has reminded him how vulnerable adults can be to new viruses. Children’s immune systems are designed to respond vigorously to viruses, but by the time we reach adulthood most of us have been exposed to the common ones so there’s less need for an all-out response; it’s why adults get chickenpox so much worse. “Some long-Covid symptoms will be specific to coronavirus but it is possible that some of what we’re talking about is the effect of new virus exposure in adults, something we’ve been aware of for a long time but which has been neglected by medicine,” he explains. He stresses the need for greater investment in rehab services where people might spend weeks recovering after leaving intensive care. What aspects of the pandemic response does he think have gone well? “The British public have done an extraordinary job in doing their best to slow the spread of the virus,” he says. Less so the government. “My work in overseas aid taught me that so much of public health is good information, but the government has got it so wrong,” he says. Blaming the public for rising infection rates after encouraging everyone to go into the office “felt like gaslighting”, and he says the hypocrisy of government adviser Dominic Cummings in failing to apologise when caught breaking the rules undermined the sense we were all in it together. He rails against the government’s dogmatic approach to science, for example the early insistence that hand-shaking was safe. When he was on Question Time in early March, he was taken aback when fellow panellist Matt Hancock reached out his hand. “I said ‘I’m not really shaking hands at the moment.’” He says Hancock was adamant it didn’t spread through handshakes. “I know how these sorts of viruses spread, but I don’t like social awkwardness so ended up shaking his hand!” He finds ministers’ claims they are “following the science” deeply problematic: “No scientist in the world can tell you whether it’s worth closing down parts of the entertainment industry; that’s an inherently political decision.” He is also scathing about the three scientists who penned the “Great Barrington declaration”, which argued we should shield the vulnerable but that life for everyone else should go back to normal. “I’m genuinely interested in the question of at what point we’ve gone too far with social restrictions; whether it’s isolation or poverty, there are terrible trade-offs. But I felt so frustrated that those scientists turned the most important question of a generation – how we respond to respiratory virus pandemics – into the most poorly thought through, unkind document, launched by a thinktank funded by the Koch brothers.” If a Covid vaccine comes, it will be important to encourage uptake; how can scientists address fake news from anti-vaxxers? Xand says that after he and Dr Chris noticed one or two people occasionally getting up and leaving the Operation Ouch! live show during their segment about vaccines, they changed their approach. “The thing society normally does is say ‘you’re so stupid’ to parents who believe the conspiracy theories. But, actually, large pharmaceutical companies, western governments and the medical profession have all given some communities in particular reasons not to trust them over the years.” He believes medics need to communicate better with sceptical parents. “If you are in the situation where the only way of saving children was compulsory vaccination, then I guess I’d be in favour of it. But to get to that point, you’ve screwed up so badly.” There’ll be no shortage of opportunities for Xand to talk directly to the public: he’s the resident doctor on BBC1’s new show Morning Live, which starts tomorrow. “I want the medical bits to feel reassuring and optimistic rather than gloomy,” he says. A tough ask during a pandemic perhaps, but having just spent an hour in Xand’s bubbly company, I reckon we’re in safe hands.
19||His House review – palpable terrorBritish writer-director Remi Weekes’s arresting first feature smartly utilises the horror genre to explore the hostile environment experienced by Sudanese refugees Bol (Sope Dirisu) and Rial (Wunmi Mosaku). Case worker Mark (Matt Smith) places the married couple in a grotty house with peeling wallpaper (“a palace”), urging them to “get along”, “fit in” and “make it easy for people”. Outside, an unfriendly neighbour observes Bol from her window, while three schoolboys taunt a disoriented Rial, telling her to “go back to Africa”. At home, Bol is haunted by voices in his head and noises from within the walls, echoes of grief, guilt and shame that assume bodily forms. Genuine jump scares are bolstered by the film’s spooky sound design, as well as terrific performances from Dirisu and Mosaku, whose terror is palpable.
13||Instagram row over plus-size model forces change to nudity policyAs campaigning victories go, forcing Mark Zuckerberg’s social media empire to admit a discriminatory flaw in its policy is no small feat. But following a campaign launched in this paper, the Observer can exclusively reveal that Instagram and its parent company Facebook will be updating its policy on nudity in order to help end discrimination of plus-size black women on its platforms and ensure all body types are treated fairly. In August, Instagram was accused of censoring and silencing the plus-size model Nyome Nicholas-Williams. A wave of content creators then confirmed the platform was repeatedly discriminating against black people, plus-size users and other marginalised communities, by deleting their photos or failing to promote them in the same way it did for its white users. Speaking to the Observer over the summer, Nicholas-Williams and photographer Alexandra Cameron told of how photos from their “confidence shoot” were repeatedly deleted and taken down, with warnings that their accounts – which have more than 115,000 followers between them – could be closed down. The controversy caused fans to protest and post pictures of the model en masse under the hashtag #IWantToSeeNyome. The photo-sharing app owned by Facebook was accused of hypocrisy and racism in allowing an abundance of photos of semi-naked skinny white women on its feeds but deleting those posted by black women in similar poses. Nicholas-Williams said she was shocked that “a fat black woman celebrating her body is banned … I want to promote self-love and inclusivity because that’s how I feel and how I want other women like me to feel”. The photos in question showed Nicholas-Williams with her eyes closed and wrapping an arm around her breasts. While the pose is a common trope across social media, in this instance it was deemed to violate Instagram’s guidance on pornography. As well as sophisticated artificial intelligence, Facebook and Instagram employ 15,000 content reviewers across the world. These workers individually sift through thousands of photos that are reported as offensive by users to the app everyday. Human bias – unconscious or otherwise – might be expected to occur in content deletion and account bans but Facebook and Instagram have exhaustive rules that must be applied to allow either to happen. The company denied Nicholas-Williams had been racially discriminated against, but confirmed that its former policy on “boob squeezing” had caused her photos to be removed. Campaigner Gina Martin, who had also lobbied Instagram and who previously got the law changed to criminalise “upskirting” in 2018,said: “This policy change is an example of what happens when you recognise an issue, get organised, form a relationship with big platforms and make yourself difficult to ignore.” Nicholas-Williams said she was delighted with the outcome. “This is a huge step and I am glad a dialogue has now been opened,” she said. “I want to ensure that I am respected and allowed to use spaces like Instagram, as many other creators do, without the worry of being censored and silenced.” Instagram’s influence on trends and popular culture cannot be underestimated. The social media site has over a billion users worldwide and millions of pictures are uploaded online everyday by individuals, small businesses, major brands and politicians keen to be part of the conversation. A spokesperson from Instagram confirmed that pictures of Nicholas-Williams were originally taken down as “we do not allow breast squeezing because it can be most commonly associated with pornography”. Cameron, the photographer, said: “There is more flesh to hold or place your arm around if you have bigger boobs. There was no suggestion of pornographic squeezing – my photos are explicitly about the female gaze and about empowering women.” Instagram acknowledged that the shoot showed the model “holding her breasts … [in] images intended to demonstrate self-love and body acceptance.” A spokesperson for Instagram said: “As we looked into this more closely, we realised it was an instance where our policy on breast squeezing wasn’t being correctly applied. Hearing Nyome’s feedback helped us understand where this policy was falling short, and how we could refine it.” The new policy on nudity will apply across Instagram and Facebook and come into effect this week.
17||PM on the ropes as London Tories rail against extension of congestion chargeBoris Johnson is facing mounting pressure from Tory MPs in London to comprehensively rule out a massive extension of the congestion charge in the capital, amid emergency talks over a new bailout for its struggling transport system. Conservative figures warned there would be “blood on the walls” if the government allowed the extension of the charge, which would hit a series of so-called “London doughnut” Tory seats on the outskirts of the city. They are also demanding there must be no threat to subsidised travel for the young or older people, also proposed as an option by the government as a condition of a further bailout. The idea of extending the congestion charge was among a series of measures suggested in a leaked letter from the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, earlier this month. It would apparently see the £15 charge extend to the North and South Circular roads by October 2021 – an 18-fold increase in the size of the area covered. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, is demanding £4.9bn for the next 18 months to rescue Transport for London (TfL), which has been severely hit by the Covid-19 crisis. However, even raising the idea has outraged Tory MPs. London Tories have held two emergency meetings with Shapps in the last fortnight, warning him an extension of the charge will “not be tolerated”. Shapps has attempted to calm concerns but Tories remain uneasy after Johnson failed to rule out a congestion charge extension when confronted with the issue at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. “Extending the congestion charge, taking away concessionary fares to the elderly and young, are completely unacceptable to us – we were not going to accept it,” said one figure involved. “If this was even suggested then there’d be real complaints and blood on the walls.” There is deep frustration among Tories in the capital, who believe the government has allowed itself to be outflanked by Khan. They warn that ministers have allowed him to blame them for imposing cuts without having to draw any up himself. Another Conservative MP said: “Khan has now been allowed to basically hide problems of his own making behind Covid. We’re letting him get away with blaming everything on the government. There’s a real frustration that [Johnson] hasn’t been as adept as he might have been with how to deal with this man.” The latest row comes as Khan and Greater Manchester mayor Andy Burnham accuse the government of treating local leaders “as the enemy” during the pandemic. Writing jointly in the Observer, they state that “rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation from ministers”. Ministers want us to bite our tongues and bend the knee. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London.” They are now calling for a meeting with the prime minister to improve relations. The dispute is the latest to highlight the growing question of No 10’s influence over London and claims that Khan’s powers have been diminished across the board. There is now just a week to go until the deadline by which the government must agree a financial support package for TfL. Khan’s team has made clear it cannot accept a deal that would force through higher fares, higher council tax, a hugely increased congestion charge zone and concessions for children and over-60s being scrapped in return for the financial support. Khan’s team has warned the government of the potentially “catastrophic” effect of forcing TfL into issuing a “section 114” notice if it cannot balance its books. In theory, that could see the winding down of all services apart from the Woolwich ferry and some school bus services – the only services TfL is legally obliged to provide. On Friday, Khan wrote to Shapps demanding a meeting to sort out the deal. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “We have agreed an extension to the support period and to roll over unspent funding from the TfL extraordinary funding agreement, allowing further time for negotiations for a new settlement. These discussions will ensure London has a safe, reliable network. It would be inappropriate to disclose further details at this stage.”
14||Don’t worry about Latin names or Victorian rulesTo the uninitiated, the world of horticulture can seem like a daunting place, full of unpronounceable Latin names, unfathomably complex pruning rules and the constant fear of killing everything in your care if you deviate even slightly from them. These doubts can serve as a really effective barrier to would-be newbies from experiencing one of the most rewarding, uplifting and therapeutic of arts. But trust me as a botanist when I tell you it simply doesn’t have to be this way. First things first – what about all those strict Victorian rules? Well, here’s a simple truth. When actually tested scientifically, many of the most long-held gardening “rules” are either based on limited evidence that is not applicable to modern, domestic gardens or, frankly, may even give you worse results. For example, religiously adding a layer of crocks to the bottom of pots actually impedes drainage. Laboriously “double digging” your flower beds each autumn has been shown to degrade soil structure, and following meticulous Victorian rose-pruning rules gives you fewer flowers the next year than simply whacking new growth back with electric hedge clippers. Now, I am absolutely not saying that all gardening advice should be disregarded – far from it. But it should be reframed as “tips and tricks”, which could potentially give you better results, not hard and fast “rules” that must be followed to the letter or risk catastrophe. Secondly: Latin is a dead language. There are no ancient Romans around to correct you and, even if there were, the empire was so enormous, encompassing such a vast diversity of cultures, the chances are that however you pronounce them, there would have been a Roman who would have said them just like you. I mean, frankly, botanical Latin isn’t even really “true” Latin, but a random hodgepodge of ancient Greek and Latin, plus a hefty dose of a myriad of other languages from Russian and German to Chinese and Indonesian. So I promise you there is categorically no “correct” way to pronounce these “Latin” names. However, using the accurate scientific name, however you say it, is often the only way to get the correct ID on the plant you are looking for, so giving it a go can save you a lot of time, money and confusion. Nursery growers will thank you. Finally, and this is probably the most important one: do not be afraid of killing plants! Over millions of years plants have evolved all sorts of ingenious strategies to overcome even the harshest environmental conditions, with zero help from horticulturists. In most cases, given light and water levels even very roughly similar to their native habitat, they will be perfectly happy to get on with it. If they do die, then just try something else. I’d go further, in fact. I’d say killing plants is the only way you’ll really learn what works and what doesn’t. I’ve killed hundreds, perhaps thousands in my time. The only secret of a green thumb is to dust yourself off and try again. In gardening there are no mistakes, only experiments. So go out there and start experimenting. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek
5||A Joe Biden White House will have little time and less love for ‘Britain’s Trump’When the long race for the White House ends, another begins: the sprint to be the first European leader to be granted an audience by the new US president. In 2016, Theresa May was distraught to have got a wooden spoon in the competition to put in an early congratulatory telephone call to Trump Tower. That made her even more neuralgic about beating a path to Washington ahead of her European rivals. Mrs May had to throw in the promise of a Trump state visit to the UK – I rather rudely called it “pimping out the Queen” – to ensure that she got to the White House first. This desperation can make British prime ministers look pathetically needy, but there is a reason why they set so much store by displays of proximity with the Oval Office. How important a prime minister is to the United States, the planet’s largest economy and most potent military force, sends a message about how much influence the UK wields in the world. So it is telling that Number 10 is resigned to the prospect that Boris Johnson will not be the first name on Joe Biden’s call sheet if he becomes the 46th president. Nor is there any expectation that Mr Johnson will be first in line when they hand out invitations to the White House. He has already quit a race UK prime ministers are usually pretty good at winning. “There is an intrinsic problem for Boris,” observes Sir Christopher Meyer, the UK’s ambassador in Washington during the presidencies of Bill Clinton and George W Bush. “The Democrats think Boris is a pea from the same pod as Trump.” Being “Britain’s Trump” goes down almost as poisonously as being Trump himself among many in Team Biden. They are bracketed together in the minds of Democrats not just because both are rule-breaking populists who have polarised their countries and trashed historic alliances. Likely members of a Biden administration remember examples of the Tory leader’s insultingly Trumpian behaviour. Ben Rhodes, who was deputy national security adviser when Mr Biden was vice-president to Barack Obama, has remarked: “I’m old enough to remember when Boris Johnson said Obama opposed Brexit because he was Kenyan.” A more recent inflammatory episode exposed a complete absence of thought in Number 10 about the man whom the polls suggest will be the next US president. One of the most essential things to know about Mr Biden – it would be on the first page if anyone wrote a book called Biden for Beginners – is that he is a Catholic who is extremely proud of his Irish ancestry. Mr Johnson was either blithe or ignorant about that when he declared that he was ready to break international law by dishonouring clauses concerning Ireland in the withdrawal agreement with the EU. Mr Biden was one of the voices in the chorus of American condemnation that the Johnson government was jeopardising the Good Friday agreement. “That was profoundly clumsy and stupid,” says Sir Chris. “It immediately ignited the Irish-American lobby in Washington, which is second in power only to the pro-Israeli lobby.” Mr Johnson can be quite adept at shape-shifting when he thinks it suits his interests. He was a liberal mayor of London before he became the face of the anti-immigrant Brexit campaign. Confronted with a Democrat in the White House, he may try to slough off his Trumpian skin and offer himself as a useful partner for an internationalist president. For his part, Mr Biden will say that America’s ties with the UK are important to him, if only because that is what all American presidents say. It is nevertheless set to start out as one of the frostiest relationships between Number 10 and the White House since Harold Wilson and Lyndon Johnson in the 1960s. Though Mr Biden has been a large figure in US politics for decades, one well-placed observer says that Number 10 is “absolutely clueless” about him and his key people. In the past, it has been usual for the Washington embassy to attach a diplomat to the campaigns of presidential candidates, the better to get to know their teams and likely priorities in office. Wary of any suggestion of outside interference in the US election, the Biden team banned meetings with foreign diplomats. Downing Street has found it hard to find other ways to establish connections. Previous Tory governments had good lines of communication to both parties in the US. This Brexiter-dominated cabinet has cultivated ties solely with Republicans. It was only very recently and very belatedly that Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, managed to get some time with Biden allies on Capitol Hill. If they were smarter, the Johnson government would also have paid a lot of attention to Mr Biden’s running mate, Kamala Harris, because she will be a 77-year-old’s heartbeat away from the presidency. Even if a Biden administration decides to let bygones be bygones, the Johnson government will still struggle to make itself relevant in Washington. After a Trump presidency that has massively strained America’s historic alliances while often fawning to authoritarians, a Biden presidency will try to reassert US leadership of the world’s democracies. A critical feature of that will be detraumatising the transatlantic relationship. At a recent Ditchley conference of foreign policy experts from America, Britain and elsewhere, one question that preoccupied the gathering was who would become Mr Biden’s “special friend” in Europe. Emmanuel Macron is very eager to secure that status, though others familiar with thinking among the Biden team believe that their highest priority will be re-establishing strong relations with Germany. Almost no one expects the UK to have preferred partnership status. After the huge distress to European leaders of enduring a US president who willed the breakup of the European Union, a Biden administration will revert to something much closer to America’s traditional post-1945 policy. Namely that US interests are best served by Europe being stable and cohesive. Having severed its central bond with its neighbours, the UK can no longer hope to offer itself to Washington as America’s bridge across the Atlantic. Searching for areas where the relationship could still be close, some emphasise “the hard security issues” – military co-operation, counter-terrorism and intelligence – where there are mutual interests that have historically transcended the personalities of leaders. “When the Americans are looking for military help, they ask who are our allies and what have they got?” says one senior Tory who thinks this still matters. But Johnson government officials sound rather desperate when they try to talk up the importance of the UK’s much-reduced military heft. Mr Biden is not planning any wars and, even if he were, the United States can act without the help of Britain. The biggest foreign policy challenge of the Biden presidency will be managing his country’s tense strategic competition with China while avoiding a deterioration into armed confrontation. Britain’s ability to be of use to Washington in that sphere is limited because our capacity to apply meaningful pressure on China is not high. The UK government has protested in vain about China’s treatment of Hong Kong. Downing Street also sounds as if it is clutching at very feeble straws when it suggests that there will be an opportunity to win favour next year when Britain hosts the UN climate change conference. Mr Biden is not exactly a summit novice and his team have clocked that Britain was mealymouthed when Mr Trump ripped up American commitments to tackling the climate crisis. There are compelling reasons why a change at the White House ought to unnerve Mr Johnson. The Trump presidency emboldens populist nationalists around the world by encouraging them to believe that they are part of an irresistibly triumphant global trend. Defeat for him will give his one term in office more the character of a freakish spasm and leave imitators looking like purveyors of an ideological style that is going out of fashion. During the Trump period, Mr Johnson has tried to lever influence with other leaders by presenting himself as the man who has the ear of, and can help to interpret, the White House wild man. “Boris Johnson sold himself as the Trump whisperer,” says Jonathan Powell, a diplomat in Washington before he became Tony Blair’s chief of staff. “Without Trump, what is the point of Johnson?” More existentially, the British may ask themselves where his policies have left this country other than looking alone in a dangerous world. Brexit has fractured the relationship with Europe, one pillar of the postwar foreign policy. Now it looks highly likely that the other pillar, a close relationship with the US, will be shuddering. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the Observer
14||What happened when me and Kim Kardashian both turned 40?My bottom is as flat as Norfolk. It’s basically a back, slightly folded. As a seat it’s acceptable, though after 45 minutes I am grateful for a padded chair. In a tight dress in dim light the effect is MC Escher-like – a leering eye is unfortunately drawn down and around a virtual staircase somehow ending up back at the shoulders again without a hint of arousal, which is sad. And yet despite my gluteous failings, Kim Kardashian and I have much in common. Both she and I turn 40 this month, and nobody can believe it of either of us. Forty! I know! A bizarre age to turn when all your parents are still basically 40; a crazy age to be presented with when you’re still not quite sure about historical wars or the spelling of, say, “embarrass”, nor can you confidently work the second TV remote. A mad age to be when, if asked how old you were, quickly and after a bracing swim, would reply, “19” without a quiver. But here it is, in black and white and shades of sparkling bronze; she and I enter the autumn of our youths and, well, also autumn, as middle-aged suburban mums. Yes, her and Kanye’s house is significantly cleaner than mine, and her arse potentially more influential. Sure, I am not yet responsible for the felling of an entire forest’s worth of paper to host debates on whether I am the overlooked face of feminism, and sure, too, she is unlikely to be found in her Twitter DMs debating taste and class consciousness vis-à-vis the return of Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen’s Changing Rooms, but this month Kim and I share an important thing: both of us have been robbed of a party. Instead of her planned celebration, a “Wild, Wild Miss West”-themed ball, for which she’d commissioned Thierry Mugler to make her a “metal cowgirl costume”, she is marking her birthday with the launch of a new makeup palette. I had also looked into launching a new makeup palette for my 40th. Well, less a palette, more a plate with a face painted wetly on to it that one can keep beside the bed and flatten upon themselves every morning to save time, but the red tape was a nightmare so, instead, I spent the day eating well and complaining loudly. Never have I needed a party more. The month-long lead-up, the quiet texts from friends asking politely if I’ve invited their exes, the gorgeous anxiety of worrying absolutely nobody will come. And then the day, with its perfunctory hoovering and rearranging of shelves – the walking into an empty room again and again attempting to see it as others might, the ceremonial bowling up of crisps. Evening, the noisy hairdryer over the noisy record player, the lover-like laying of dress on bed. Lamplighting, a candle that threatens to burn down the bunting, and just when doubt kicks in about the very fine threads of friendship you have sewn across years and postcodes, the best music in the world – a doorbell, right on time. It gets dark and someone’s smoking inside. You lose control of the music around the time the hummus runs out, and soon a girl will be shouting in your ear about love or buses. Because age is real, someone will mournfully leave then to pay a babysitter, and their face will disappear ghostlike in an Uber window. At some point there are no more photos taken, and two people are slow dancing in the kitchen to Kermit’s Rainbow Connection, and the hem of your dress is wet so you tuck it into your tights. It’s no surprise who’s still there at dawn, or who is part-dead on the sofa when you’re quietly decanting old drinks in the morning, or who texts for your sister’s number the following day, or who orders a pizza with you when evening rudely returns. Ah, to know again the sweet ignorance of eating cake someone has blown on. The carefree joy of trying a stranger’s cocktail, the casual hello hug of some you barely care for. Never have I needed a party more. It’s comforting to know that right now at least one person is feeling exactly the same. Perhaps, when “all this” is “over”, Kim and I could sort out a joint party. I’m up for it if she is. I could supply the Ikea fairy lights, she could be in charge of going-home bags containing £30,000-worth of spangly iPhones and a voucher for a knee-lift. She could call in a queen-sized chocolate sculpture of our auras, I could make sure everyone knew how to do the tricky lock on the loo. She could ask Disney to create a Frozen-themed sleepover for the children, I could see if my mum could sort out some pasta for them around six. She could get her husband to whip up the dancefloor, I could get my husband to mop it up later. A piñata in the shape of Kim’s body, a truncheon to hit it with in the shape of mine. The more I think about it the more I know it could work. It is becoming clear that the real tragedy of Covid is the fact that Kim and I have been unable to properly celebrate our ascent into middle age. Which means, of course, that all important birthdays must regretfully be postponed. I will not turn 40 until the vaccine is ready, and only then, when I finally receive the kall. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWiseman
16||Simone Lia: Scary films – cartoon
0||'What we do isn't rocket science': how Midtjylland started football's data revolutionThink of it as the Moneyball derby. Not so long ago, the idea a club could gain a vital edge using mathematical models – let alone employ a theoretical physicist or track key performance indicators (KPI) – would have left real football men choking on their meat pies and Bovril. But when Liverpool host Midtjylland in the Champions League on Tuesday, it will not only be a meeting between the champions of England and Denmark, but one between the twin vanguards of the sport’s analytics revolution. Midtjylland became the movement’s poster child in 2014 when they started using deeper metrics – such as expected goals and pre-assists to an assist – to better evaluate player performances, find undervalued bargains and to shatter myths and easy narratives. Many sneered when the unfashionable club from the centre of the Danish mainland – literally the middle of Jutland – also hired dedicated ball-striking and throw-in coaches and when their chairman, Rasmus Ankersen, promised to exploit inefficiencies in football. Winning three Danish Superliga titles in six years and qualifying for the Champions League for the first time this autumn have proved an effective riposte. More recently, Liverpool have become Midtjylland’s big-budget half-brother. Their highly regarded research department, which includes an analyst with a doctorate in high-energy physics from Harvard, has earned significant credit for its recruitment of a string of top-quality players. The bonds between the teams go further still, however. Two years ago, Jürgen Klopp headhunted Midtjylland’s throwing coach, Thomas Grønnemark. Since then, Liverpool’s statistics for retaining possession from throw-ins under pressure has shot up from 45.4% to 68.4% – taking them from one of the worst in the Premier League to the second-best in Europe. The team ahead of them? Midtjylland. “We also scored a lot of goals on long throws, then he went to Liverpool,” says Ankersen. Midtjylland were thrashed 4-0 at home to Atalanta in their opening Champions League game and the bookies make them huge underdogs against Liverpool. But if they have a chance of making their hosts uncomfortable, it will probably come at set pieces, where they consistently ranked among the most successful teams in Europe. It is the result – the club’s amiable captain, Erik Sviatchenko, explains – of analysts scrutinising thousands of free-kicks and corners and distilling them into an American football-style set-piece playbook of 20-25 routines. “Other clubs do this,” he says. “But when you see the data, 49% of all our goals last season were scored on set pieces. They are something our club and our owner, Matthew Benham, sees as a clear point for winning or changing games.” Benham is the key figure in the Midtjylland story. Since taking a controlling stake in 2014 – two years after he did so in England at Brentford – he has used similar methods and models to those that helped him win millions as a professional gambler. His company, Smartodds, which analyses matches and players in dozens of leagues around the world, is also used by the club. It all amounts, says Ankersen, to a different way of thinking. “A professional gambler seeks an edge over the market. He is not getting it right all the time. He’s looking for value. However, in football there are a lot of emotional mechanics that lead to people not making rational decisions – that sets them back.” Ankersen says data is key because it helps Midtjylland get closer to the truth. “In football the stories we tell ourselves are often wrong,” he says. “Look what happens when a team goes through a bad set of results. The fans and the media search for a narrative to explain it. It’s the same when a team does well. “Last season, for instance, we won the league by 14 points. People were saying we were doing fantastically well. But when you looked at the underlying data, we didn’t actually improve. Our closest competitors got worse. And once you’ve seen regression to the mean, again and again, you build up a big belief that this is the right way of doing things.” The club even have a league table that shows where each team would be in the standings based on its underlying numbers, calculated by Benham’s team at Smartodds. “Even if I were allowed, I couldn’t tell you the precise algorithm involved,” says the head performance analyst, Søren Bjerg. “But expected goals is in there, as well as how opponents have been doing and whether a team has changed its coach and so on. There are a lot of variables.” These days almost every club has an analytics department. So how does a club stay ahead in a world where expected goals is now on Match of the Day and the easiest analytical advantages have already been exploited? Ankersen, understandably, does not want to give every secret away. But he says there are still inefficiencies – if a club knows where to find them. “The Brazilian transfer market is really chaotic, for instance,” he says. “The value of a player can change by a few hundred percent over a couple of months. It’s a highly irrational and emotional market. If you can pick up players when they are on a low, there’s a lot of value.” The signings of Paulinho, “an outstanding left back”, as well as Evander, who “on his day is the best player in the Danish league” after he lost his way at Vasco De Gama, shows Midtjylland practice what they preach. Ankersen also believes that some clubs are still doing “simple things” wrong, like taking too many shots from locations where the probability of scoring is too low - and points to the growth of three-point shooting in basketball as an example of a sport that’s become more efficient. Meanwhile Sviatchenko says another edge comes through using sports psychologist BS Christiansen, a former elite soldier from the Danish Huntsmen Corps, who is “especially good when we need to get together and talk through things”. “I don’t think a lot of what we do is rocket science,” says Ankersen. “But where we may be ahead still is that this is driven from the top. It’s not two interns in the basement working with data. The belief system comes from Matthew, from me and it filters down.” Ankersen says one KPI coaches have been given this season is to increase the team’s Smartodds rating up by 0.5 goals. “So between us we are asking: ‘Where’s that improvement going to come from? Is it going to come from set pieces? Where are the low-hanging fruits defensively and offensively? In which phases of the game?’” A knock-on effect is that Midtjylland keep chasing a second and third goal when they are 1-0 up, says Bjerg. Is that because your experts have worked out it is better not to sit on a lead? “Exactly,” he says. “But it also suits our style of play. Our mindset isn’t to sit back. The whole club DNA is about achieving things rather than protecting the stuff you have already got.” Those watching on Tuesday will see Midtjylland play a 4-2-3-1 formation and like to press – much like Liverpool. “We also have a little bit of X-Factor on our day, especially with Pione Sisto and Evander,” says Ankersen. Four years ago, Sisto was also a scorer when Midtjylland stunned Manchester United in the first leg of a Europa League last-32 tie. Toppling Liverpool, Ankersen says, would be another level again, but he is not entirely ruling it out. “It’s going to be very difficult,” he says. “We will need to play to our best, and have a bit of luck. But bigger miracles have happened in football.”
12||John Gray: 'What can we learn from cats? Don't live in an imagined future'What’s it like to be a cat? John Gray has spent a lifetime half-wondering. The philosopher – to his many fans the intellectual cat’s pyjamas, to his critics the least palatable of furballs – has had feline companions at home since he was a boy in South Shields. In adult life – he now lives in Bath with his wife Mieko, a dealer in Japanese antiquities – this has principally been two pairs of cats: “Two Burmese sisters, Sophie and Sarah, and two Birman brothers, Jamie and Julian.” The last of them, Julian, died earlier this year, aged 23. Gray, currently catless, is by no means a sentimental writer, but his new book, Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life, is written in memory of their shared wisdom. Other philosophers have been enthralled by cats over the years. There was Schrödinger and his box, of course. And Michel de Montaigne, who famously asked: “When I am playing with my cat, how do I know she is not playing with me?” The rationalist René Descartes, Gray notes, once “hurled a cat out of the window in order to demonstrate the absence of conscious awareness in non-human animals; its terrified screams were mechanical reactions, he concluded.” One impulse for this book was a conversation with a fellow philosopher, who assured Gray that he “had taught his cat to be vegan”. (Gray had only one question: “Did the cat ever go out?” It did.) When he informed another philosopher that he was writing about what we can learn from cats, that man replied: “But cats have no history.” “And,” Gray wondered, “is that necessarily a disadvantage?” Elsewhere, Gray has written how Ludwig Wittgenstein once observed “if lions could talk we would not understand”, to which the zookeeper John Aspinall responded: “He hasn’t spent long enough with lions.” If cats could talk, I ask Gray, do you think we would understand? “Well, the book is in some ways an experiment in that respect,” he says. “Of course, it’s not a scientific inquiry. But if you live with a cat very closely for a long time – and it takes a long time, because they’re slow to trust, slow to really enter into communication with you – then you can probably imagine how they might philosophise.” Gray believes that humans turned to philosophy principally out of anxiety, looking for some tranquillity in a chaotic and frightening world, telling themselves stories that might provide the illusion of calm. Cats, he suggests, wouldn’t recognise that need because they naturally revert to equilibrium whenever they’re not hungry or threatened. If cats were to give advice, it would be for their own amusement. Readers of Gray will recognise this book as a postscript or coda to Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Other Animals, the 2002 bestseller in which he elegantly dismantled the history of western philosophy – with its illusory faith in our species living somehow “above” evolving life and outside the constraints of nature. That book aimed its fire particularly at the prevailing belief of our time: that of the inevitably steady forward progress of humankind brought about by liberal democracy. When the book came out, as George W Bush was demanding “regime change” in Iraq, it struck a particular nerve. In the two decades since, its argument that the advance of rational enlightened thought might not offer any kind of lasting protection against baser tribal instincts or environmental destruction or human folly has felt like prophecy. Gray never bought the idea that his book was a handbook for despair. His subject was humility; his target any ideology that believed it possessed anything more than doubtful and piecemeal answers to vast and changing questions. The cat book is written in that spirit. If like me you read with a pencil to hand, you will be underlining constantly with a mix of purring enjoyment and frequent exclamation marks. “Consciousness has been overrated,” Gray will write, coolly. Or “the flaw in rationalism is the belief that human beings can live by applying a theory”. Or “human beings quickly lose their humanity but cats never stop being cats”. He concludes with a 10-point list of how cats might give their anxious, unhappy, self-conscious human companions hints “to live less awkwardly”. These range from “never try to persuade human beings to be reasonable”, to “do not look for meaning in your suffering” to “sleep for the joy of sleeping”. Does he see that 10-point plan, offered half in earnest (“as a cat would offer it”) as an answer to those people who criticised Straw Dogs for offering little in place of what it debunked? “Yes, yes,” Gray says, in his engaged and friendly voice, that still carries a north-east inflection (he chose the theme of When the Boat Comes In as one of his desert island discs). “Many people didn’t like Straw Dogs. The criticism was that I swept the board of philosophy and left nothing standing. I should say that I got some wonderful responses from people who weren’t philosophers. For example, three over the years, from war correspondents who said that adapting to what they’d witnessed, the trauma, had been one of the great struggles of their lives. And somehow my book helped them.” It helped them because it removed the pressure to make terrible and tragic things meaningful? “Exactly. I would say that a lot of torment in our lives comes from that pressure for finding meaning. Unless you adopt a transcendental faith which imagines a wholly other world where meaning is secure from any accident, most of the things that happen to us are pure chance. We struggle with the idea that there is no hidden meaning to find. We can’t become cats in that sense – we probably will need to always have the disposition to tell ourselves stories about our lives – but I would suggest a library of short stories is better than a novel.” In these three-tiered times our original plan for this interview was to meet and sit outside a cafe in Bath – Gray, 72, is wary of inside – but the forecast suggested we’d have got soaked, so we have retreated, catlike, indoors, and to Zoom. In some ways, I suggest, Gray’s is the perfect book for the estranging oddness of the pandemic. How has he coped? “I’ve tried to emulate what I recall of my wonderful cat Julian,” he says. “Which is, not to live in an imagined future. We simply don’t know how this is going to develop. And of course, the political response in most places, and certainly here, has been shambolic. But that inability to come up with a clear response reflects, I think, something deep: that even the most well-developed systems of knowledge always leave an enormous amount of uncertainty.” Alarm bells must have gone off for Gray when Dominic Cummings started promoting the powers of “super-forecasting”, while the government appeared unable to predict what was likely to happen the following day? “Yes, they did. I think “super-forecasting” is possible only in a very few limited fields. Hardly anyone has forecasted the biggest events in my lifetime. And, more importantly, most of the really big events were not considered even to be within the range of reasonable possibilities. I remember back in the early 2000s, asking various economists and bigwigs if there could be a global banking crisis and the idea was universally dismissed. Only one even said: ‘I don’t think so, but you never know.’” If we are hopeless at imagining the future, we are, I suggest, brilliant at recasting the suddenly weird present to make it seem normal? “That has happened, although I think it’s partly on the assumption that many people still have that there will be a ‘normal’ to go back to. I don’t think that’s at all plausible. I think some of the changes that have occurred in the course of this six months might usually take six years or 60 years. Some of these may prove benign in a rich country, which Britain still is, but not so much for the more marginal populations in Brazil or India, say.” Take HS2, Gray suggests. “Always a mistake for cost and environmental reasons, but now it’s surreal, because huge numbers are never going to travel for work again, not in the way that they did. There is kind of a lag built into politics – in which adapting to a radically changed circumstance is easier to do in practice for individuals than for governments.” Cats, he says, returning to our theme, don’t have stories to which they get deeply attached. “Of course, you may say that’s because they haven’t got the intellectual capacity, but I think it’s just as likely they’re not interested.” That lack of interest in holding on to particular stories has led Gray over the years to some curious places politically. He grew up in a strong old Labour house on Tyneside, where his father worked on the docks as a carpenter and his mother kept the home. Witnessing that close community being broken up in the 1960s – Victorian streets bulldozed, and residents moved into brutal “utopian” housing schemes built under the criminal Labour council leader T Dan Smith – gave Gray a lasting distrust of all grandiose projects selling the idea of progress. He has formed the belief since then that “politics is a succession of temporary and partial remedies for permanent and recurring human evil”. His two central intellectual friendships were with the Oxford philosopher Isaiah Berlin, whose family had fled Soviet Russia, and with the novelist JG Ballard, who spent his childhood in a Japanese prison facility. Both helped to convince Gray that any political movement that believed it possessed a monopoly of wisdom, had gulags or concentration camps priced in. (In his most famous provocation, aping Jonathan Swift, Gray wrote a satirical “modest proposal” that called for the urgent reintroduction of torture to protect human rights in western democracies; Abu Ghraib and extraordinary rendition quickly followed.) Gray has consistently voted flexibly, for what he sees as the lesser of two political evils at any political moment. “Had I been around, I would have strongly supported the Attlee government in 1945,” he says, but by the 1970s, he believed that postwar Labour settlement had become unwieldy and corrupt. Setting himself against most of the university academy, he supported Thatcher as a necessary corrective in British political history. “But then it turned into another ‘universal project’, certainly by 1989. And I would say I started jumping off in about 1987.” He was in favour of New Labour for a while, before abandoning the idea of that project for the same reasons. In the last election he voted Conservative, persuaded in part, he says, by that need to get Brexit done, and laughing now at the delusional hypocrisy of “democrats”, who wanted a second referendum “without the option that people had voted for the first time even on the paper!” That was never going to end well, in his eyes – and neither too was the European Union itself, with its grand schemes and projects. “I was interviewed in the early 90s, by a Polish newspaper,” Gray says. “They asked, ‘What do you think will come after the new [Thatcherite] right that had emerged after the fall of communism in eastern Europe?’ And I said, ‘Probably the old right’. The idea of a Europe-wide economic space was from day one a very capitalist project. And given that communism had imploded, where was the backlash against the European Union going to come from? It would have to come from the right – and that is what has happened.” Gray predicted the election victory of Trump in 2016 for something like the same reasons – “the feeling of abandonment, and disrespect in large parts of the working population” had to go somewhere – and suggests that even in the event of a Biden victory next month, those forces will not be silenced. Human beings, particularly in extremis, should never be expected to make rational choices. “As Bertrand Russell pointed out, the first world war, when it started, was welcomed largely as an interruption of boredom.” Cats don’t appear to get bored, because in Gray’s terms it would never occur to them to struggle to be happy. Humans, on the other hand, “are self-divided creatures whose lives are mostly spent on displacement activity”. Much of this displacement activity is a product of that other disabling difference to their feline companions, the certain knowledge of death. Gray is, typically, both irreligious and anti-atheist, reserving genial contempt for the likes of Richard Dawkins, and their censorious belief “that religion can be simply erased”. Gray believes that our innate need to explain mortality and suffering with imagination and myth is far too fundamental. “I don’t have an idea of God or anything but I find the idea that you could wipe the slate clean of that impulse to be ridiculous. I once met in America a Christian fundamentalist, who told me in all seriousness that if young people were brought up in a completely chaste environment, they wouldn’t experience sexual urges until they got married.” He laughs loudly. “That’s exactly what Dawkins thinks about religion. Myth-making has been a part of every single human culture in history, why would we imagine that it is disappearing from our own?” Gray writes with great amusement in this book and elsewhere of the stubborn gap between philosophers’ higher ideals and the more animal instincts of their lives, but he genially resists any autobiographical reading of his own life or thinking. He has a few catch-all defences to more personal questions – “I tend to think my life is not that interesting,” and so on. (To which one’s cynical instinct is to think: “The philosopher does not reflect much on his own life? Yeah, right.”) I ask him at one point if he thinks that being childless has had any bearing on his thinking, but he shuts down that line of inquiry, with his only vaguely curt reply in two hours of wide-ranging cat chat: “I tend not to talk about that aspect of my life.” I wonder if he chose to live in Bath for the same reasons he suggests Schopenhauer chose to live in Frankfurt for the last decades of his life: “no floods, better cafes and good dentists”? He laughs. “Well the dentists seem pretty good.” He came to Bath after leaving academic life – having been a professor of politics at Oxford, he was for a decade professor of European thought at the London School of Economics – to become “a freelance writer”. “I was looking for a walking city,” he says. “And I like the fact here that if you look up you can see trees.” The liberation from academia has given him more liberty, he suggests, to write exactly as he pleases, cat-like. “If you’re an academic, before you say anything at all, you have to give about 20 caveats,” he says. “And when I was a professional academic, I used to do that. But now I take a different view. I just say I’m just putting this out for you to consider. Don’t throw it away – or if you do at least give it to Oxfam.” He loves the lightness of those writers who construct fabulous thought-experiments, Montaigne, Borges. “The English-speaking world associates aphorism with arrogance,” he says. “But I’m not sure other ways of writing are more likely to change minds. I don’t want followers. I don’t even expect many people to understand what I say. The whole point of the voice I have in the books is to trigger a process of thought in some readers whose outcome is uncertain.” And what does he say to those critics who argue that his writing dwells on the reductive, brutish side of humanity, as opposed to its great collective achievements? “If you think, as I do, that civilised life is like a spider’s web, easy to destroy, but hard to construct, then what I write is perhaps a caution, a warning. I’m anti-hubris.” In the last sentence of Straw Dogs, Gray asked a question, almost plaintively: “Can we not think of the aim of life as being simply to see?” Has writing the current book helped him to understand what such a life of experience might look like? “Cats live for the sensation of life, not for something they might achieve or not achieve,” he says. “If we attach ourselves too heavily to some overarching purpose we’re losing the joy of life. Leave all those ideologies and religions to one side and what’s left? What’s left is a sensation of life – which is a wonderful thing.” Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life is published by Allen Lane on 29 October (£20). To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
17||Chilling find shows how Henry VIII planned every detail of Boleyn beheadingIt is a Tudor warrant book, one of many in the National Archives, filled with bureaucratic minutiae relating to 16th-century crimes. But this one has an extraordinary passage, overlooked until now, which bears instructions from Henry VIII explaining precisely how he wanted his second wife, Anne Boleyn, to be executed. In this document, the king stipulated that, although his queen had been “adjudged to death… by burning of fire… or decapitation”, he had been “moved by pity” to spare her the more painful death of being “burned by fire”. But he continued: “We, however, command that… the head of the same Anne shall be… cut off.” Tracy Borman, a leading Tudor historian, described the warrant book as an astonishing discovery, reinforcing the image of Henry VIII as a “pathological monster”. She told the Observer: “As a previously unknown document about one of the most famous events in history, it really is golddust, one of the most exciting finds in recent years. What it shows is Henry’s premeditated, calculating manner. He knows exactly how and where he wants it to happen.” The instructions laid out by Henry are for Sir William Kingston, constable of the Tower, detailing how the king would rid himself of the “late queen of England, lately our wife, lately attainted and convicted of high treason”. Boleyn was incarcerated in the Tower of London on 2 May 1536 for adultery. At her trial, she was depicted as unable to control her “carnal lusts”. She refuted the charges but was found guilty of treason and condemned to be burned or beheaded at “the King’s pleasure”. Most historians agree the charges were bogus – her only crime had been her failure to give Henry a son. The most famous king in English history married six times in his relentless quest for a male heir. He divorced his first wife, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Boleyn – the marriage led him to break with the Catholic church and brought about the English Reformation. Boleyn did bear him a daughter, who became Elizabeth I. In recent years, the story of Boleyn’s life and death have reached a new audience thanks to Hilary Mantel’s bestselling saga tracing the life of Thomas Cromwell, a blacksmith’s son who became one of Henry VIII’s most trusted advisers. In the Booker-prize-winning Bring Up the Bodies, she explored the destruction of Boleyn, writing of her execution: “Three years ago when she went to be crowned, she walked on a blue cloth that stretched the length of the abbey… Now she must shift over the rough ground… with her body hollow and light and just as many hands around her, ready to retrieve her from any stumble and deliver her safely to death.” The warrant book reveals that Henry worked out details such as the exact spot for the execution (“upon the Green within our Tower of London”), making clear Kingston should “omit nothing” from his orders. Borman is joint chief curator for Historic Royal Palaces, the charity that manages the Tower of London, among other sites. She will include the discovery in her forthcoming Channel 5 series, The Fall of Anne Boleyn, which begins in December. She had visited the National Archives to study the Anne Boleyn trial papers when archivist Sean Cunningham, a Tudor expert, drew her attention to a passage he had discovered in a warrant book. Most of these warrants are “just the minutiae of Tudor government”, she said. “They’re pretty dull. The Tudors were great bureaucrats, and there are an awful lot of these warrant books and account books within the National Archives… It’s thanks to Sean’s eye for detail that it was uncovered.” Borman argues that, despite the coldness of the instructions, the fact Henry spared Boleyn from being burned – a slow, agonising death – was a real kindness by the standards of the day. A beheading with an axe could also involve several blows, and Henry had specified that Boleyn’s head should be “cut off’, which meant by sword, a more reliable form of execution, but not used in England, which is why he had Cromwell send to Calais for a swordsman. Henry’s instructions were not followed to the letter, though, partly due to a series of blunders, Borman said. “The execution didn’t take place on Tower Green, which is actually where we still mark it at the Tower today. More recent research has proved that… it was moved to opposite what is today the Waterloo Block, home of the crown jewels.” She added: “Because we know the story so well, we forget how deeply shocking it was to execute a queen. They could well have got the collywobbles and thought we’re not going to do this. So this is Henry making really sure of it. For years, his trusty adviser Thomas Cromwell has got the blame. But this shows, actually, it’s Henry pulling the strings.”
19||Summer of 85 review – François Ozon's bittersweet teen romanceThis latest from François Ozon, director of such wildly diverse offerings as Sitcom, Under the Sand, 8 Women and The New Girlfriend is a bittersweet saga of love and death, a coming-of-age tale based on Aidan Chambers’s 1982 novel Dance on My Grave. Shifting the setting from Southend-on-Sea to Le Tréport in 1985, it centres on Alex (Félix Lefebvre), a death-obsessed teen in the throes of doomed first love, whose morbidly romantic story plays out with the sensual artfulness of classic Ozon, combined with the accessible vigour of an 80s American teen pic. We first meet David (Benjamin Voisin) at sea, a beautiful vision riding the waves to rescue the hapless Alex after his little boat capsizes. David takes Alex home to his widowed mum, played with nervy energy by Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, who undresses and bathes the new arrival (“All David’s capsized friends go in the tub!”) and tells Alex that “my David needs a real friend”. Yet with his flick-knife comb and razor-cut smile, David is clearly much more than a friend, taking Alex’s breath away as he weaves through oncoming traffic on his motorbike, chasing an elusive moment of speeding ecstasy that is always just out of reach, like the green light in The Great Gatsby. All this thrilling young love unfolds in flashback, intercut with later scenes in which an apparently traumatised Alex faces questions about a terrible event for which he is being held accountable. Is Alex somehow responsible for the dreadful fate awaiting David? The only person able to reach Alex is Mr Lefèvre (Melvil Poupaud), the caring but slightly creepy teacher who tells him to try to write about what happened, seemingly prompting the self-questioning memoir narrative. Ozon first read Chambers’s novel as a teenager and his adaptation blends the prickly joy of that first encounter with the stylistic confidence of a film-maker revisiting an old flame. Gorgeously shot on super-16 by cinematographer Hichame Alaouie, this has the tangible texture of its retro setting, filtered through a nostalgic lens that seems to supersaturate the image, amplifying emotions. Pop music plays a key role, with the Cure’s In Between Days bookending jukebox selections that trip from the melancholia of Bananarama’s Cruel Summer to the jump-around sounds of Movie Music’s Stars De La Pub. In one key scene, recalling a memorable moment from the 1980 film La boum, Alex finds himself in a nightclub, swaying slowly to the headphone sounds of Rod Stewart’s Sailing while those around him (including David) cavort to more frenetic disco beats. But whereas in La boum, Richard Sanderson’s Reality created a momentary bubble of intimacy for Sophie Marceau and Alexandre Sterling’s characters, here Alex is alone is his reverie, highlighting not only the differing paths that he and David are on, but also the sense that this “friend of my dreams” may be just that – an invention, a projection, reminding us that we do indeed live as we dream, alone. Well-observed background details add weight to the story, from David’s Jewish heritage and suppressed bereavement about his father to the subtly sympathetic figures of Alex’s parents, who seem to understand more than he imagines. There’s also a strong thread of black comedy, not least in a cross-dressing sequence that somehow manages to intertwine agonising anguish with near-slapstick absurdity – just one example of the tonal balancing act that Ozon so deftly maintains.
2||Who in Europe is getting it right on Covid?A second coronavirus wave is sweeping continental Europe, with new infection records broken daily in many countries. There are wide variations, but almost no country has been left untouched – even those that fared well in the first wave. Across the 31 countries from which the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control collects national data, the average 14-day case incidence rate per 100,000 inhabitants has multiplied from just 13 in mid-July to almost 250 last week. While hospitalisations, ICU admissions and deaths are not so far following the same steep upward curve and generally remain far below levels this spring, they are rising steadily – and already causing severe problems for health services in some countries. France reported more than 40,000 new cases on two days this week, bringing its 14-day incidence rate to 521. Strict measures including a 9pm-6am curfew now cover two-thirds of the population. Germany, whose infection rate was far lower than most EU countries this spring, is also seeing new daily cases surge alarmingly: from 5,250 a day to 13,500 this week for an incidence rate of 319 – a “very serious” rise, a senior official warned. Spain, one of the worst affected during the first wave, is again facing crisis, becoming the first western European country to pass 1 million cases this week after recording 20,000 new infections on two consecutive days. Italy, another country hit hard this spring, hit a new case record on Friday with 19,000 infections amid fears the pandemic is again spiralling out of control. With a 14-day incidence rate of 240 per 100,000, the situation is “dramatic”. The epidemic in Belgium, which suffered one of Europe’s highest per-capita death tolls this spring, is “out of control” and “the most dangerous in Europe”, the health minister has said, with a 14-day incidence rate of a startling 1,115. The Czech Republic, lauded as a first wave success with infection rates among the lowest on the continent, is now among the highest with an even higher incidence rate of 1,210. Like Belgium, it seems headed for a new lockdown. Sweden, an international outlier with its anti-lockdown strategy, has introduced mandatory regional measures to combat a sudden surge that last week saw the number of new daily infections exceed 1,000 from barely 150 in early September. Finland, with one of Europe’s lowest infection and death rates first time round, is one of few EU countries to be fighting this second wave effectively. Tough regional measures have reversed a surge in new cases over the past week, leaving the country’s 14-day incidence rate at 52 per 100,000 inhabitants.
3||Whether Trump or Biden wins, US-China relations look set to worsenTies between China and the US have reached their lowest point in decades ahead of the election in November, signalling what experts in both countries believe is the clear direction for one of the most important bilateral relationships in the world. Under the Trump administration, the US has put sanctions on Chinese officials over human rights issues in Xinjiang and Hong Kong while also increasing engagement with Taiwan, including arms sales. A trade deal to end a protracted tariff war has stalled and the US has placed more restrictions on Chinese state media. Biden, who in a presidential debate referred to the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, as one of several “thugs” Trump has cosied up to, has also promised to take a strong stance against China. “The China-US relationship will not go back to where it was before,” said Cheng Xiaohe, an associate professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing. “The relationship is so bad.” It is a view shared in the US. “Regardless of who wins the US presidential election, we should expect to see increasing US-China tensions across a broad range of economic, political, geo-strategic, human rights and people-to people issues for the years to come,” said Wendy Cutler, former acting deputy at the Office of the US Trade Representative, focusing on Asia. Hong Kong and Taiwan are particular flash points. In response to Beijing imposing a controversial national security law in Hong Kong, the Trump administration placed sanctions on officials connected to the crackdown, downgraded the city’s special customs status and warned financial institutions against conducting “significant” transactions with anyone deemed to have undermined Hong Kong’s autonomy. In Taiwan the US has sent high-level government visitors, drawing recrimination from Beijing, increased military exercises in the region and launched a new economic dialogue with Taipei. There have been calls for the US to end its policy of “strategic ambiguity”, a way of discouraging both Beijing and Taipei from making a military move by refusing to say if the US would come to Taiwan’s aid. “The mutual distrust has never been higher,” said Bonnie Glaser, director of the China Power Project at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies. “I think many in China think the US has basically abandoned its one-China policy,” she said, referring to Beijing’s view that Taiwan is part of China. While tensions will persist under a Biden administration, the key difference, observers expect, will be in approach. Biden has pledged to work with allies to pressure China through the multilateral organisations that Trump has eschewed. Analysts expect the Democratic candidate, if elected, to work with China on issues such as climate change and response to the pandemic. “We need to be having the rest of our friends with us, saying to China: ‘We play by the rules. You play by them or you are going to pay the price for not playing by them, economically’,” Biden said in Thursday’s debate against Trump. In contrast, Trump is expected to continue a more confrontational, unilateral strategy that is likely to raise tensions. While Trump’s approach is likely to place more immediate pressure on China, Biden’s is seen by others as more predictable and comprehensive. A second term for Trump heralds unpredictability in a number of ways. During the initial years of his presidency, Trump spoke admiringly of Xi and was seen by experts in China as “a businessman ready to make deals and not focused on human rights,” according to Jacques deLisle, director of the Center for the Study of Contemporary China at the University of Pennsylvania. A trade deal, previously seen as his top priority in relation to China, could take precedent over human rights. Last year Trump described pro-democracy protests as “riots”. According to his former national security adviser John Bolton, Trump told Xi to “go ahead building the camps” in Xinjiang, describing the mass internment campaign as “exactly the right thing to do”. Some optimists in China believe another four years of Trump would give both countries time to negotiate a trade deal. Still, others believe there is potential for ties to dramatically worsen. “The current situation couldn’t be any worse. If it does get worse, military conflict is near,” said Cheng. Beijing has so far responded to the Trump administration’s various moves with reciprocal measures that limit escalating tensions. Four more years of Trump coinciding with an increasingly aggressive Chinese leadership could end that restraint. “It is possible that China has been gritting its teeth and not reacting to Trump provocations during what may be the final months of the administration. With a reelection, all bets would be off on that front,” said deLisle. For hawks in China another term for Trump is ideal. In China, state media have portrayed the pandemic in the US, Black Lives Matter protests and the chaos of the first presidential debate as yet more examples of the failing American democratic experiment. “While China is worried about Trump’s aggressiveness over the short-term, it also believes that over the long-term he is accelerating American decline,” said Rush Doshi, director of the Brookings China Strategy Initiative. Few in China however saw much difference between the two candidates as they met for their final debate. Under a clip posted on Weibo, one commentator observed: “These two should be enjoying their twilight years, not exposing their flaws in public.” Another wrote: “US comedians have taken the stage.” As that debate got underway, Xi gave a lengthy speech to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the war to “resist US aggression and aid Korea” between 1950 and 1953. Speaking in the Great Hall of the People, Xi said Chinese people had learned to “speak to invaders in a language they understand.” He declared: “The Chinese people will not create trouble but nor are we afraid of them, and no matter the difficulties or challenges we face, our legs will not shake and our backs will not bend.” Additional reporting by Helen Davidson and Lillian Yang.
5||The north-south divide is as old as England itself. Unity is only ever fleetingDivide England? Who could seriously propose that? With all that mighty history behind us? Well, it didn’t seem crazy to Winston Churchill in 1912. He said that if we wanted to preserve the UK we “would have to face the task of dividing England into several great self-governing areas”. Southern England was just too Tory – and too big. Churchill saw that in the democratic era an England dominated by this Tory south could not coexist with the Celts. If anyone thinks he was wrong, just look at what has happened over the past year. By the autumn of 2019, clear majorities of Conservative voters were ready to jettison the UK, and even the Conservative party itself, in pursuit of Brexit. Our very modern, music-hall merry monarch, Boris Johnson, and his tacticians saw the way the wind was blowing. A purged Conservative and Unionist party became the English National party in all but name. Nationalism did what nationalism does, persuading people whose lives are very different that they have mysterious interests in common and many northerners were persuaded to vote, often for the first time, the same way as southerners. It looked like an epochal triumph, but the Tories were forgetting the monster from the English id. Scarcely 10 months after Johnson was enshrined, scientific discussions about how best to fight a pandemic somehow mutated into a political north-south battle. It is as if English history is on autopilot. For this cry has assailed southern leaders from the death of Athelstan (the first Englishman to rule all of England) in 939AD. The struggle adopted many ethnic/religious/political masks, starting with part-Scandinavian northerners v would-be southern rulers. It was this split that in 1066 doomed England to conquest. For three centuries, a French-speaking elite gave England a faux unity, but as they anglicised, the old divide reopened, climaxing in the apocalyptic north v south bloodshed of Towton in 1461. The north became the fortress of Catholicism in the Pilgrimage of Grace (1536) and the Northern Rebellion (1569). Even the civil war had a north-south element. So is geography fate? It looks like it, in England. Or, more accurately, a unique conspiracy of geography and geology. We are divided by the faultline between the rich lands of the south and the rugged, igneous uplands beyond the Trent. By coincidence, the naturally better farmland also has a kinder climate for agriculture and is closer to the great markets and new ideas of the continent: the entire set-up of England conspires in favour of the south. The Venerable Bede, himself a northerner, thought it worthwhile mentioning nine times in his History that the English are divided into northerners and southerners. By high medieval times, the Trent had become thoroughly fixed as the border. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the chivalric heralds of England and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge both used it as an official demarcation. When Daniel Defoe wrote the first guidebook to the brand-new Great Britain in 1727, he compared crossing the Trent to crossing the Rubicon and simply lumped everything “North by Trent” together. This, not the old border between England and Scotland, was what mattered in the new state. The Industrial Revolution could have changed everything: for once, geology, principally, King Coal, was on the side of the north. By 1848, its latest cultural-political expression, the Chartist movement, was ready to mount a challenge to the south and (with the delighted support of Karl Marx) even to try setting up an alternative parliament in Manchester, in 1854. The southern English elite responded with their signature masterstroke: new blood was allowed in on strictly controlled terms through a great new wave of Anglican public schools. Northern thinkers were soon complaining that, as one MP put it in 1897, English manufacturers should “do as the Germans do and bring their sons up to be better manufacturers than themselves, instead of bringing them up to be gentlemen who do nothing but hunt and shoot”. But the cultural pull of the south was too strong and, by 1900, the industrial north was falling off the international pace while the gentleman capitalists of the south played development bankers to the world. How could something so deep and powerful have gone unnoticed by so many English people today, if asked, would probably say that the north-south divide started in the 1980s? Well, that is what happens when something is right in front of our noses, be it in politics or relationships: we can focus it out precisely because it is so close, until, one day, something changes and there it is, waiting where it has always been. It’s back in focus now and it’s not going away. We are all essentially “valence voters”, who will generally go for politicians who, in some nebulous way, we feel to be like us. When George Orwell went north researching The Road to Wigan Pier, he found that the yawning class divide between him (Eton and Oxford) and a sharp-nosed, dark-haired little cockney melted away in face of the cultural otherness of the northerners: “He suddenly divined that I was a fellow-southerner. ‘The filthy bloody bastards!’ he said, feelingly.” That was why Peter Mandelson, in 1994, confident that he could rely on a desperate north to back almost anyone, saw that Tony Blair’s vague “southern appeal” was so vital. Keir Starmer (southern accent, Knight of the Bath, QC) is well placed to repeat that trick, but can anyone ever really appeal for long to both north and south in England? (Blair himself, lest we forget, was under heavy fire from the north by 1999.) Johnson thought he had cracked it, but that now seems risible. It may be time to recognise what voting maps show quite clearly: the English have always voted as much on tribal lines as any of the Celts. “We” are not a single people at all and never really have been. Or we can insist, against all the historical evidence, that we are one nation, a nation that, as Churchill saw in 1912, will almost always be ruled by the party of the south. •James Hawes’ latest book is The Shortest History of England. His novels include Speak For England
19||Dorset's art deco cinema jewel returns to its 1930s splendourIt was the year of the abdication crisis, the Jarrow marches, the Battle of Cable Street and the launch of the BBC’s television service. Beyond Britain’s shores, the world was edging closer to war. In Christchurch, then in Hampshire but now in Dorset, people were flocking to the Regent Centre in 1936 to watch movies such as Charlie Chaplin’s Modern Times and Mr Deeds Goes to Town, starring Gary Cooper. The Regent had been built five years earlier by a local entrepreneur at a cost of £25,000. In the middle of the decade, new owners gave it a plush makeover, featuring a deep rose, gold and silver colour scheme and art deco signage. The cinema thrived. But in 1973 the march of the Rank Organisation reached the south coast town, and the movie theatre became a Mecca bingo hall. Thankfully not for long: Christchurch council bought the property in 1983, and leased it to a charitable trust to run it as an independent. Now, as cinemas across the country are shutting their doors or curtailing their opening hours as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Regent is bucking the trend. Next month it will reopen after the completion of a £350,000 restoration project funded by the local community. “It is a bit of a gamble, to be honest,” Gary Trinder, chair of the trust and a cinema historian, told the Observer. “None of us knows quite what’s coming next. But people were desperate for us to reopen.” Trinder, who oversaw the 2009 restoration of the Grade II*-listed Plaza cinema in Stockport, had a clear vision for the Regent. “We wanted to recreate the way the cinema looked in the mid-1930s. Converting an idea into reality is always a bit worrying, but we’re extremely pleased with the result.” Fourteen different paint colours on the cinema’s walls – “a bit too vibrant, left over from the bingo days,” said Trinder – were replaced with a classic palette of deep rose with features picked out in gold, silver, black and dark brown. A bespoke carpet was ordered from a specialist firm, which consulted its historical files to create a pattern of silver leaves on a mulberry background. New seating, made to a traditional design and upholstered in deep red moquette, was supplied by another specialist company. “They look like period cinema seats, but they’re vastly more comfortable,” said Trinder. The restoration was planned long before Covid-19 disrupted the world. Funds had been raised by a £1 levy on ticket sales, donations and the sale of seat plaques. By the time the cinema closed at the start of lockdown, contractors had been appointed and orders placed with specialist suppliers. “We were committed by then,” said general manager Matthew Vass-White. “We’d planned for a five-week refurbishment. If there was a very slight silver lining to lockdown it was that it gave us more time to do the job.” The Regent had been riding the crest of a wave, with record-breaking years in 2018 and 2019. “Last year, we had 155,000 admissions and were named top independent cinema. We went into lockdown from a better position than some independents, but we can’t sustain zero income forever,” Vass-White said. When the cinema reopens on 12 November, with a screening of a Michael Ball and Alfie Boe performance that was cancelled during lockdown, a maximum of 170 seats out of 509 will be occupied because of Covid-19 restrictions. The cinema’s cafe – usually run by the trust’s 200 volunteers – will remain closed but people will be able to buy a drink from the bar. The pandemic means the cinema will be operating at a loss for the foreseeable future. “Reopening is a way of reducing our losses, rather than making money,” said Trinder. “Every person who comes through our doors helps. If we ever get back to break-even point, I’ll be absolutely delighted. “This is a critical moment for cinemas. Forty per cent of cinemas in this country are run by independent operators. Those with small reserves will be pushed under, but the big multiplexes will rebound.” He reserved particular fury for the distributors of the new James Bond film, No Time to Die, who pulled its release for the second time this month. “We were just about to show the Bond film when we closed in March. We were going to reopen with it in November. It would have been a shot in the arm for struggling cinemas.” As well as reducing its capacity by two-thirds, the Regent has invested £10,000 in Covid-19 compliance equipment and has doubled its cleaning operation. But Vass-White said he was constantly – and anxiously – awaiting further changes to Covid-19 regulations. “The future is unknown for all independent cinema operators. We have fantastic community support, so we’re hopeful. And at the moment, we’re all good to go.”
5||Carry On Coronavirus: why a vaccine trial has saucy potentialLove in a cold climate The news that the government is to fund “human challenge studies” into Covid-19, in which young, healthy volunteers will be infected with the safest possible dose and paid to be quarantined to test the efficacy of vaccines, was a reminder that this country has a unique history in such trials. The Common Cold Unit in Salisbury was set up just after the war at a former Red Cross hospital. By the time it closed in 1990, 20,000 people had taken up its offer to be dosed with cold and flu viruses and monitored for reactions. The camps were advertised as vacations: “How would you like a cheap and comfortable holiday, everything free and no expense, and even 35p a day pocket money?” one typical advert ran in 1974. “It’s true there’s a risk of catching a cold – but in a very good cause!” Much of what is known of the way coronaviruses are transmitted is a direct result of the unit’s scientific work. David Tyrrell, who ran it for 30 years, identified more than 100 strains of the common cold virus, which had been thought to be a single type of infection. Though a cure was never found, there were occasional beneficial side effects for those involved. Information given to new arrivals seemed keen to play up the Carry On potential, advising that “chatting up other volunteers in a different flat can only be by telephone or at a very long range outside”. Despite these restrictions, romances apparently blossomed; at least one viral couple returned to the cold clinic for their honeymoon. Roll of honour In the new British Library exhibition devoted to feminist protest, even the three-foot-long, sequin-encrusted tampon created by the artist Sam Dawood for the charity Bloody Good Period is upstaged by the prison poems of Sylvia Pankhurst. For nearly a century, it has remained a mystery how the suffragette managed to write a volume of poems and a five-act play in solitary confinement in Holloway with only a single slate and a piece of chalk. That mystery has been solved by her biographer, Rachel Holmes, who has catalogued and collated hundreds of perforated sheets of lavatory paper on which Pankhurst wrote with a blunted pencil. The sheets were hidden in the underwear of her prison uniform and passed to other prisoners on release. Subsequently, the papers, bundled in envelopes, travelled with Pankhurst to her final home in Ethiopia, before being archived by the British Library among a cache of her correspondence. Their preserved presence in the exhibition, Unfinished Business: The Fight for Women’s Rights, is not only testament to the extraordinary spirit and fortitude of the suffragette, but also to the disturbing resilience of rough, beige, HM prison-issue loo roll. Bard of Salford It may have been watching the political stand-off in Manchester, or the fact that I’d just booked optimistic tickets for the London leg of his tour next spring, but over the past week I’ve had some lines from John Cooper Clarke knocking around persistently in my head. It’s the refrain from his epic meditation on mortality that goes: “Things are going to get worse, nurse, things are going to get rotten…” Delivered with full Manc relish, I’ve found that the lines seem cheerfully suited to almost any current situation. Every cloud Overheard in a pub garden on Tuesday with Storm Barbara gathering: “In the circumstances, you’d think Rishi Sunak could stump up for some fookin’ gazebos…”
5||We French love our history teachers – Samuel Paty made us remember whySince that fateful morning of 7 January 2015, and the Charlie Hebdo massacre, it sometimes feels as if we French are living our lives between terrorist assaults, each as vile as the previous but each more poignant in its viciousness and symbolism. When we think this can’t get any worse, a new attack proves us wrong. In the past five years, Islamists in France have targeted and murdered journalists, cartoonists, policemen and women, soldiers, Jews, young people at a concert, football fans, families at a Bastille Day fireworks show, an 86-year-old priest celebrating mass in his little Normandy church, tourists at a Christmas market... the list goes on. Last week, a history teacher was beheaded while walking back home from his school, in the quiet town of Conflans-Sainte-Honorine, halfway between Paris and Giverny. The speed with which we learned the facts sharpened the blow, deepened our emotions and focused our minds. The teacher called Samuel Paty was murdered by an 18-year-old refugee of Chechen origin for having shown satirical cartoons, some of them caricatures of the prophet Muhammad, during a history lesson about freedom of speech and freedom of conscience. We tried to process the facts we were given. We had to read and hear the words several times; they just did not add up. In 2020, a history teacher had just been beheaded in France for teaching his pupils tolerance and the use of a critical mind? Worse was to come: his murder was the result of a campaign of hatred and misinformation led by a few bigoted parents and relayed on social networks by a well-known Salafist imam. Children could see the shock on adults’ faces, they could feel their seething anger. They asked what had happened, but how to tell them? We gritted our teeth, swallowed hard and gave them the news. And a country went to bed thinking about its history and its teachers. There are very few countries where the figure of the history teacher is more symbolic and powerful than in France. Since the Third Republic firmly took education from the hands of the church in the early 1880s and made it free, mandatory and secular, its peaceful infantry of teachers has been the bedrock of the French republic. Their task was clear: to spread the values of the Enlightenment to the remotest parts of France – in other words, to open young minds to the world around them in all its complexity. Young, devoted teachers were thus trained by the state not only to educate children but to root out superstition from the classroom. State schools became the places where the French entered as infants and left as citizens. The church was still free to teach children in its schools but those were closely monitored by the state and had to scrupulously follow the national curriculum. These first generations of teachers were nicknamed the “Black Hussars of the Republic” because they wore a black uniform during their training years and looked decidedly solemn in pictures. They had to. After all, everywhere they were posted, they had to gain ground opposite the local priest who continued to exert a powerful influence. Wholly dedicated to their civilising mission, those Black Hussars and their heirs, such as Samuel Paty, succeeded in emancipating minds. They did it with a heightened sense of duty and sacrifice. Thanks to them, religion was eventually relegated to the spiritual realm. They had successfully destroyed the church’s aspirations to weigh in on France’s political life and choices. Like many of my compatriots this past week, I have thought about what I owe my teachers and my history teachers in particular. I looked back with tenderness at their many quirks. One was always dressed in red or green, from head to toe. We thought he was either a communist or a green, only that he couldn’t quite make up his mind. There was another, called Pierre de Panafieu. I was 13 and, just as for Paty’s pupils, this was the year I learned about Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot and the French Revolution. Of all disciplines, history is the one telling us that the people of France have the power to change our destiny, whether we’re sons of peasants or daughters of the bourgeoisie. Powerful stuff for young minds. It was like being struck by lightning. I would go to his class with the elation of an explorer about to discover a continent. I remember where I sat, the colour of my fountain pen and the south-eastern light from the window. I remember every detail vividly, as you do when something momentous is taking place in your life. He was softly spoken, with a kind smile, a man of quiet passion and quick wit. And all the while he was, effortlessly, making us free thinkers and citizens. We just didn’t know it yet. A century after they helped tame religion’s interference in our public life, France’s teachers find themselves again at the vanguard of a new fight against obscurantism. They will need energy, courage and determination, just like the Black Hussars before them. They will also need the whole country behind them. That’s the least we can do, for we now know what we owe them: free thinking. •Agnès Poirier is a Paris-based political commentator, writer and critic
13||How TikTok is proving beauty is more than skin deepHe grew up on a cattle ranch in Arizona before moving to New York to work on a department store makeup counter. Now at just 24, despite having no formal dermatology qualifications, Hyram Yarbro is a skincare guru to millions worldwide. Yarbro is one of a new breed of superstar social media “skinfluencers” who have gained popularity during lockdown – especially on TikTok – and are changing what we buy and why. Lockdown affected grooming routines, with a shift to skincare from make-up and perfume. It will come as no surprise to anyone who’s tried to book a salon appointment since March that home-treatment sales are up, with teeth-whitening products up 180% and hair-dye sales six times higher than last year. But it also affected how we discover new products. “There was an uptick in people accessing social media,” says Samantha Dover, senior beauty and personal-care analyst at Mintel, “but the real impact was among existing social-media users, who spent more time on these platforms and visited them more frequently. This meant they were exposed to more grooming content.” Social media already has an established effect on product sales. “Half of beauty consumers look for reviews online, before making a purchase,” says lifestyle and skincare blogger Lesley Buckle, aka @freshlengths. “There’s also a lot of satisfying videos out there. Dramatic before-and-after visuals go viral.” But in 2020, one platform emerged as the winner: TikTok. “Facebook and YouTube are important for beauty brands, but TikTok users are the most likely to get grooming advice from social media,” says Dover. Influencer marketing firm Traackr found that TikTok users’ engagement with skincare videos has increased by more than 1,000% since last year. In March, Skincare by Hyram had 100,000 followers on TikTok. During lockdown that surpassed six million. “I feel gratitude for the connection I have with my followers on TikTok – I’m not able to replicate that on any other platform. Personally, however, the growth has felt surprisingly normal,” he says. Yarbro’s knowledge about skincare ingredients, and funny, honest reviews have impressed beauty brands and followers alike. In January 2019 he made $50 from affiliate sales. By July 2020, he’d made $265,000 from online ads, brand partnerships and affiliate links. What many of these biggest new names in skincare lack in formal qualifications, they make up for in enthusiasm and humour – and vast audiences across YouTube, Instagram and TikTok. Many skinfluencers are just about the fun of skincare such as Young-Seok Yuh – whose @yayayayoung TikTok account has gathered 1.2m followers since launching in March, and Vi Lai, who often talks about using skincare as a coping mechanism to deal with anxiety and depression. There are also qualified dermatologists such as Dr Dustin Portela, whose @208skindoc has just under 1m followers and aesthetic therapists such as Nayamka Roberts-Smith. Popularity on TikTok does seem to affect sales. CeraVe is a high street skincare brand for dry and problem skin that launched in the UK in 2018. But a 67% increase in influencer posts about CeraVe in 2020, according to influencer marketing firm Traackr, coincides with a run on sales. UK chemist Superdrug reported a 65% week on week increase in sales this summer and CeraVe sold out in the US. The Ordinary was a hit skincare brand long before TikTok, but skinfluencers have affected sales, says Nicola Kilne, co-founder and CEO of Deciem, The Ordinary’s parent company. “The TikTok audience is truly global in a way that we haven’t seen before,” she says. The brand is a skinfluencer favourite, and only started its own TikTok account in February. “Our first video had almost one million views – #TheOrdinary alone has 229.1 million views.” The Ordinary sold a bottle of its Niacinamide 10% + Zinc 1% – a serum for acne – every three seconds at the start of lockdown. Kilne thinks that time at home gave people more time to experiment. “I believe honesty has built our fan base,” says Kilne. “Word of mouth is important for us, but this wouldn’t work if we didn’t produce quality products.” Buckle agrees that quality is the key to the hit products of TikTok. “CeraVe’s mentioned by lots of influencers, but it’s successful because it’s affordable and the formulas are gentle. It’s exactly the sort of brand I reach for if my skin’s had a reaction.” The skinfluencers of TikTok are also hits because of their honesty. “Traditional marketing fails to establish trust,” says Yarbro, who now lives in Honolulu. “People gravitate towards online creators who have real, honest opinions. When a creator establishes trust with their audience, its reach exceeds any marketing budget or exposure strategy. People are drawn to people.”
1||NRLW grand final 2020: Brisbane Broncos beat Sydney Roosters – as it happenedHere is a match report if you’d like an easily digestible recount: And that concludes our live coverage this afternoon. We’ll be back (at another link) to take you through the men’s grand final. Broncos captain Ali Brigginshaw pays tribute to the Roosters, who she says set the standard in rounds one and two. She also thanks the referees, especially grand final referee Belinda Sharpe. McGregor, as the losing captain, makes an eloquent speech, beginning by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land and going on to congratulate Brisbane for “setting the standard for the last three years”. “My Roosters girls,” she continues, “I’m really proud of you. We’re building towards better things.” Amber Hall, unsurprisingly, has won the Karyn Murphy Medal as recognition of her outstanding, ubiquitous display. She does the obligatory thanks to the NRL , sponsors, her team and fans, and family in New Zealand. Brigginshaw (see below) is praising her side for reigning in what she described as “by far the toughest” of the Broncos’ three grand final wins. “The Roosters showed great character out there. The weather didn’t suit both of us but we dug deep.” Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: The three-peat is complete! Brisbane have gone back to back to back, continuing to write themselves into history as the only team to have won the NRLW. The Broncos were tremendous defensively throughout a first half during which the Roosters had their fair share of possession and territory but became somewhat wasteful with the ball. Second half (1 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Everyone is coughing up the ball now. Nobody wants it. The Broncos need merely complete their sets and should have this one wrapped up. Mel Howard is the latest to depart with what looks like an arm injury. Second half (4 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Now Ward is down injured and leaves the field for a concussion assessment having lost the ball in a tackle. Roosters get the scrum 20m from the try line but the Broncos have forced a knock-on. Second half (7 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Shenae Ciesiolka is quick to take care of business when Temara kicks behind the Broncos’ defensive line. The Roosters have possession and, then another set, as they chase this game. They have had plenty of chances in this half but have lacked the composure of their opponents. The crowd is a tick over 9000 for this decider, with another 30,000 or so expected to come through the turnstiles in time for the NRL finale between the Penrith Panthers and Melbourne Storm. Second half (13 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: A hair pull! Vette-Welsh gets a tug on the ponytail as she looks for a breakthrough down the right side. It’s a penalty, but the Roosters are struggling to get organised enough to make good of field position and McGregor knocks on at dummy half. Second half (16 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! The Broncos have made this look oh so straightforward, again capitalising on a Roosters error after they missed a repeat set. The Broncos have a seven-tackle set and Dally M medallist Brigginshaw plays a short ball to Tallisha Harden and the latter beats two and scores her first NRLW try untouched from five metres out. Special mention to Hall, who has been superb. Could this be the game? The Roosters have to score soon because this is quickly running away from them. Meanwhile, Brown has left the field. Second half (19 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: Millie Boyle makes an error as she carries with one arm straight into Hannah Southwell. Never a good idea. She loses the ball and the Roosters get the scrum 40 metres from their own line. Second half (21 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: The game has been halted for an injury concern after Lauren Brown came out worse for wear in a head clash with Temara. But she is back up, passes a head injury assessment and ready to play again. Have a look for yourself ... Second half (25 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! Brown darts from dummy half, dummies, goes inside to Lenarduzzi and she scores her second. The Australian shot put champion came off the bench for her first, and Meakes tries to stop her second with the low tackle around the legs from the line. But her effort is in vain. No conversion but the Broncos have a nice little buffer again. Quick word on Roosters forward Vanessa Foliaki, who is 10kg lighter than this time last year and says she feels in the best shape of her career. The former Jillaroo was not confident she would keep a spot under new coach Jamie Feeney, but has proven herself and been a regular on the edge. The Broncos thus far have completed all their sets for a near-perfect first half. Here’s Amber Hall’s try ... And Yasmin Meakes’s effort ... Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters: Well the Broncos piled on two early tries to race to a 12-0 lead, but the Roosters kept their cool under pressure, matched the double defending champions and raised them one with two of their own. Big second half coming. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters (3 minutes): Fullback Botille Vette-Welsh, on her return to the field, dummies and makes her dash. through Raecene McGregor and Jayme Fressard for a much-needed break. Melanie Howard kicks into space another repeat set. And here’s another try! Quincy Dodd charges over the line after help from the forwards. Dodd, played the ball on the tryline, literally barges through the Broncos defence. Temara converts and the Roosters are right back in this coming into the breakAnd just like that, it’s 12-10 and the Roosters are right back in it. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (7 minutes): McGregor has challenged another knock-on as Togatuki tries to play through again, but she’s incorrect this time. The final minutes of this half are turning into an arm wrestle. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (9 minutes): The rain is starting to come down now as the Broncos pass their fifth tackle and Ali Brigginshaw kicks on the outside of her boot. It’s an awkward landing but the Roosters have it under control. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (13 minutes): Temara cannot make her conversion but the Roosters are on the board. Meakes did very well to hold off opposing centre Julia Robinson. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (14 minutes): The Roosters, to their credit, have stayed composed and have a repeat set. And here’s the first captain’s challenge of the match, as Roosters skipper Corban McGregor appeals against a knock-on. Sarah Togatuki was adamant she hadn’t despite Ali Brigginshaw’s appeals and is vindicated. The Roosters use the momentum superbly and go over for their first try. Pass, pass, pass and Yasmin Meakes backs herself to skip over the line. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-0 Sydney Roosters (21 minutes): Amber Hall the Wrecking Ball has practically fallen over the try line after sending Tricolours counterparts this way and that with her pace and power. Yasmin Meakes makes a last-ditch effort to take her out from behind. Hall converts and this is already looking a little worrying for the Roosters, who will have to start putting pressure on the Broncos’ line instead of inviting them in. First half - Brisbane Broncos 6-0 Sydney Roosters (25 minutes): Peep! And we’re off. The Broncos have possession and the Roosters are hitting them hard, making an early statement. The underdogs are winning the early field position. The two wingers, Brydie and Shanice Parker are heavily involved. The Broncos’ strength is taking advantage of mistakes and it is a simple error that gifts Tarryn Aiken a break. She beats two defenders then passes to Tamika Upton for her sixth try in seven games. Pre-game interview with Broncos coach Kelvin Wright. After last round’s defeat of the Roosters he felt his side had “played inside themselves”. Here he says there were a “couple of areas we really need to tidy up, especially around the ruck”. On the Roosters: “The way they’ve been playing, they look like they’re playing for each other and really enjoying themselves.” Here are the teams ... Good afternoon and welcome to our live coverage of the NRLW grand final. And what a splendid day for it. Mother Nature has put on a wet, windy one. Which way will she blow at ANZ Stadium? Is this a Brisbane three-peat in the making, or will the Roosters exact 2018 grand final revenge over the competition’s dominant force. As the only team to have lifted the NRLW trophy, the Broncos have lost one of 11 games to date and won their two previous deciders against the Roosters and Dragons by a combined margin of 64-18. Kelvin Wright’s team saw off Jamie Feeney’s Roosters 24-16 in round three last week, though star Tricolours forwards Hannah Southwell and Simaima Taufa were rested and there were some positive signs. The Roosters have never beaten the Broncos, and are seeking to remedy this short historical shortcoming without star rugby sevens recruit Charlotte Caslick, who sustained two fractures in her spine during their second match against the Warriors. Kick-off is at 4.05pm AEDT, stay tuned.
13||The US has a good record on fighting monopolies. Now it's Google's turnSundar Pichai, chief executive of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, is a mild-mannered software engineer who is not good at games of verbal fisticuffs with US politicians. He received a drubbing last month during the “big tech” congressional hearing. Pichai can, however, summon lawyers and lobbyists galore as soon as the game gets more serious, which it definitely has. The US Department of Justice (DoJ) last week launched a huge and historic antitrust case against Google, accusing the tech company of abusing its position to maintain an illegal monopoly over internet searches and search advertising. In response, Kent Walker, Google’s chief lawyer, published an indignant blogpost that signalled how the firm will fight this. Google will claim it – and not the DoJ – is on the side of the American people and, by extension, people across the world. “People use Google because they choose to, not because they’re forced to, or because they can’t find alternatives,” wrote Walker. “This lawsuit would do nothing to help consumers. To the contrary, it would artificially prop up lower-quality search alternatives, raise phone prices, and make it harder for people to get the search services they want to use”. This argument has superficial appeal. Google doesn’t charge users and can’t stop them using rivals’ products. In a neat touch, Walker included instructions on how to load Microsoft’s Bing search engine on an Android phone. As for those multibillion payments to Apple to get Google pre-loaded on iPhones and iPads – one of the DoJ’s main complaints – Walker said they are like the promotional fees a cereal brand might pay a supermarket to stock its products at eye level. Other search engines are free to negotiate space on the digital shelf or home screen, he argued, and this is how software has always been distributed. Convinced? You shouldn’t be. There are four reasons, at least, why the DoJ is right to fight this case. First, a product that is free (or free at the point of use) can still cause harm to consumers. The process is just indirect. An overly dominant search engine can, for example, raise its prices to advertisers, who then recoup the extra expense by charging more for hotels, flights, electronic gadgets, books, insurance, and so on. Second, Google’s cereal comparison doesn’t work. A key point about a dominant search engine is that it can gather more data to enhance the offer and thereby achieve greater competitive clout. It has a self-reinforcing aspect that doesn’t apply in the non-data world of cornflakes and Coco Pops. Third, most users don’t change their default settings. Yes, it’s technically simple to do, but most people don’t. That is why Google is happy to pay Apple a fortune every year for default status – it can be extremely confident of a return on that investment, knowing no rival can match its spending power. Fourth, there is the deep problem of Google’s sheer size and effective control of 80% of the search market. How could new ideas and approaches ever get a look-in? “If we let Google continue its anti-competitive ways, we will lose the next wave of innovators and Americans may never get to benefit from the ‘next Google’,” said William Barr, the US attorney-general. In that final respect, this case is similar to celebrated antitrust challenges of the past – Standard Oil, AT&amp;T and Microsoft. It’s about confronting corporate power when it becomes the gatekeeper to an industry, the lawsuit’s description of Google’s position in search. Pichai’s usual plea on that point is that “Google’s continued success is not guaranteed”. And that can be rubbished for a simple reason: it is easy to see how the gates would clang shut on any competitor that became truly threatening. Good luck to the DoJ – this is an important 21st-century case. Johnson’s plans for British industry are full of wind Next week, Boris Johnson is expected to deliver a 10-point plan outlining the government’s green industrial strategy before it publishes a long-delayed energy white paper, possibly in November. A fresh strategy paper is a chance for the PM to persuade the electorate that while his character may not be well suited to fighting a pandemic, he knows how to strike an upbeat note when the subject turns to major building projects. It might have taken him six years as London mayor before he could see cycle superhighways being built across London, but they did happen, and they played a part in transforming the infrastructure of the capital. When he wanted a cable car across the Thames, it arrived and worked, to many people’s amazement. Unfortunately what you cannot say is that any of the prime minister’s achievements so far are glued together as part of a strategy. They can at best be described as ad hoc, and sit alongside schemes that detract from the central message, if that message is about the climate emergency and carbon emissions. At this year’s Conservative party conference, Johnson said a green industrial revolution would repair the economy following the pandemic. This month, he repeated a pledge that every home in the UK would be powered by wind energy within 10 years, at a cost of £160bn. These are laudable aims and show Johnson has been gathering his thoughts. But the manufacturing industry that might have played a big part in building wind turbines was destroyed by previous Tory governments. Now Johnson wants to add a no-deal or limited-deal Brexit that will undermine the rest of the UK’s industrial base. Britain needs a strategy in many areas. Let’s hope the PM has coordinated a plan across all departments that can rightfully be called a green industrial strategy. The ticket king’s bid for Viagogo could be about to stall The $4bn (£3bn) takeover of ticket resale website StubHub by its rival Viagogo had already been dubbed the “worst deal in history”, having been finalised weeks before the pandemic shut down live events indefinitely. Viagogo boss Eric Baker founded both firms and his dream is to preside as ticket king over a reunited empire. Perhaps blinded by that ambition, he dismissed Covid-19 as a flash in the pan and pressed on with the deal, spending some of his own considerable resources – together with those of financial backers including the mega-rich Waltons, the family behind Walmart. As ill-timed as the takeover looked a few weeks ago, it looks even worse now that the UK competition watchdog has signalled its intention to block it. The CMA understandably balked at the idea of a tie-up that would give the combined company 90% of the UK ticket resale market. What now for Viagogo? It’s main target in buying StubHub is the US market, where its rival dominates. Yet the British regulator threatens to scupper everything. If Baker offers to shut down StubHub UK, Viagogo would hoover up its rival’s business anyway, creating a monopoly via a different route. The CMA surely could not allow that. A partial sale of StubHub, a web-based company whose strength is its platform, is impractical to the point of impossibility. The CMA may ultimately force Viagogo to sell StubHub, appointing a divestiture trustee to seek a buyer. That trustee would have no obligation to recoup Baker’s $4bn. That’s not the most remarkable thing, though. Part of the CMA’s remit will be, unwittingly, to look out for the interests of professional resellers, the touts who dominate resale listings. As the Observer has shown, many “resellers” use the same methods that saw super-touts Peter Hunter and David Smith jailed last year for fraud. So the CMA may find itself accidentally defending the interests of fraudsters who make a living scamming the public. It seems anything is possible in 2020.
5||Money fosters the cosmopolitan joy of our football but also its soullessnessIf you want to see the dilemmas of globalisation playing out, forget Brexit or the US elections. Watch a game of football (though in Britain, of course, you can’t actually watch a game in a stadium these days). For it’s in the beautiful game that the many faces of globalisation reveal themselves. Last week, news broke of talks between top European clubs about creating a breakaway lucrative European Premier League. A week earlier, two of the teams reportedly involved in these talks, Liverpool and Manchester United, had attempted a power grab in the English game, offering more money to the sides in the lower leagues in return for a handful of top clubs having control. Liverpool and Man United had to retreat in the face of fierce criticism. It’s unlikely, though, that either plan has been buried. What they reveal is the tension between the needs of commerce and those of supporters, between the demands of elite sides and the burdens on those at bottom of football’s pyramid. Over the past 30 years, football has metamorphosed from being what the Sunday Times called, in the wake of the 1985 Heysel tragedy, “a slum game played by slum people in slum stadiums” into “an optimistic, upwardly mobile, aspirational business”, in the words of Richard Scudamore, former CEO of the Premier League, speaking to MPs in 2011. From unrestrained contempt for the “working-class game” to adoration in management-speak in the space of three decades. When the Premier League launched in 1992, revenue in its first season was £170m; last year, it was €5.16bn. The new wealth has allowed the league to attract some of the world’s best players and managers. On the opening day of that first season, 13 foreign players graced the Premier League. This year, 244 have already stepped on to the pitch. And all this has made it attractive for everyone from Russian oligarchs to Middle Eastern autocrats to buy English clubs. In football, as in politics, globalisation has created a tension between the benefits of a more cosmopolitan game and the erosion of local attachments and the creation of huge inequalities. Football is not just about watching 22 people kick the ball around for an hour and a half. What gives football its heart, its soul and its drama, is that every game, every fan, is part of a wider story. Part of a collective memory, an identity, an imagined community. In many small towns, football clubs are among the most important social institutions, providing both a sense of civic pride and a form of collective hope and aspiration. All this, however, slams against the imperatives of football as a business. That’s why we need to be clear about what exactly is wrong with the globalisation of football. It’s not the creation of a more cosmopolitan game. Few would moan about being able to watch some of the world’s great players (Mohamed Salah, Kevin de Bruyne, James Rodriguez). Or the fact that such players are coached by some of the best managers in the world (Jürgen Klopp, Pep Guardiola, Carlo Ancelotti). Some worry that the influx of foreign players has squeezed out English players. Yet one could argue that it’s improved them, that they have benefited from both playing with and being coached by the world’s best. And foreign players and coaches can have as great an attachment to their clubs as British-born ones. German Klopp is as much part of Liverpool folklore as Bill Shankly. Arsenal fans worship French former forward Thierry Henry as “one of ours” as much as they do Londoner Ian Wright. What grates is the other side of the equation: the commercialisation, the creation of monstrous inequalities. The plans for a European Premier League envisage games between the European top teams as a money-spinning exercise detached from any organic connection to a history of competition or rivalry. It also evinces a desire to corner the market, as if Liverpool and Leeds were like Amazon and Google. The question facing football is about how to foster the one without encouraging the other, how to nurture the openness and cosmopolitanism without cultivating also the soullessness and the inequalities. It’s the question confronting us in politics, too. We can only begin to answer it if we stop thinking about globalisation as a single phenomenon, about which we have to be for or against, but start unpicking its different threads, good and bad. “There is more politics in football,” the former England manager, the Swede Sven-Göran Eriksson, once quipped, “than in politics.” He spoke more truth than he probably realised. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
9||Freshwater Five: radar casts doubt on guilty verdict for £53m cocaine haulIt began like most other fishing trips for the crew of the Galwad. The sea was choppier than they’d have liked but the four men on board were hopeful of rich pickings in the spring tides off the Isle of Wight. They had no idea that the same stretch of the English Channel was that night the focus of a sophisticated policing operation centred on a container ship from Brazil. Around midnight on 30 May 2010 the Galwad came to the attention of the police surveillance teams. When its crew arrived on shore hours later, lugging baskets of lobster, they were arrested. The following day a fisherman found 250kg of cocaine worth £53m floating in holdalls in the island’s Freshwater Bay. Jamie Green and his Galwad crew – Scott Birtwistle, Daniel Payne and Zoran Dresic, along with local scaffolder Jonathan Beere – were jailed in June 2011 for up to 24 years each for conspiracy to import cocaine. All five were far from the image of multimillion pound drug kingpins, described by friends and family as hard-working with modest lifestyles. None had previous convictions relating to drugs. Known as the Freshwater Five, all maintain their innocence. Now compelling new evidence from the radar of a UK Border Agency surveillance vessel casts doubt over the safety of their convictions. Not disclosed during the original trial, the nautical navigation data from the vessel’s Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) appears to show that information presented to the jury was incorrect. Detailed in a fresh submission on the case to the court of appeal and seen by the Observer, lawyers believe the failure to submit the ECDIS evidence at the original trial “was a significant failure that has yet to be properly explored and explained away”. The 22-page submission says that the inexplicable disappearance of the radar data was a serious shortcoming by the since disbanded Serious Organised Crime Agency (Soca), which coordinated the drugs operation that led to the jailing of the Freshwater Five. “The absence of key material was a significant failing on the part of Soca and/or the experts deployed by the prosecution at trial,” the document adds. Dated 2 October, the submission follows a six-year battle to obtain the radar evidence by lawyer Emily Bolton. Bolton, director of Appeal, a charity law practice that fights miscarriages of justice, said: “This is a case where the investigating authorities developed chronic tunnel vision early on and ignored evidence that suggested they were pursuing the wrong suspects. And of course it snowballed from there.” The prosecution case claimed the Freshwater Five were involved in a plot that entailed sailing behind a container ship, the Oriane, to recover 11 holdalls of cocaine tossed from its stern in the dark, in high seas. Yet the new evidence reveals that the path of the fishing boat never crossed that of the container ship, making a transfer of drugs impossible. In fact the ECDIS radar course suggests the Galwad never got sufficiently close to the Oriane to pick up the drugs. The nautical data reveals that a UK Border Agency aircraft and cutter were closely monitoring the Oriane and subsequently tracked the container boat for over an hour after the Galwad left the area. Such monitoring led the UKBA to “specifically discount the Galwad as the drugs-receiving vessel”, says the submission. The radar data also provides striking new details that Bolton feels would have influenced the jury very differently. Another small vessel, recorded as “A50” by the ECDIS, was tracked that night travelling “towards the position in which the drugs were found” nearly an hour after the Galwad had left the Freshwater Bay area. The mystery potential “suspect” boat was not disclosed at trial. Expert analysis of the new data indicates the A50 is “likely to be a RHIB [rigid hulled inflatable boat] or fast power cruiser moving at 46 knots”. The document for the court of appeal states: “It is submitted that A50 was either another suspect vessel or a vessel deployed by a law enforcement agency. “If it was the latter, it would profoundly undermine any suggestion that the Galwad deposited the drugs, as the Soca officers were manifestly unaware where the drugs were to be found until the next day after their discovery by a fisherman.” It adds: “The failure by the prosecution to examine and disclose the ECDIS product at trial deprived the defence of substantial arguments that might have led to different verdicts.” Another central plank of the prosecution case is also challenged by the radar findings. Film from a plane flying over Freshwater Bay the day after the Galwad returned to shore was shown at trial. Clearly visible are the holdalls of cocaine that had been discovered by then. However, the new data shows that a surveillance aircraft flew over Freshwater Bay just after the Galwad passed through. Yet the hi-tech plane noted nothing out of the ordinary and did not report any unusual objects in the water. “Had there been anything suspicious left in the water, the aircraft would have spotted it,” states Bolton. Finally, the ECDIS data shows the crew of a UKBA cutter monitoring the Oriane “had visuals” on its rear deck at the time the drugs were said to have been thrown off. However, there is no entry in the ship’s log indicating this took place. “The jury would then have had evidence that the Galwad was observed and disregarded on account of there being no activity on the stern of the Oriane at the relevant time,” states the submission. Despite extensive searches, no traces of cocaine were found on either the Galwad or Oriane. The families of the Freshwater Five hope the case will be heard in the court of appeal early next year. • The subheading of this article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct a misspelling of Isle of Wight.
5||Farewell James Randi, prince of reason. Now who’ll mock the quacks and anti-vaxxers?A mong many tributes to the great James Randi, who died last week aged 92, one stands out. Hours after the death was announced, cutlery expert Uri Geller reacted with a tweet he piously expanded on Facebook. “How sad that Randi died with hatred in his soul. Love to you all.” One thing that the most professional paranormalist may find it hard to conceal, you gather, is indecent glee. Geller’s public gloat has, however, ensured that many people who might never otherwise have viewed his televised humbling in 1973, at the height of media credulity about his claimed paranormal talent, will now have witnessed the spectacle of his inexplicably interrupted powers. Randi had advised the producers to supply their own props. Even supreme rationalists, it turns out, can exact vengeance after death. Spoon-benders are unlikely to be the only profession toasting the disappearance – supposing we rule out further hauntings – of Randi, who, being himself a brilliant magician as “The Amazing Randi: The Man No Jail Can Hold” (previously “The Great Randall: Telepath”) was repeatedly more effective than scientists at examining paranormalist claims, sometimes by simply performing their stunts himself. Mediums, dowsers, astrologers, homeopaths, clairvoyants, faith-healers, mind-readers, spirit guides and anti-vaxxers also featured among Randi’s targets after he moved on from surpassing Houdini’s escapology to exposing all forms of pseudoscience, on principle but with a showmanship that made him reliably more compelling than his subjects. This made him immeasurably valuable to sceptics. Addressing homeopathy, for instance, he appreciated that argument alone would have less impact in demonstrating the staggering uselessness of these royal-endorsed products than his filmed consumption of a homeopathic overdose. Before Randi’s retirement in 2015, his eponymous educational foundation’s “paranormal challenge”, offering $1m to anyone who could demonstrate supernatural ability in scientific conditions, provided sceptics with a perfect response to ambitious phonies: supposing they didn’t want the money, how about the glory? The cash went unclaimed. Now, with Randi gone, life just got much more comfortable for purveyors of pseudoscience and, it follows, less so for their prey, the public. If, say, the prognostication industry, which proved either unable or unwilling to alert Earthlings to the horrors coming in 2020, does nothing worse than make fools of consumers, Randi showed that more ambitious charlatans, such as the British manufacturer of a fake bomb detector, which he exposed in 2008, could kill them. Now, with lizard-believers hosting UK anti-mask/anti-5G/anti-Covid-19/anti-vaxx/reportedly antisemitic rallies in Trafalgar Square, and with quack remedies and conspiracy theories disseminated by the White House as well as by social media, his death only underlines the absence of comparably effective sceptics to counter lies more baleful than Doris Stokes’s “I’m getting an Eileen”. Long before Covid-19 elicited interventions from influencers including the anti-vaxxer Novak Djokovic and that oracle Eamonn Holmes, Randi had warned against celebrity contributions to vaccination panic. “We have a Dark Age of sorts facing us,” he wrote in 2010, a time when Andrew Wakefield seemed to have done his worst, “one in which a generation of children may be decimated through the ignorance of the public, fuelled by irresponsible public figures who assume expertise they do not possess”. Since then, irresponsible minor figures have learned, in good time to do extensive damage, to transform themselves into major public nuisances. How much did we hear from Piers Corbyn before Twitter plus the virus turned him from weird sibling into a free-speech martyr, currently telling his followers: “Modern Vax is utterly evil. It’s purpose is to maim kill control and depopulate.” If there’s anything to the theory, one that informs Kate Summerscale’s new novel inspired by 1930s poltergeist reports, that superstition thrives in periods of uncertainty and disruption, the appetite for Corbyn, Wakefield, David Icke and their various scare tactics, directed at an already fearful public, could probably have been anticipated, at least by anyone except a professional astrologer. After the First World War and the 1918 flu pandemic, Summerscale has pointed out, “many of the bereaved found consolation in seances. In an era of widespread technological change, it seemed plausible that the living could forge channels of communication with the dead.” Likewise, earlier, Daniel Defoe: “These terrors and apprehensions of the people led them into a thousand weak, foolish and wicked things, which there wanted not a sort of people, really wicked, to encourage them to; and this was a running about to fortune tellers, cunning men and astrologers, to know their fortune…” Updated, amid reports of a renewed appetite for forecasts, we find the Daily Mail keen to gratify the excellent foppery of the world, as someone once called it, with insights from the astrologer Jessica Adams. One statement in a 2019-dated forecast for March 2020, “we’re going to see computer and human viruses”, is widely taken (unlike Bill Gates’s 2015 prediction) to compensate for the failure of apparently all her rivals to spot what frustrated stars/spirits/entrails have been trying to tell humanity about a virus that, according to other paranormalists, does not exist (Icke), is no worse than flu (Trump), was made by Bill Gates (44% of Republicans) or alternatively in China (also Trump), then accidentally transmitted to a human “while delivering the virus to Iran for bacteriological warfare reasons” (Geller). Luckily for us, Adams is also a medium. “I’ve always been able to see the spirit world and I know about things before they happen,” she told the Mail. I know this is a busy time, especially for the world’s only reliable astrologer, but is there any chance she could make contact with The Amazing Randi – shortish guy, big beard – and ask where we can find his successor? • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist
3||'Power grab': how Republican hardball gave us Amy Coney BarrettThe almost certain confirmation of Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court on Monday represents a “power grab” by Republicans facing possible wipeout at the ballot box, activists and analysts say. Republicans on the Senate judiciary committee shrugged off a Democratic boycott on Thursday to advance Barrett’s nomination to the full Senate, which will vote little more than a week before the presidential election. If confirmed, Barrett could be sworn in as a justice almost immediately. To critics, the rushed process represents one of the most naked power plays yet by a party which, confronting dismal opinion polls, is weaponizing unelected judges to compensate for setbacks in elections. Even as they contemplate the loss of political power, Republicans are poised to cement judicial power for generations. “This is like the last gasp by the Republican party to try to lock in their minority rule,” said Christopher Kang, co-founder and chief counsel of the progressive group Demand Justice. “They’re potentially just days away from not only losing the White House but also the Senate, maybe even resoundingly, and so they’re trying to do everything they can to consolidate on the supreme court a Trump supermajority for decades to come.” Under Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, Republicans have built a reputation for ruthless bare knuckle tactics Democrats struggle to combat. They blocked swaths of Barack Obama’s legislative agenda and in 2016 refused to grant a hearing to his supreme court nominee Merrick Garland, arguing that it was an election year so the voters should decide. In 2018, when the conservative nominee Brett Kavanaugh faced credible allegations of sexual assault, Republicans ignored fierce protests and rammed his appointment through. And when liberal justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg died last month, Donald Trump moved like lightning to replace her with Barrett, 48, a lifetime appointment who would tilt America’s highest court to a 6-3 conservative majority. It was another example of Republican hardball – audacious, shameless and devastatingly effective. Comedian Bill Maher told viewers of his HBO show: “If you haven’t gotten it yet, this kind of completely bald-faced premeditated hypocrisy should make it clear. There’s no catching them in an inconsistency. They don’t care because it’s all and only about power. The only rule Republicans play by is: the people who win make the rules. Power talks, losers walk.” Democrats cried foul, pointing out that the Senate has never confirmed a supreme court nominee so close to a presidential election. They were whistling in the wind. During committee hearings Barrett swerved most of their questions, refusing to commit herself on abortion, the transfer or power or the climate crisis. Kang said: “The process was so rushed and she was far more evasive and refused to answer more questions than any other nominee. That was a little bit jarring, if not surprising, but it shows how little respect Republicans have not only for the Senate but the supreme court itself. The Republican party is very blatantly just treating the supreme court as another political branch of government.” Demand Justice has called for Democrats to fight back by expanding the court, noting that its size has been changed seven times before. Joe Biden, the Democratic presidential nominee, has said he will appoint a bipartisan commission to examine such proposals. Kang predicted: “Republicans’ attempt to assert their raw political partisan power grab to get a sixth seat on the court, when they already have five, could end up backfiring spectacularly on them and they could be on the losing side of a 7-6 supreme court before they know it.” All 12 Republicans on the judiciary committee voted in favour of Barrett. Ted Cruz of Texas hailed perhaps the “single most important accomplishment” of Trump’s presidency. Democrats displayed posters at their desks, of Americans who benefited from Obama’s Affordable Care Act which they warn Barrett could help strike down. Democrats have also warned that if Trump follows through on his threat to dispute the outcome of the 3 November election, it might go before Barrett and other members of the supreme court for a final ruling, just like the 2000 election between George W Bush and Al Gore. Laurence Tribe, a constitutional law professor at Harvard University, described Barrett’s probable confirmation as a “‘power grab’ in every relevant sense of the term, especially in light of President Trump’s open concession that he appointed judge Coney Barrett in part to ensure her ability to vote in his favour should his re-election as president end up turning on a case the supreme court would need to resolve in order to give him an electoral college victory in the face of a national popular defeat.” Trump has appointed more than 200 federal judges, likely to be his most lasting legacy whether he serves one term or two. Critics suggest the courts represent the last bulwark of Republican minority rule and the Barrett episode is starkly indicative of a party that has lost its ideological and ethical moorings and now treats power as an end in itself. Kurt Bardella, a senior adviser to the Lincoln Project, an anti-Trump group, said Republicans have betrayed their claims to be the party of fiscal responsibility, pro-life principles, small government and congressional oversight. “When a party diverges from itself on so many issues so many times,” he said, “it tells you they don’t actually have any moral convictions or principles that guide them. Only the pursuit of power.”
24||Twenty years of the International Space Station – but was it worth it?Space scientists are preparing to celebrate a remarkable astronautical achievement. In a few days, they will mark the 20th anniversary of humanity’s continuous presence in outer space. For two decades, teams of astronauts have made their homes 250 miles above our planet through their uninterrupted occupancy of the International Space Station (ISS). First inhabited by US astronaut Bill Shepherd and Russian cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Yuri Gidzenko on 2 November 2000, the ISS has since provided shelter for a steady rotation of crews that has ensured the station has never been left unoccupied. A total of 240 men and women have set up camp on the 420-tonne station as it has swept over Earth at 17,000 mph, making 16 orbits of our world every day. Accommodation on the 109-metre-long station includes six sleeping quarters, two toilets, a gym – and, most popular of all, a European-built set of bay windows, called the Cupola, which provides 360-degree views and allows astronauts to gaze as storms have gathered, and the Sun has risen, over Earth. Tim Peake, the only official British astronaut to make it to the ISS, was a particular fan of the Cupola, where, he says, he first looked at our planet and realised how fragile it is. “You can see the atmosphere, which is only 16km thick. It is not endless,” he recalled in a BBC interview. “All of the gas that keeps us alive on Earth is trapped in that tiny, tiny layer. You suddenly realise that what we put into that layer is really important.” More mundane aspects of station life have included guitar serenades by floating astronauts; a piece of culinary history made by Italian astronaut Samantha Cristoforetti, who drank the first espresso made in outer space out of a zero-gravity mug; and dealing with a series of broken toilets – “the part of the station which attracts most curiosity back on Earth, I discovered”, says Peake. And these domestic details are important, scientists insist. “Running the International Space Station has shown us that human beings can make their homes away from their own planet in outer space, which is a truly hostile environment,” said astrobiologist Professor Charles Cockell of Edinburgh University. “That has been a critically important lesson for us.” Plans to build a permanent orbiting space station were first drawn up in the 1980s by Nasa. However, forecasts of costs indicated these would be alarmingly high – until the collapse of the Soviet Union offered an opportunity to cooperate with Russia. Its space engineers had already gained considerable experience of long-term space missions with their own small orbiting Salyut stations and the much larger Mir station. “It was also a highly pragmatic move by the United States,” said Professor Anu Ojha, a director of the National Space Centre, Leicester. “America wanted to prevent Soviet space experts from getting snapped up by rogue states as the USSR disintegrated. So it sought to get them involved in a joint space programme so that it could keep them at home and give them some degree of input. The ISS was perfect for that.” In the end, the two nations agreed on a plan for the ISS’s construction, with Canadian and Japanese space agencies also agreeing to join the project, along with the European Space Agency, of which the UK is a key member. Assembly of the station began in 1998 and required more than 30 flights by US space shuttles and 40 by Russian rockets to take components and modules to the station before its completion in 2011. For years, astronauts were preoccupied with constructing the station, and only relatively recently have they been able to concentrate on doing serious science, including running more than 3,000 experiments in collaboration with thousands of scientists on Earth. The final bill for constructing the ISS came to more than $100bn. The station soaks up $4bn a year in maintenance costs and service flights. Most of this has been paid by the US. The question is: was this vast expenditure worth it? Planetary science expert Professor Ian Crawford of Birkbeck, University of London, believes it was. “The ISS is a fantastic example of high-profile international cooperation at a time when the world desperately needs examples of activities that can bring people and nations together. And learning how to live and work in space will stand us in good stead as we prepare to return to the Moon and possibly send people to Mars.” Other scientists take a different stance, however. “There is no way you could justify the vast sums the have been spent on building the ISS,” said the astronomer royal, Sir Martin Rees. “For a start, the scientific returns have been meagre. We have learned a bit about how the body reacts to spending long periods in space, and we have grown a few crystals in zero gravity, but that is in no way commensurate to the tens of billions of dollars that have spent on the ISS. Really, the station only makes news when its toilets get blocked or an astronaut sings while floating about with a guitar.” Nasa’s money would have been better spent on launching robot missions to other planets or constructing orbiting observatories, Rees added – a view that is backed by the physicist and Nobel laureate Steve Weinberg of the University of Texas at Austin. “The only interesting science done on the ISS has been the study of cosmic rays by the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, but astronauts played no role in its operation,” he told the Observer. “It could have been placed in orbit much more cheaply by an unmanned mission.” Ojha added that he was initially very doubtful about the scientific rationale for the ISS but was now convinced it was a major success. “What we have achieved in terms of human spaceflight experience, space engineering, and scientific yield has been immense. We have learned how to assemble huge structures in space and live for long periods up there while dealing with all sorts of incidents that have arisen. It is crucial we do not waste that experience.” A key lesson learned from studying ISS astronauts has been the impacts of prolonged periods of zero gravity on the human body. These include muscle loss, bone density reductions, and vision and taste impairment. Scientists have found it can take several years for an astronaut to recover their bone density after a four- or five-month space mission. On the other hand, by using treadmills and weight machines, astronauts can avoid the worst effects of muscle loss. Nasa is scheduled to continue funding the ISS for four or five years and has said it then hopes private companies will take over and run it commercially while the agency funds more cutting-edge missions to explore and settle on the Moon, and possibly one day take humans to Mars. These projects will involve building Gateway, a smaller version of the space station, in orbit round the Moon as a stopping off point to explore the lunar surface. But is private enterprise interested in taking over the ISS? Early interest has been expressed by a number of companies who say they want to work there. The Texas-based company Axiom Space has signed a deal with Nasa to build a module where research on novel materials would be carried out; actor Tom Cruise and director Doug Liman are scheduled to fly to the station next year on a SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule to shoot scenes for an action adventure film; and the forthcoming reality TV contest, Space Hero – scheduled for screening in 2023 – has announced plans to send a winner to the ISS. Whether ventures like these will be enough to provide the billions of dollars needed to run the station remains to be seen. The alternative would be to dismantle the ISS and send its components spiralling down to the Earth in the hope they would be destroyed as they burn up in the atmosphere. And that would be a terrible waste, says Cockell. “It was a hell of an effort to get everyone to agree to the station and then to build it. We would have little chance of building another one in the near future if we lose this one, so we need to encourage companies to keep the station going for at least another decade.”
12||Lost letters reveal JM Barrie and Robert Louis Stevenson's mutual affectionThey are two of the greatest writers in history and they were also the greatest of friends. But they never met, and the importance and intensity of their relationship has never before been fully understood. Now, the lost letters of JM Barrie to Robert Louis Stevenson – missing for over a century – have been found in a cardboard box in a library archive and will be published for the first time in a forthcoming book. The letters reveal how ardently the young Barrie both adored and admired Stevenson, who was an older and more established writer. A year into their friendship, which was initiated by Stevenson, Barrie wrote to him: “To be blunt I have discovered (have suspected it for some time) that I love you, and if you had been a woman...” He leaves the sentence unfinished. He also imagines in the letters that he and Stevenson are related and were descended from the same Scottish family, a fantasy that allows him to open up to the older man about the intimacies of his family life and his close relationship with his mother. Treasure Island had already been published when the two authors began corresponding in 1892; 12 years later, Barrie went on to write his own masterpiece, Peter Pan, about a dangerous amputated pirate, a young boy and a journey to a far-off fantasy island. He repeatedly fantasises in his letters about meeting Stevenson, who had left their native Scotland in 1879 and was living in Samoa to improve his health. In one letter, Barrie even writes a funny, self-deprecating playlet – never seen before – in which he imagines himself visiting Stevenson’s 314-acre estate, and Stevenson “glumly” saying to his wife about Barrie: “Perhaps he will improve after he has rested a bit.” In reality, Barrie was held back from ever making that thrilling journey to Stevenson’s Pacific island paradise by his desire to stay near his frail, elderly mother – feelings he later explores intensely in Peter Pan – and had to content himself with merely writing 3,000-word letters to his beloved friend. Later, he recounts Stevenson’s whimsical directions to the island of Samoa (“you take the boat at San Francisco, and then my place is second to the left”), which seem to echo Peter Pan’s famous directions for the island of Neverland: “Second to the right and straight on till morning.” While many of Stevenson’s letters to Barrie appeared in print soon after Stevenson’s death in 1894 and the rest were published over the course of the 20th century, Barrie’s side of the correspondence has, until now, remained a mystery. Dr Michael Shaw, a lecturer in Scottish literature at the University of Stirling, stumbled across the missing letters while looking through a neglected box of correspondence at Beinecke Library in Yale University. “When I first saw them, I didn’t realise that these were lost letters,” he told the Observer. “I just assumed that they had been published and I didn’t know about them. I was judging myself, thinking I really should have read these.” It was only when he tried to buy a book of the correspondence and researched why it was not available that he realised what he had unearthed. In Shaw’s forthcoming book, A Friendship in Letters, Barrie and Stevenson’s letters to each other are published together for the first time. “What’s revealed in these letters – and it took me a while to discover the full extent of this – is the influence that both Stevenson and the correspondence have on Barrie,” said Shaw. “In reading over Barrie’s works, I started to see allusions to the letters and to Stevenson that I hadn’t noticed before.” Barrie, he said, loves to play games with his writing and unsettle the line between art and reality. “And I could see how he was doing that with the correspondence. He’s incorporating aspects of the correspondence into his own works, into his poetry and novels, and their friendship is also inspiring his works.” He tries to keep his bond with Stevenson alive in other ways, too. Odd little phrases Stevenson used in his letters creep into Barrie’s stories, and Peter Pan was placed in the same imaginary world as Treasure Island. Long John Silver (who is known by his aliases of Barbecue and Sea-Cook in Neverland) is afraid of only one man, readers are told: Captain Hook. “As a literary critic, I’m trained to be sceptical of biography coming into literary text,” said Shaw, “but the more I re-read Peter Pan, the more potential references I found not just to Treasure Island but to Stevenson, Samoa and their life.” Barrie has a real desire to incorporate Stevenson and his affection for Stevenson in his works, he believes. “I think what Barrie is saying is: if I can never meet Stevenson, because he has unfortunately died, then I want to create the opportunity for our characters to meet. “I think he liked that idea that they could occupy the same world, and could potentially bump into each other.”
5||Why can't questions be asked of Facebook's ads?Facebook wants you to know that it’s being transparent about political ads, requiring advertisers to verify their identity and to show who paid for an ad. But it doesn’t want to be too transparent. It has sent cease and desist letters to two New York University researchers, Laura Edelson and Damon McCoy, part of the Online Political Transparency Project, who are investigating how people are targeted by ads. They helped develop a browser plug-in called Ad Observer, which allows people voluntarily to share data about political ads on Facebook. Edelson and McCoy are particularly interested in two aspects of political ads that Facebook won’t publicly discuss – how particular people are targeted and how campaigns craft messages based on criteria such as race or age. Facebook claims that Ad Observer compromises privacy. This, observes Alex Abdo, a lawyer representing Edelson and McCoy, is “ridiculous”, given that “the plug-in’s users voluntarily sign up to donate data” and it “does not share any personally identifying information”. Facebook also claims that Ad Observer violates its terms of service by automating the collection of data. There are good reasons for blocking data aggregators, but Facebook is trying to block not data aggregation but academic research. It’s not the first time it has tried to do so. Researchers have long called for the company to allow research in the public interest. It has so far refused. The issue here is not simply about political ads. It’s about who controls the narrative. At a time when Facebook, Twitter and other tech businesses are making huge decisions that affect public debate, from blocking tweets to taking down accounts, not only is transparency important, but it is important, too, that the tech giants themselves don’t get to define what it means. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
25||The big picture: magical realism in everyday DublinThe Irish writer Colm Tóibín was first introduced to the photographs of Tony O’Shea when he was an editor at a magazine called In Dublin back in the late 1970s. O’Shea was in the habit of coming to the magazine’s office every other Friday with a cardboard box containing a fortnight’s black-and-white prints, pictures he’d taken around the city’s streets. The photographs, Tóibín observed, in the introduction to their landmark collaborative book of 1990, Dubliners, “were like nothing I’d ever seen”. He looked forward to O’Shea’s arrival, and each time, though the magazine might be going to press, found himself “taking the cardboard box away with me, looking through the photos again and again on my own and wondering about them”. It was Tóibín who first sent O’Shea out on Dublin buses for a story to capture the life of the city from the upper deck. You would never say of O’Shea’s pictures that anything was typical of his work, but this photograph taken in 1989 of two boys and the kestrel is a memorable example of the magical realism that he so often seemed to locate in the everyday. Strange animal spirits are everywhere apparent in his pictures: raggedy boys stand on horseback on city streets, hounds are held at bay on misty bogland; in a famous series, Dublin housewives carry Christmas turkeys home from a side-street butcher, heads and necks and beaks dangling at their knees. O’Shea is 73 now. A retrospective book of his life’s work to date, The Light of Day, is full of natural wonders and human struggles that surface from the borderlands during the Troubles and in the rituals and recreation of his city. Each image wants to be a short story. And there is genius in revealing the teenage kestrel handlers’ eyes to be quite as bright and sharp as the bird he holds. The Light of Day is published next month by RRB Photobooks and the Gallery of Photography Ireland (£40) An exhibition of his work will be shown at the Gallery of Photography, Ireland, next year.
2||Frustration is rising as clampdowns spread across UK: are we in grip of Covid fatigue?As the people of Sheffield prepared to join Greater Manchester and the Liverpool city region in the premier league of Covid-19 restrictions – tier 3 – there were widely differing views on whether the tough new rules about to be imposed from London were welcome, or would even work. On the streets and in the city’s pubs last Thursday evening there was, however, one commonly held opinion – compliance would be some way short of total. “During the first part of lockdown I abided by the rules very strictly,” said Phillip, a 47-year-old gas engineer, as he waited for a pork wrap outside the Greedy Greek Deli. “We still are doing that, but it’s wearing thin. I think the economy and life still has to go on. But then it’s a balancing act with the NHS and the beds.” Back in March when Boris Johnson shut down most of the country including schools, most people understood and obeyed. “Proper lockdown was easy,” said Jason, 29, sitting on a wall on Sharrow Vale Road eating a butty. “You knew what you could and couldn’t do and you just did that.” Like many others he seemed less sure this time. Simon, 36, who works in hospitality and travels a lot with his work, said his attitudes had been influenced by seeing others breaking the rules and ignoring guidance, meeting people outside their households in places where doing so was banned. If they broke the rules, why shouldn’t he? He said: “We’re sat next to a couple in the pub whose opening gambit was ‘so, how’s things?’ They’ve clearly not seen each other for a while. When you look around and see other people who probably don’t even live in the same postcode, you kind of go: ‘fuck the rules.’” Yesterday some 1.2 million people in South Yorkshire joined around 2.8 million in Greater Manchester and 3.1 million in Lancashire and the Liverpool city region in tier 3. In these areas, social mixing is banned indoors and in private gardens while pubs and bars have to close unless they serve substantial meals. Stoke-on-Trent, Slough and Coventry have also joined London in tier 2. Scotland is to enter a new five-tier system of restrictions from 2 November; Northern Ireland has adopted much tougher restrictions; and a 17-day “fire break” is under way in Wales meaning most non-essential businesses are closed, with people only able to leave home for limited reasons. Supermarkets removed non-essential items from sale – including clothing, kitchen electricals and crockery – using barriers and plastic sheets to cover products. But seven months into the pandemic the views of people in places such as Sheffield raise a very serious question – aside from the intense scientific debates – about whether, whatever the new rules are here and there, the country has still got the stomach for the fight? Professor Susan Michie, director of the centre for behaviour change at University College London and a participant in the government’s scientific committee Sage, rejects the idea that “pandemic fatigue” has set in. But she believes there is a real compliance problem that is of the government’s own making. “There is no evidence to suggest people are getting tired. People are getting angry, frustrated and resentful – they’re not getting tired,” she told the Observer. “The collective solidarity of ‘we’re all in this together’ is a really important part of people following challenging restrictions, [but] adherence is being undermined by many kinds of perceived unfairness.” Michie believes the tolerance of Dominic Cummings’ trip to Durham in the spring, the perceived fuelling of a north-south divide which culminated in the rows over financial support involving Greater Manchester’s mayor, Andy Burnham, and “the ideology of privatisation, giving huge amounts of money seemingly to their contacts” for the test, trace and isolate programme have savaged public confidence and, in turn, compliance. She added that communities did not feel involved or consulted: “There isn’t a strategy that makes sense to an overwhelming majority of people. The restrictions haven’t worked, communities have not been engaged with and instead they have been blamed. The government blames health professionals for using too much PPE, it blames people for having tests, it blames young people – it does not celebrate good practice or make people feel good about themselves or pride in what they’ve achieved.” Michie was backed by social psychologist Professor Stephen Reicher, at the University of St Andrews, and Molly Byrne, director of the Health Behaviour Change Research Group and a public health adviser to the Irish government. Both said Westminster’s approach of imposing fines and encouraging neighbours to snitch on one another would backfire. “It’s a bad road to go down,” said Byrne. “The data shows that the vast majority of people want to adhere to the measures in their areas and it’s really important to boost those levels of solidarity and trust.” On Friday, a major report by the London School of Economics revealed that government policies had exacerbated the problem of non-compliance. Researchers advised that communities be put at the centre of pandemic policy if the rules were expected to be followed. Reicher said: “If people see restrictions which don’t seem to have achieved very much being imposed again, they will be sceptical. The British public have shown remarkable resilience and would get behind a national lockdown. The polling has consistently shown that by a ratio of three to one, people want the government to do more rather than less and do it sooner rather than later.” When Sage first recommended a short national circuit breaker or full lockdown on 21 September, as opposed to regional interventions, infection rates in England stood at 4,500 a day. A month on, the figure is four times that. The latest Opinium poll for the Observer this weekend suggests lack of faith in the government’s handling of the pandemic is indeed growing, hand in hand with public confusion and increasing lack of compliance. Approval of the government’s response to Covid is now at a record low of 29%, with 50% disapproving. Some 50% of people say the new three-tier system in England is clear but 44% say it is not, while 34% say they aren’t confident that they know what the rules are in their own area. And among young people aged 18 to 34 the proportion admitting to flouting the rules has risen in two weeks from 10% to 17%. Among those aged 35 to 44 it has risen from 10% to 18%. A sense that the spirit of national solidarity is crumbling is fuelled by parts of the media who believe the restrictions have gone way too far. Yesterday the Daily Mail splashed with “It’s Covid Hysteria”, adding a list of what it regarded as examples of interventionist madness saying “supermarkets ban sock sales, CCTV spies on social distancing, road checks on Welsh border, teacher threatens playdate pupils with police”. But as the Mail rails against diktats, many scientists take the opposite line – that the restrictions on our lives have gone nowhere near far enough. “At the end of March we went into a very severe lockdown. Students were not at university, children were not at school, and pubs and restaurants were all closed and even then we only managed to bring the virus reproduction value R down to just below one,” said mathematician Michael Tildesley, at Warwick University. In comparison, tier 3, the most severe set of new restrictions that can be imposed in England, still allows students to attend university, children to be at school and pubs and cafes to remain open to a limited extent. “My worry is that tier 3 won’t bring us close enough to the crucial ‘R equals one’ level that has to be reached to ensure that case numbers start to come down,” he added. “We could easily get a situation where cities like Manchester or Liverpool will never be able to come out of tier 3 because they cannot get ‘R below 1’. That is my real worry. All we are going to see is tighter and tighter restrictions being imposed and that will have long-term economic consequences and pose threats to people’s mental health.” Like other experts he backs a draconian national circuit breaker in which really severe lockdown measures are imposed for a fixed period. “People would know that it was only a fairly short period and would tolerate it,” said Tildesley. “Certainly, if we don’t do something now, we will soon be in real trouble.” In Westminster, any semblance of political consensus has disappeared, replaced by open division. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has argued for the same kind of circuit breaker over half-term, while accusing Johnson of having “lost control” of the virus. Worries that the government has not been tough enough were expressed also by Professor Neil Ferguson, of Imperial College London. He told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme on Saturday that the NHS would not be able to cope with the current rate of growth in numbers of Covid cases for much longer. New restrictions on households mixing should have a “significant effect”, he said, but these might not be enough and further action might be needed. “There is a limit to what we can do in terms of reducing contacts, short of starting to target, for instance, the older years in schools and sixth-form colleges where we know older teenagers are able to transmit as adults. Of course, nobody wants to start moving to virtual education and closing schools even partially. The challenge may be that we are not able to get on top of the transmission otherwise.” The government’s failure to provide consistent warnings of the disease’s danger to the public was another major factor in the current rise in numbers of cases, added Bharat Pankhania, of Exeter University Medical School. “They launched their ‘eat out to help out’ to encourage people to go to restaurants without giving any additional advice about the need to continue to be vigilant – and that was a real mistake,” he said. “We need to be giving much better advice to people on how deal with this virus.” Pankhania also urged that the government’s test-and-trace system be moved into local areas. “We need a much slicker operation and that sort of thing can be done much better at a local level. We are going to need our trace-and-track services for a long time, I suspect.” Michie adds that confusion is inevitable among the public as the arguments rage. “People are understandably confused. Over time they become disengaged and think: ‘you know what, I’ll try and extract my own principles and do my own risk assessment and management.’” Back in Sheffield some were indeed making their own assessments, bending the rules where they felt they could. A young resident called Rebecca said she had recently “intimately kissed” on a date, insisting it was not a moment of complete abandon but a measured decision. She said: “I judged it on if, you know [I believed] the other person was taking precautions”, rather than on what the strict letter of the latest government rules told her she was allowed to do.
12||Anatomy of a Killing by Ian Cobain review – a death that casts new light on the TroublesIn certain parts of Northern Ireland in the late 1970s, a stranger arriving at the door could provoke panic, even terror. The town of Lisburn, near Belfast, was not such a place. Predominantly Protestant and home to many members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), it had for the most part escaped the violence that had ravaged other parts of the province. Up until 1977, as Ian Cobain puts it, “not a single member of the security forces had lost their life in Lisburn”. All that would change on the morning of Saturday, 22 April 1978, when Millar McAllister, a police photographer, opened the back door of his home in Woodland Park, having glimpsed a figure moving in his back garden. He was shot three times at close range, twice in the chest and the third time, as he was lying on the ground, in the head. In the silence that followed, the killer noticed McAllister’s seven-year-old son, Alan, standing just inside the kitchen door, frozen to the spot. They stared at each other for a long moment until the boy started screaming. The stranger ran to a waiting car, the boy’s cries echoing in his head, In Lost Lives, the vast book of historical record that chronologically documents every death in the Troubles, Millar McAllister is listed as victim number 2,017. The bare facts of his life are outlined thus: RUC, Protestant, 36, married, two children. In Anatomy of a Killing, Ian Cobain rescues him from the abyss of history, tracing the arc of his short life and contrasting it with the still ongoing, altogether more tangled, life of Harry Murray, his killer. By reconstructing a single murder – its planning, its ruthless execution and its protracted aftermath – through in-depth interviews and the careful sifting of not always reliable evidence from official records, Cobain also casts new light on the culture of terrorist violence and state repression that defined Northern Ireland during 30 years of conflict. Cobain is a seasoned, award-winning investigative journalist (most recently for the Guardian), who also sketches the social and historical context that spawned the Troubles. Throughout, his style is brisk and his tone level-headed, the violence he chronicles often evoked through spartan, but chillingly descriptive, detail. Of the aftermath of the IRA bombing of the La Mon hotel restaurant, which happened on 17 February 1978, just a few months before the murder of Millar McAllister, he writes: “Twelve people, including three married couples, died in the blast. All were Protestant. The dead were so badly burned and shrivelled by the flames that firemen thought initially that some of them were children.” Hell is in the details. Amid such carnage, the death of an individual could pass all too swiftly into the anonymous realm of statistics, forgotten by all but family members and loved ones. Cobain’s book is, among other things, an act of reclamation. It is also, in its skilful telling, a tale of two ordinary lives converging with the inexorability of a Greek tragedy. Millar McAllister joined the RUC in 1961, when the Troubles, as Cobain puts it, “were barely visible on the horizon”. He had two hobbies: photography and racing pigeons. The former provided him with a well-paid job; the second unwittingly led to his death. McAllister wrote a monthly column for Pigeon Racing News and Gazette under the byline “The Copper”, which was accompanied by his photograph. When an IRA suspect, who was being held at the Castlereagh interrogation centre in east Belfast, recognised McAllister from the photo, the word went out to find him. Soon afterwards, Harry Murray was dispatched with another young volunteer to carry out his execution. In almost every way, Murray comes across as the polar opposite of the level-headed McAllister: impetuous, impressionable and instinctively rebellious. What they had in common is that they were both Protestants, Murray being one of the very few from his community to join the IRA. A few years before, he had been driven out of his home in loyalist Tiger’s Bay in Belfast by local paramilitaries. His transgression was to marry a Catholic. Having been resettled where his wife grew up in nationalist north Belfast, he grew increasingly sympathetic to the republican cause. Murray seems to have drifted into the ranks of the Provisionals much like, years before, he had enlisted on impulse with the Royal Air Force and served overseas. His military career ended abruptly after one too many breaches of discipline. “I just couldn’t take orders,” he tells Cobain without irony. Murray’s renegade life was not without principle, however. During his induction into the IRA, he claims to have told his recruiters there were two things he would not do: kneecappings and shooting Protestants “just because they were Protestant”. Like all IRA combatants, though, he regarded the RUC as the enemy in a just war, and, as Cobain discovers, remains remarkably free of remorse for the brutal taking of Millar McAllister’s life. In 1983, while serving time for the killing, Murray would take part in an audacious IRA jailbreak from Long Kesh prison, shooting a prison officer in the leg before being wounded himself. On his recapture, he was set upon by prison officers who berated him as “a turncoat bastard”. As with Patrick Radden Keefe’s recent book, Say Nothing, which uses the IRA’s “disappearance” of Jean McConville in 1972 as the starting point for an illuminating exploration of the conflict, Anatomy of a Killing deftly merges history, social context and anecdotal testimony. Cobain explores the psychology of political violence, citing a study from 1978 which found that, rather than being the psychopaths of tabloid headlines, the IRA’s “political killers tended to be normal in intelligence and mental stability”. He also suggests that vengeance may have been a crucial motivating factor for young men joining the Provisionals and, in Murray’s case, it is clear that he has never forgiven his own community for the humiliation of his expulsion. The immediate aftermath of the killing also makes for deeply unsettling reading. On information obtained from an IRA informer, Murray and his accomplices were arrested and taken to Castlereagh, where they were beaten and interrogated relentlessly by Special Branch men working in shifts. Anne, an IRA courier, confesses to her role and, Cobain writes, “appears to have suffered a fairly complete physical and psychological breakdown”. The man she gave the gun to after the killing, Brian Maguire, whom Cobain describes as “highly strung”, was not an IRA member. He was interrogated non-stop for 12 hours and, the next morning, was found hanged in his cell. His death remains disputed. Among the revelations in Cobain’s book is testimony given at the time by another suspect called Phelim, which provides what Cobain calls “an accurate description of the torture technique that became known as waterboarding when used by the CIA in the years after 9/11”. If there is much that is compelling in Anatomy of a Killing, what lingers longest is the awful mundanity of the events leading up to and after the killing. Cobain describes how, on that fateful morning, Anne calmly carried the gun from Belfast to Lisburn on a bus, and, having arrived early, went shopping for a birthday present for her brother. Just a few hours after he killed McAllister, Murray returned to Lisburn to play football on a pitch close to his victim’s home. As the Troubles begin to fade into history and forgetting, it is in these incidental actions that the deep moral fracture caused by the conflict comes sharply and chillingly into focus. We would do well to remember how quickly violence can become almost normalised in a culture riven by intractable differences of identity and belonging. • Anatomy of a Killing: Life and Death on a Divided Island by Ian Cobain is published by Granta (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
10||Into the night: why walking in the dark is good for the soulThe lights from the cottagewindows recede, all too rapidly, as we walk along an unlit country lane and take a footpath through a field into open countryside. Thick cloud cover prevents the moonlight from illuminating the way ahead. Yet, as my eyes begin to get used to the darkness, the landscape around me reveals itself in a new light – albeit a shady one. The contours of Mount Caburn, an iron-age hill fort, are like shadows against the sky. On the horizon, a tree bent by the wind is silhouetted, and the rocky outcrop at the top of the field turns out to be a flock of sleeping sheep. A fox cries, a pheasant crows and the air is full of a heady earthy scent. “For most of human history man lived in close contact with the land,” says Nigel Berman, my guide, whose company, School of the Wild, organises guided night walks on the South Downs. “Only in the past few hundred years have we shut ourselves off from our natural surroundings. Walking at night is a powerful way of reconnecting . When your vision is reduced, your other senses are sharpened.” Darkness is a thing we have come to fear and shy away from. It has become a metaphor for evil and depression, a place held at bay by our electric-lit world. But in the parts where darkness holds sway for much of the winter, inhabitants embrace it rather than yearning for longer days. In the Arctic Circle during the polar night, when the sun never rises and the Earth is swathed in darkness for several months, the Norwegians simply wrap up, strap on a head torch and head for the hills. As nights in the UK close in and a Covid-induced indoor isolation looms, it is a perfect opportunity to take note and go into the countryside, or walk across a deserted beach, to see starlit skies and moonlit rocks, spot owls, see bats swooping and breathe in the night air. Nigel and I walk from Glynde, a village near Glyndebourne opera house, across the South Downs towards the town of Lewes. It’s a walk I know well by day but at night everything is different, and a familiar stroll becomes a mini adventure. The lighter strip of sky above it highlights the ridge of the downs that we head towards to start. At the top, we edge along a wire fence looking for the gate that will take us along a path through the Mount Caburn nature reserve to Oxteddle Bottom. When Nigel told me not to bring a torch, I was alarmed. I can’t remember the last time I used my night vision and I’m not even aware of how it works. Nigel explains that in the dark our pupils not only expand to allow light in they also switch to use different light sensors. In bright light, cone-shaped sensors respond to different colours of light and allow us to see fine detail, but in the dark the eyes switch to rod-shaped sensors, far more sensitive to light but unable to sense colours. We descend past clumps of trees into the darker, hill-surrounded valley, aiming for the eerie shimmer of a dew pond where we pause to sit. I’m aware of the breeze caressing my face, the rustle of leaves and, as I watch the clouds swirling and slowly changing colour against the sky like a natural sound and light show, it feels mesmeric. Normally at this time of night I’d be having a glass of wine in front of the television, but being out in the countryside is a purer form of relaxation. I forget about work and family tensions and begin to blend into the surroundings. There is no one other than Nigel to see or hear me and, with little visual distraction, my mind calms. Walking at night is not without risk, but with knowledge and preparation it opens up a new side to walking. For example, it’s important to know your route by day so that you know what features to pick out by night; to have good navigational skills; take the right kit (hat, gloves, insulated layers and a daypack with a flask of hot drink); and pick favourable weather. A deep unfamiliar sound rouses me from my reverie and Nigel tells me it is the “cronk” call of the raven. We continue walking and, having got used to the dark, the chalk path that leads up the escarpment of Saxon Down now appears to almost shine in front of us. We climb carefully, feeling, rather than groping for, our way on the uneven ground. As we reach the top, Lewes appears below as a twinkly mass of lights, a sight I’d generally think of as inviting. But in just a few hours I have gone over to the dark side and find myself reluctant to walk back down. Walking at night is like discovering a new world on your doorstep, one that allows you to roam beyond the duration of winter’s short days and explore in the time of Covid. As Henry David Thoreau wrote in Night and Moonlight: “Night is certainly more novel and less profane than day.” • Guided mindful night walks are available from schoolofthewild.com, price information is available through the website More ways to explore by night National parks are some of the best places to see the star-studded autumn and winter skies, and there are a number of dark sky festivals that include organised stargazing walks. • darkskiesnationalparks.org.uk The Bat Conservation Trust has groups across the UK and most run local bat walks. • bats.org.uk Ramblers groups offer group night walks. • ramblers.org.uk Many charities now run organised night walks as a way of raising money. The original MoonWalk, organised by breast cancer charity Walk the Walk, now takes place all around the world. • walkthewalk.org
2||Rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccine, say scientistsScientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Finn said such confusion could cause setbacks in dealing with Covid, adding: “We should be preparing to meet this challenge and work out ways to compare the effectiveness of early vaccines – but at present we are not doing that well enough.” A total of 198 Covid vaccines are now under development across the globe with four key versions undergoing final phase 3 trials. These include Pfizer’s BNT162b2 and the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine. Results of those trials – in which each is compared with a placebo – are expected in weeks or months. Once the first vaccine that shows efficacy in countering Covid-19 is revealed, there will be enormous pressure to use it immediately. Key candidates would be healthcare workers who deal with Covid cases and others at high risk of becoming infected. But for groups such as the elderly, who tend to have weaker immune systems, caution will be required. “The problem is that early vaccine trials are not likely to show how well these products work in these populations,” said Kanta Subbarao, a World Health Organization director, in an editorial in Nature last week. “We know vaccines often work better in young, healthy adults, which is why they are enhanced with a higher dose or an adjuvant to boost immunity for diseases such as flu and shingles. It is also unclear how well clinical trials will assess effectiveness in those in minority ethnic communities.” In other words, by spring, several vaccines may have passed their trials without any mechanism being in place to select which is the most effective for different groups. Nor is the problem confined to the UK. “The complexity and chaos and confusion that will happen in a few short months has hardly dawned on anybody,” Dr Gregory Poland, director of the Vaccine Research Group at the Mayo Clinic, told the New York Times. It is expected that approval would be given to any vaccine that protects at least half of those injected with it. The problem will come when other vaccines appear and it is unclear whether or not they are better than the first licensed product. Bryan Deane, a director at the Association of British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI), said: “There was a lot of over-optimistic talk earlier this year about Britain having a vaccine before Christmas. However, that really looks unlikely now. Results of trials are not likely to arrive until next year, and when they do they are likely to come out sequentially. “The first one that shows any significant protection will be the one people will want to start using straightaway. The problem will be that when the others come through their trials, you won’t be able to say that one is better than another because we have not set up ways to compare them.” This concern was backed by Finn. “It is a paradox. If we get a vaccine that works, but not very well, it’s almost worse than not having one at all because it gets in the way of getting a better vaccine. We need to be thinking about it to avoid that situation urgently.”
14||For Halloween match dark lips with facial glowIn the run-up to Halloween, you’ll see a lot of impractical makeup options. While I accept pragmatism isn’t at the top of Halloween’s cosmetic agenda, if you’d rather something less terrifying, try Rodarte’s AW20 look. The trick is to juxtapose brooding lips with a glowy – not ghostly – face. Mimic skin by mixing in a bit of foundation with moisturiser. Apply subtle hints of highlighter to your cheekbones, add a dark eyeliner and finish off with a moody lip. 1. Dior Rouge Dior Ultra Rouge Lipstick £30, dior.com 2. Dolce &amp; Gabbana Passion Lips Lipstick £36, harrods.com 3. Laura Mercier Caviar Intense Ink Waterproof Liquid Eyeliner £22, feelunique.com 4. Westman Atelier Super Loaded Highlight £69, net-a-porter.com 5. Guerlain Rouge G de Guerlain Lipstick £26, guerlain.com I can’t do without… An excellent but simple cleanser that doesn’t break the bank Long before single-ingredient products became fashionable, Indeed Laboratories was there, quietly getting on with it producing clever formulations at great prices. As someone who grew up battling skin issues, I have always had a soft spot for efficacious, targeted skincare brands that are not financially prohibitive. The basis of good skincare is a decent cleanser, but even the very best shouldn’t cost you three figures – so if yours does, you are wasting your money. Especially when you have this. Now, a lot of cream cleansers irk me because I find they don’t clean well enough and they leave a residue on the skin. This one, however, has a myriad of characteristics I could champion all day long. The formula is made up of hyaluronic acid (hence the name) thereby enhancing moisture in the skin. It also includes a resurfacer and exfoliant that is gentle but powerful (clinically proven to brighten skin in 14 days) and grapeseed oil, which is a non-clogging source of antioxidants that also helps to reduce hyperpigmentation. The texture – a thick cream that lathers, but not too much – cleans like a gel counterpart. Like really cleans, but not in a way that leaves my skin feeling tight. Instead, my skin feels completely balanced. Which means on the days I am feeling particularly lazy I can skip my toner and go straight to moisturising. Always a winner in my book. Indeed Laboratories Hydraluron Cream Cleanser, £19.99, boots.com On my radar… A trio of body treats to sooth and smooth Salt of the earth Using avocado oil and sustainably sourced mineral salts from the Dead Sea and Kalahari desert, these bath salts create a relaxing soak, replenishing moisture and soothing aching muscles. Olverum Bath Salts, £37, spacenk.com Called to the bar I’m obsessed with this body-exfoliating bar. It has orange blossom and neroli, as well as bamboo powder for dead skin, and sunflower seed and aloe vera to lock in moisture. Glossier Body Hero Exfoliating Bar, £12, glossier.com Cream de la cream This thick luxe body cream – infused with soothing saffron flowers and moisturising shea butter and babassu – is excellent for dry skin. Feel the silkiness. Sisley Velvet Nourishing Body Cream, £102, sisley-paris.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto
18||Bail out our musicians or risk losing them for ever, say classical music starsLeading figures in classical music say many highly-trained orchestral musicians are giving up on music as they face homelessness and hunger this autumn. Speaking to the Observer this weekend, the internationally renowned conductor Sir Simon Rattle warned that an “exodus is happening right now”, while top English soloists the violinist Tasmin Little and the pianist Stephen Hough both spoke of despair and desperation among even successful performers. “Next month, we will all expect to hear the traditional sound of music as we commemorate Armistice Day,” said Little, an acclaimed virtuoso musician who trained as a child at the Yehudi Menuhin School. “But consider who is playing all this beautiful music for us and where it will come from in the future?” When the Last Post sounds, Little suggests, it will be heralding the end of Britain’s celebrated musical culture if there is no rescue for thousands of professional freelance musicians without work. She called on the government to support more distanced concerts to make them commercially viable for venues. Earlier this month, leading orchestras and music festivals received a first government bailout grant, including Rattle’s London Symphony Orchestra. But there is renewed concern that the majority of musicians who are freelancers have no safety net while only a few socially distanced concerts are staged. “While some of us working in established institutions have been fortunate to be given grants that help us to hang on, the vast majority of freelancers are in a desperate situation,” said Rattle. Institutions such as the LSO, BBC Radio 3, London’s Wigmore Hall or Snape Maltings Concert Hall in Suffolk, home of the Aldeburgh festival, have been creating as much paid work as possible since the lockdown eased, staging performances in front of reduced audiences and for live broadcast. But it is a tiny proportion of the scale of music once made. “My worry is that so many musicians will be forced to leave the profession that we will not be able to return to anything like the cultural life that we enjoyed previously. And that this exodus is happening right now, and that it will not be noticed until it is too late,” said Rattle. The controller of Radio 3, Alan Davey, said he hears worry and sometimes despair from musicians on a daily basis. “Everything that was certain for the next year has been thrown into complete uncertainty. “Music has got me through this so far, but musicians are particularly exhausted now because of the effort of finding new ways to reach audiences.” Radio 3 now stages concerts every week for live broadcasts that go out around the world, including a current residency at the Southbank Centre and upcoming events at the Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival. “What we are doing is a small thing, but if we can find ways to do it safely we will keep on, of course, because it matters.” Davey’s words were echoed by Cheshire-born concert pianist Stephen Hough: “It is strange, then distressing, to find oneself suddenly cut off from the joyful exhilaration of making music for an audience,” he said this weekend. “Musicians almost always chose this life not because of financial rewards but because of an inner necessity to communicate the beauty to others. And then … the concerts stop and the money stops too – voice silenced, and pockets emptied.” But Hough said he has found hope by playing at the Wigmore Hall and with the Liverpool Philharmonic, where he performs this week to a small crowd and an online ticketed audience. “It feels like a healing of the soul.” Petroc Trelawny, breakfast presenter on Radio 3, fears the new generation of young musicians will miss their moment to start a career while older audiences will lose the concert-going habit. “You have only a few years to sell yourself as a young performer,” he said. “You start out at the age of seven or eight, with the same commitment a doctor makes but with no guarantee at the end at the best of times,” he said. “There are wonderful things still happening, of course, but there is a danger in taking comfort from that. The vast majority of concerts are not happening. It is pretty grim for most musicians and they are very tired.” Trelawny added that he knows of one “really very famous name who his hit massive financial problems”. The difficulty for freelance musicians, he said, is that even those with viable careers rarely earn enough to save. “Many had just banked on being able to carry on.” For some performers the sudden drop in income has already forced them out of their homes or made the weekly shop unaffordable. He paid tribute to organisations, such as the Oxford Lieder festival, that are “still heroically staging distanced events and online concerts and paying musicians a normal wage” from any remaining funds. He also praised local musical groups, such as one in Kendal which has moved into the local church to allow smaller concert audiences to socially distance. “At the beginning of this, musicians tried to raise our spirits and now they need our help because there is no national organisation protecting them all,” he said. Little, who is playing out her last season as a violinist through the pandemic, having already decided last year to quit at the top of her career, urged music fans to support performers. “A huge percentage of us now have no work and yet we all expect music to be everywhere around us, on the radio, on television and in films. And musicians create great value for this country in terms of culture and the wider economy,” she said. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the spelling of Tasmin Little’s first name.
14||The Danish plot is all about trees, but it’s hard to resist flowers, tooIt took us years to add flowers at the Danish plot. An aesthetic thing to some extent. It is, after all, a simple piece of land by the sea, surrounding a black wooden beach hut, or summerhouse as they call them. There were already delicate wild hepatica, clumps of cowslip and campion, and carpets of celandine and cow parsley. We planted a crimson rugosa, an echo of the beach-side banks that colonise this coast. Next, a pale-blushed clambering rose, an old Danish variety. Here is where we mostly plant trees, replenishing the birch and beech, the larch and pine and fir that grow everywhere. Our first flower for its own sake: a shy naturalising species tulip that promptly disappeared for a few years. Next, Henri’s birthday lily of the valley, set in clumps by tree roots, quietly in keeping with a woodland feel to the plot. But then the species tulip showed and spread, and we were lost in admiration. Most years since, we have added to them, though always in small numbers. Sometimes we’re there when they’re at their best. Other times, we simply find the fallen petals. Our most recent tulip plantings: in late September, pale ‘Coerulea Oculata’ and a more exuberant T acuminata in the longer grass. We also added our first snake’s head fritillary (Fritillaria meleagris from Farmer Gracy) that we dotted though patches of the meadow. These all still in modest amounts. Then, as we were leaving, Henri’s missing parcel arrived with Sarah Raven border tulips and another tall French mix. I blame lockdown loneliness and the siren call of online shopping. I suspect we may stop. Though this year I’m trialling overwintering, calendula covered by clear storage boxes. For now, our thoughts turn to a Danish family Christmas and bright spring. A few more scattered flowers by a northern sea. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.com
3||From climate to China, how Joe Biden is plotting America’s restorationBy any measure, Joe Biden is old in the ways of the world. As Barack Obama’s vice-president, he met all the big international actors. As chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, he helped direct US foreign policy. After four years of Donald Trump’s manic leadership, the Democrat offers a steady, dependable hand on the tiller. Biden’s grand aim: a glorious American restoration, at home and abroad. But his long experience cuts both ways. For many on the left, Biden’s conventional global outlook represents not so much a new dawn as a return to the Washington establishment-led policies of the pre-Trump era. Those hoping for radical action on pressing issues such as the climate crisis, global inequality, or confronting authoritarian “strongman” leaders could be disappointed. If he wins, Biden’s supporters say, America will be back in charge at the global helm. Normal service will resume. Biden’s critics say he is but a pale shadow of his old boss – a cautious, centrist politician like Obama but lacking the latter’s vision. In either case, who Biden selects to be his secretary of state, national security adviser and defence secretary could be crucial. Pressure from Democratic party progressives such as Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren pushed Biden leftwards during the campaign. The twin health and economic crises caused by the coronavirus pandemic also shifted his thinking. He now talks about “reimagining” America’s relationship with the world. Whether his views have really changed remains to be seen. And for all his foreign policy expertise, it’s clear Biden’s primary focus, if elected, will be domestic. Writing in Foreign Affairs magazine earlier this year, he set out a “foreign policy for the middle class” whose top priority was “enabling Americans to succeed in the global economy”. Strengthening the US at home was a prerequisite for restoring global leadership, he said. His priorities were plain. The idea that America must and should lead internationally, and that Trump “abdicated” that duty, is nevertheless hard-wired into Biden, a child of the cold war. This assumption of supremacy is challenged nowadays by those who believe post-1989 and post-9/11 US leadership, and particularly its armed interventions abroad, have served neither the US nor the world. They point to Iraq – a war Biden supported. “If you liked US national security policy before Trump mucked things up, then Biden is probably your kind of guy,” wrote historian Andrew Bacevich, a former army colonel. “Install him in the Oval office and the mindless pursuit of ‘dominance in the name of internationalism’ will resume.” Bacevich argues foreign policy-making – for example, decisions about sanctions on Cuba or Iran – should be taken out of the hands of the foreign policy elite, publicly debated, and democratised. Biden’s is more a top-down approach. To be fair, he says he will rebuild alliances, nurture multilateralism, and always try diplomacy first. But the worry remains that his grand project could become a restoration tragedy, heralding a return to old-fashioned, high-handed American exceptionalism. Climate &amp; health Trump abandoned the Paris climate agreement last year; Biden has pledged to immediately rejoin it, committing the US to meeting international global warming targets by cutting national greenhouse gas emissions. In July he announced a $2tn, four-year plan to invest in a range of climate crisis solutions and a separate scheme to decarbonise the electricity sector by 2035. On the pandemic, Biden has said the US will rejoin the World Health Organization and restore funding. He has proposed a US-led coalition to coordinate the search for a Covid-19 vaccine and new treatments. Democracy &amp; values Biden says the world is caught in a battle between democracy and authoritarianism – and that the US must be at the forefront. “As a nation, we have to prove to the world that the US is prepared to lead again – not just with the example of our power but also with the power of our example,” he wrote in Foreign Affairs. He says he will convene a “global summit for democracy” within his first year in office “to renew the spirit and shared purpose of the nations of the free world”. He has vowed to ensure the US presidency is again seen as a principled defender of open and fair elections, judicial independence, human rights, and free speech. Britain &amp; Europe As a man proud of his Irish roots, Biden is strongly opposed to any Brexit outcome that jeopardises the Good Friday agreement or threatens peace in Ireland. Even if such concerns are allayed, a swift US-UK free trade deal, as promised by Trump, is likely to prove harder to achieve. Given Boris Johnson’s perceived Trump-style brand of rightwing populist politics, Biden is expected to call on Berlin and Paris, rather than London, as preferred partners on European issues. Like Obama, he favours a strong, united EU that makes common cause with the US. Biden may be the undertaker who finally buries the “special relationship”. China Despite Trump’s repeated claims to the contrary, Biden says he will be tough on China, citing its threats to Taiwan, its “unfair” trade practices, and its habit of “robbing” American companies of technology and intellectual property. To do so, he proposes “to build a united front of US allies and partners to confront China’s abusive behaviours and human rights violations – even as we seek to cooperate on issues where our interests converge, such as climate change, non-proliferation and global health security”. He has been notably critical of Beijing’s treatment of Uighur Muslims. Nuclear proliferation Biden plans to revive the system of nuclear arms control treaties with Russia degraded during the Trump years, starting with an extension of the 2010 New Start strategic arms treaty negotiated by Obama. He also says he will rehabilitate the 2015 Iran nuclear deal that Trump abandoned, if Tehran recommits to observing its terms. On North Korea’s nuclear weapons, he has little new to say. However, the modernisation of the US’s own nuclear arsenal, begun by Obama, looks set to continue. Conflicts Biden says he wants to reinvigorate Nato and strengthen alliances in Asia; will adopt a strong deterrent stance in the face of Russia’s anti-western machinations; will try to revive the Israel-Palestine peace process short-circuited by Trump; will end US support for the Saudi war in Yemen; halt family separations on the Mexican border and reform immigration; and support the UN and international law. Like Trump, he also vows to end what he calls “forever wars”. “We should bring the vast majority of our troops home from wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East and narrowly define our missions as defeating al-Qaida and Isis,” he states. Another Middle East war, in Syria, is rarely mentioned. Diplomacy first “Diplomacy requires credibility and Trump has shattered ours,” Biden says. “In the conduct of foreign policy, a nation’s word is its most valuable asset. As president, I will elevate diplomacy as the United States’ principal tool of foreign policy.”
5||The Observer view on Poland's draconian abortion banLast week’s flawed ruling by a constitutional tribunal in Warsaw drastically restricting the right to abortion is a grim reminder that women’s rights and, more broadly, the rule of law are under serious threat in Poland. This oppressive decision is part of a slide towards authoritarianism that began in earnest after the rightwing populist Law and Justice party (PiS) of Jarosław Kaczyński won an absolute majority in 2015. It must not be allowed to continue. Halting this deterioration is, first, a matter for the people of Poland. Although this predominantly Catholic, socially conservative country already has some of the strictest abortion prohibitions in Europe, surveys suggest that only a small minority supports additional curbs. Not for the first time, Kaczyński and PiS are deliberately ignoring the democratic consensus to advance a narrow ideological and religious agenda. Pro-choice supporters have reacted quickly. Angry crowds besieged streets around Kaczyński’s home in Warsaw waving signs that read “You are building women’s hell”. More demonstrations are planned this weekend in a nationwide upsurge of protest reminiscent of 2016, when tens of thousands of women dressed in black marched against earlier anti-abortion legislation. The new restrictions ban terminations in the case of severe foetal impairment, currently the reason given for most legal abortions. In future, abortion in Poland will be allowed only in cases of rape, incest or where there is a threat to the mother’s life. Such cases account for only 2% of legal terminations. Each year, thousands of Polish women seeking abortions are forced to travel abroad. The ruling is a direct assault on women’s rights and a moral obscenity. It is also legally flawed, in the sense that the PiS packed the tribunal with loyalists who delivered the result it wanted. Sadly, this is not unusual in Poland, whose government is locked in a long-running dispute with the EU commission over its repeated attacks on judicial independence, free media and LGBT rights. Past attempts by Brussels to impose penalties have been ineffective, owing to a lack of solidarity and, more recently, to Polish threats to block the new EU budget and pandemic recovery fund. Last month, the commission singled out Poland (and Hungary) for criticism in its first rule-of-law audit of EU states. Some MEPs and governments want to withhold EU financial aid, from which Poland benefits hugely, unless or until the PiS shifts ground. A poll last week showed overwhelming public support for linking EU funding to the rule of law. Those who doubt the Europe-wide relevance of Poland’s assault on women’s rights and the wider dispute with Warsaw should study Kaczyński’s recent remarks: they are the typical distortions of a populist-nationalist politician disdainful of democratic and legal norms. He vowed not to succumb to “threats and blackmail” from Brussels. “Those who want to take away our sovereignty based on their own whims are headed for a fall,” he said. “Today, the EU institutions, their officials, some politicians that the Polish people have never elected, demand that we verify our whole culture, reject everything that is very important for us, just because they like it,” Kaczyński told the Gazeta Polska Codziennie newspaper. His words could equally have been spoken by Italian, French or Brexit-touting British ultra-nationalists. For the sake of women’s rights and its own integrity, the EU must stop pulling its punches and crack down on governments that mock its core beliefs. And it should be clear eyed about the universality of this fight. Last week, the Trump administration promulgated a “global anti-abortion declaration” along with 31 like-minded illiberal or authoritarian regimes. Poland is a signatory. What do these governments have in common? They are run by men and they oppress women.
4||Refugee advocates concerned for detainee held in Brisbane hotel for 16 monthsRefugee advocates have raised concerns about the welfare of a 37-year-old man who is under suicide watch at the Brisbane Immigration Transit Accommodation after attempting self harm. The man, from Somalia, had been detained in a hotel at Kangaroo Point in Brisbane since being transferred to Australia from Nauru under now-defunct Medevac laws in June last year. He was approved for transfer under clauses allowing people to reunite with family members in Australia for medical treatment. His wife and infant son were transferred to Australia in 2017 because his son was having trouble breathing. They now live just 20 minutes from the motel where he has been detained for 16 months. But the family has not been reunited, and since coronavirus restrictions were introduced in March they have been unable to visit. “The only time he has seen his wife and son is when his wife brings his son to the fence,” Refugee Action Coalition spokesman Ian Rintoul said. “That’s the only time he has seen them since March.” In recent weeks they have been unable to visit because both have been unwell. “He is extremely distressed to be so close to them and not be able to provide any kind of support,” Rintoul said. The man attempted to self-harm about 3am on Saturday but guards at the Serco-run facility intervened. He was then kept at Kangaroo Point, without any medical support or assessment, for about 12 hours before being transferred to Brisbane Immigration Transit Accomodation and placed under watch as high risk. As of June there were more than 100 people held in detention at Kangaroo Point, which has been designated as an alternative place of detention. All were transferred to Australia from Nauru or Manus Island under medevac laws, which were repealed in December. Rintoul said detainees at Kangaroo Point, and the Mantra hotel in Melbourne, were now living in more restricted conditions than existed on Nauru. Because of the coronavirus lockdown, all in-person visits have been banned. Meanwhile prisoners in Queensland are now allowed to receive visitors, with Queensland Corrective Services allowing the resumption of in-person from 28 September. There have been suicide attempts among the immigration detainees at both hotels. “They thought when they were transferred here they were going to get medical help, including in some cases for mental health,” he said. “Many of them have not got that medical help that they were promised. There are people who have applied [for refugee status in] Canada, but that has been stalled because of the pandemic. “At least there is a balcony at Kangaroo Point. At Mantra they can’t open the windows.” Guardian Australia has sought a response from the Department of Home Affairs. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org
22||TV tonight: Hugh Laurie's Tory chancer flirts with misfortune in RoadkillRoadkill 9pm, BBC One “People like me because I break the rules. Voters think of me as a character.” While similarities to current politicians are no doubt entirely coincidental, it is impossible not to detect echoes of modern populism in David Hare’s drama as Hugh Laurie’s Tory chancer Peter Laurence continues to push the boundaries of probity. This week, Laurence isn’t the sole architect of his misfortune as his daughter attracts the attention of the tabloids. But her indiscretion comes at an unfortunate time in the light of other events. Phil Harrison Michael Palin: Travels of a Lifetime 8pm, BBC Two Of all the shows repurposed for pandemic viewing, these travelogues have been among the most likable. Partly, that’s down to Palin himself, but they have also tapped into our current longing for freedom. Tonight’s final episode sees Palin revisiting his journey across the Sahara. PH Enslaved With Samuel L Jackson 9pm, BBC Two The powerful series concludes with changing attitudes and the eventual abolition of slavery. Jackson, along with Afua Hirsch, looks at the activists, petitions and cultural changes that led to its demise, while Divers With Purpose examine the wreckage of slave ship the London. Hannah Verdier Piers Morgan’s Life Stories 9pm, ITV The older the guest, the better the chat; that’s a general rule of thumb and one that bodes well for this week’s interviewee. Sir Cliff Richard has just celebrated his 80th birthday and he’s here to discuss his poverty-stricken childhood, conversion to Christianity and an extraordinary life in British pop. Ellen E Jones The Bridge 9pm, Channel 4 There’s little bridge-building and lots of contrived machinations by the programme-makers as the reality show continues. The contestants, one of whom wins cash if they all complete their task, are going hungry, so food is offered – with a catch designed to manufacture division. Jack Seale The Olivier Awards 2020 10.20pm, ITV Originally scheduled for April and celebrating the best of 2019, the theatre awards finally get the go-ahead. Enjoy them while you can because it’s hard to imagine any similar ceremony next year. Nominees include Wendell Pierce and Phoebe Waller-Bridge and our master of ceremonies is Jason Manford. PH Film choice The Lighthouse, 12.50pm, 9.45pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Two salty seadogs question their sanity in a lighthouse: Robert Eggers’s follow-up to The Witch is a claustrophobic yarn of 19th-century mariners, superbly shot in shadowy monochrome by Jarin Blaschke, with haunting performances from Willem Dafoe and Robert Pattinson. Paul Howlett Live sport Scottish Premiership Football: Aberdeen v Celtic, 11am, Sky Sports Main Event Top-flight action from Pittodrie. F1: Portuguese Grand Prix, 1.05pm, Sky Sports F1 From Autódromo Internacional do Algarve. Premier League Football: Southampton v Everton, 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event With Wolves v Newcastle United to follow at 4pm.
23||Land, Birmingham: ‘Vegan cookery to file under thrilling’ – restaurant reviewEditor’s note: we have decided that, while restaurants remain open, we will continue to review them Land, 26 Great Western Arcade, Colmore Row, Birmingham B2 5HU (0121 236 2313). Two courses £20, three courses £26, five-course tasting menu £35, wines from £29 In the beginning there was a wild mushroom risotto and the non-meat eaters looked upon it and saw that it was seriously lame. Really? Is that it? For many kitchens cooking in the European tradition, it was. Going back 20 years or so it often seemed that, without a lump of animal protein to put front and centre, many lazy cooks would fall back swiftly into the heavy embrace of the carbs. Those damn vegetarians and vegans might not get something imaginative, but at least they’d get fed. Bring on the rice and pasta. Or, if you’re really lucky, a vegetable gratin that could grout a bathroom. A lot has changed. A lot hasn’t. As recently as February this year, at the splashy new restaurant of a chef who not only should know better but generally does, the meat-free options were pasta to start and gnocchi for the main. The come-hither menu descriptions listed roasted pumpkin and amaretto biscuits, pickled Thai shallots and dukkah. But none of that disguised those dishes’ true nature: pasta and gnocchi. There has, of course, been innovation. All hail Ottolenghi. Likewise, new generations of cooks have arrived in waves, fully aware that the diverse traditions of the Indian subcontinent, of China and the Middle East and all points in between often get along just fine without reaching for an ingredient that once had a pulse. Give thanks, too, for the rich blessing that is miso; for the uncompromising heft of gochujang. And yet, what occurs to me early on in my terrific lunch at Land, a small restaurant tucked away in the sort of Victorian shopping arcade in Birmingham that Pevsner wrote about, is how many clichés are still present in non-meat cookery in so many British restaurants. And how many of them are completely absent here. In your service I have been living through the cauliflower years. I have survived the aubergine years. Fine, sturdy vegetables, both. Love a bit of roasted cauliflower, me. I haven’t met an aubergine that I couldn’t spank with miso, grill to a charred mess and call dinner. But these can become as deadening a trope as that damn wild mushroom risotto. At Land there is none of that. It’s why I would encourage as many cooks as possible to get to Birmingham right now to see what chef Adrian Luck is doing there. The rest of you should pop along, too. His menu of almost entirely vegan cookery is short – just three choices at each course – but it should be filed under thrilling. There’s enormous, nerdy attention to detail alongside a precise understanding of both acidity and spice that lifts the seemingly humble far beyond its origins. We sit in the small downstairs dining room, at the bare wooden tables overseen by just one masked and attentive waiter, peering at plates of edible wonder. There are crescents of roasted onion squash the colour of a setting sun, on a bed of still-nutty puy lentils, bound by a mustardy dressing tangled with roasted red onion. What makes it sing is the addition of crisp lentils, perhaps deep-fried, to give it texture. There are the sweetest of Indian spice-roasted carrots, perched on a brilliant and vivid sweet-sour carrot and ginger purée. I could do serious damage to a bowl of that alone. There is the crunch of roasted seeds across the top. There are dribbles of what’s described as yogurt. As it’s a vegan dish, let’s assume nuts have been press-ganged into service. A potato rösti isn’t really, but let’s not get too hung up on nomenclature: it’s a plank of multilayered sliced potatoes, deep fried to an encouraging golden. There’s a cloud-like smoked-potato purée draped across the top, dusted with cep powder and, next to it, a spoonful of a boisterously acidulated mushroom ketchup. Oh boy. And on it goes. For a main course, a chunk of sweet potato has been roasted and partnered with a deep and sultry mole, that classic Mexican exercise in controlled burning used to produce a sauce full of spice and toasty dark-chocolate notes. There are whorls of avocado purée, and petals of the sweet potato skin, deep-fried for crunch. In another dish, sautéed king oyster mushrooms come on a cassoulet of borlotti beans lubricated with a little cream, the only dairy in the whole meal. The plate is topped with lacy “carbon tuiles” looking encouragingly like something worn by the women painted by Jack Vettriano. Celeriac, as familiar a non-meat trope as cauliflower and aubergine, is given a new and complex seeing to here. Chunks arrive roasted, under snowy slices of more of the same. Underneath are pearls of barley in a dark, umami-rich yeast broth. There’s a dusting of yeast across the top as well as dollops of a black garlic purée. I have a credo: non-meat dishes should be good because of that fact, rather than in spite of it. But I can’t help describing this celeriac dish as deep, intense and, well, meaty. With all these descriptions I will have missed a detail. I will have missed an ingredient or a moment of wizardry, because so much is going on. Adrian Luck is in complete control of his ingredients. It’s why I wish I could be just as enthusiastic about the desserts, but I can’t. Non-dairy creams can all too often have a musty, cereal back note, especially when sweetened. That’s what happens here in a sweetcorn tart with blackberries. The shell is tough and over-engineered, and the sweetcorn “cream” betrays its origins. Coconut milk might have been Luck’s friend here. A rapeseed oil cake with stewed apple, dribbles of caramel and a scoop of brisk buttermilk sorbet is much better, but lacks a certain largesse. Which is my fancy way of saying it needs loads more caramel. But ignore all that because of the brilliance that has gone before. Land is designed to take you somewhere new. Even the wine list is calculated to encourage experimentation. “If you like pinot noir,” says one heading, for example, before suggesting a gamay. And so we toast Luck’s cooking with a couple of glasses of godello because we like pinot grigio. I am aware that describing a restaurant like this as a find, when it’s been there for three years and always knew exactly where it was, might be a little insulting. But I can say that I’m delighted I’ve now found it. You should find it, too. News bites A new take on the cook-at-home ingredient delivery model: outside caterer Rocket, has launched a programme of food boxes entitled “A cook’s tour”. Alongside those ingredients, available for delivery nationwide, you also get access to a video cook-along, complete with live chat. Upcoming boxes include Flavours of Istanbul, Temples of Balinese Cuisine and Korean Street Food. The boxes cost from £55 for two. For more info visit acookstour.co.uk The tier 2 and 3 Covid-19 rules, prohibiting people meeting up indoors with anybody other than members of their own household, have resulted in mass restaurant cancellations. The Corbin and King group, which runs the Wolseley and Brasserie Zedel among others, says it lost 2,000 covers across the group to the end of October. At the same time a number of restaurant managers have told me that they are not clear how they are meant to police it. ‘Am I supposed to ask the members of every table for a proof of address?’ one maître d’ said to me. Another said there was a concern that, even to enquire of a table, might breach discrimination and equality legislation. In other news, Harrods in London’s Knightsbridge has announced it will be opening a branch of Gordon Ramsay Burger. It follows the success of the first in Las Vegas where the chef’s take on the humble hamburger costs up to $25.99. So there’s that. No opening date has yet been announced (gordonramsayrestaurants.com). Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1
23||The Loire’s chenin blanc is a master of disguiseBouvet Ladubay Saumur Brut, Loire, France NV (£13.99, or £9.99 as part of a mixed case of six, majestic.co.uk) If you’re a producer of chenin blanc in France’s Loire Valley, you get used to ceding the spotlight. You have to accept that the grape variety you’re working with is currently better known around the world for its contribution to the recent proliferation of superb dry white wines from South Africa. And you know very well that the white grape variety for which your home region is most famous has for some years now been sauvignon blanc, as found in the wines of Sancerre, Pouilly-Fumé and Touraine. But there are some compensations. Chenin blanc grown in the Loire Valley has a kind of super-power shared by very few other grape varieties (riesling is the only other one I can think of): you can use it to make any style of wine at the very highest quality level, from golden sweet dessert wines to crisply apple-scented, incisive champagne-alike sparkling wines such as Bouvet Ladubay’s reliably fresh and tangy fizz from Saumur. Domaine la Rouletière Patrimoine Vouvray Sec, Loire, France 2015 (from £17.49, allaboutwine.co.uk; greatwinesdirect.co.uk; corkingwines.co.uk) My current favourite Loire chenin fizz is a little more expensive than the Bouvet Ladubay. But at £21.95 (vincognito.co.uk) Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Triple Zéro is pretty competitive alongside the likes of champagne and English wine. It gets its name from the absence of sugar, which is commonly added in three stages in the production of sparkling wine, but not here: what you get is a tinglingly dry wine of luminous clarity and depth of ripe apple (a classic chenin character) and more exotic fruit. It’s made by one of the stars of Loire still wines, Jacky Blot, whose Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Remus 2017, a still dry chenin from vineyards around the village of Montouis-sur-Loire (£26.68, justerinis.com), has the same mix of fruit-depth and struck-bell resonance of flavour as the Triple Zéro, and which you can also find in the silkily elegant Patrimoine from Domaine la Rouletière in Vouvray. Domaine des Forges Coteaux du Layon Chaume 1er Cru, Loire, France 2016 (£18.56, gauntleys.com) The very best Loire chenin is certainly a match for the best chardonnay from Burgundy, and at a fraction of the price to boot. But the combination of grape and region is also responsible for some charming wines at more accessible prices: I’m thinking of reliable staples such as Waitrose’s Les Andides Saumur Blanc (currently on offer for £7.49) and Yapp Bros’ never-less-than-fun, tangy-racy and drinkable Saumur Blanc (£11.49). For sheer gastronomic pleasure from chenin, however, it’s hard to beat the dessert wines, which combine the lusciousness of honey, brown sugar and crystallized apple with that resounding, cleansing, Cox’s apple acidity you find in the dry and sparkling wines. A wine such as Domaine des Forges’ lingeringly lovely Chaume 1er Cru, for example, is the closest thing the wine world has to the experience of eating a perfectly made tarte tatin. Follow David Williams on Twitter @Daveydaibach
3||Many midwest Democrats stayed home in 2016. Will they turn out for Biden?Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. “Trump’s presidency, the last four years, have been absolutely horrible. Trump blew life back into white supremacy. Him being so open and unapologetic about the stuff he says, and things that he’s done, really gave that power,” he said. “Plus coronavirus, because now we have tens of thousands of people, especially in the black community, really suffering from Covid-19. We have an economy decimated to almost the proportions of the depression. The loss of jobs and loss of wealth is worse than I’ve ever seen before.” Collins will be voting for Biden and encouraging anyone else he can to do the same because the election hangs in good part on the turnout in major midwestern cities. Trump decisively won Ohio four years ago after the state had voted twice for Obama. But with the president holding a lead of just 1% in the aggregate of recent polls, the result in Ohio may come down to just a few thousand votes in Cleveland. Four years ago, Clinton won nearly 50,000 fewer votes than Obama in Cuyahoga county, which includes Cleveland and its small satellite cities, in part because so many Democrats stayed home. In neighbouring Michigan, Democratic turnout in Detroit fell by about 60,000 votes in 2016. Trump took the state with a majority of just 10,704 votes. Similarly, the drop in turnout between presidential elections in the Democratic stronghold of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, was more than double the number of votes – just 23,000 – that Trump won the state by. Those victories were key to the president winning the electoral college and taking the White House. The Democrats have reason to hope Biden can turn that around on 3 November. More than 8m people have registered to vote in Ohio, the second highest on record after Obama’s 2008 race. The number registering as Democrats has surged 20% in the state this year while Republicans have fallen 6% although they still have a slight lead in total registrations. Little more than half of the electorate are independents. Two-thirds of the drop in Republican voters is in Cuyahoga county. Those retreating from Trump include blue collar workers and white women living in the Cleveland suburbs. “Voting for him was a big mistake,” said a shop assistant, Lynn, who is married to a factory worker, after a campaign worker knocked on her door. “We both didn’t like Hillary and thought Trump would be good for bringing jobs back. I lost it with him that first year. I realised he was completely unfit to be president. But my husband hung on, believing in him until Covid. We’re both voting Biden just to get him out. I don’t know what Biden will do but at this point I don’t care.” Like others who once backed Trump and have turned away she did not want to be identified because “we have some crazy neighbours around here”. Lynn is among about 2.5m Ohioans who applied for absentee ballots, double the number in 2016. Nearly one quarter of the electorate has already voted in Cuyahoga county, whether by post or in person. “What we’re seeing right now is astronomical volumes of people voting by mail,” said Erika Anthony of Cleveland Votes, a nonpartisan get out the vote group. “Weirdly, despite the fact that every sort of tactic that we normally would be deploying to get people to vote has been compromised because of the pandemic, I will say there’s been an increased excitement when we are engaging with residents, potential voters.” But for all that, less than half of the population of Cleveland registered to vote. Some in the city have never been to the polls. Others turned out for Obama but not since. “Voter apathy is a real thing,” said Anthony. “If I’m a black person particularly, I really am not seeing anything that’s demonstrating to me that democracy is working for me.” Cleveland is among the most racially segregated cities in the country and one in three residents lives below the poverty line. It struggled through the Obama years, never really recovering from the 2001 recession or the national economic collapse seven years later. Then came coronavirus. Amanda King, an African American volunteer working to register voters in Cleveland said some voters are more motivated to turn out this year. “I think that among young and educated voters, there’s a feeling that this is our duty to vote in this election because it’s consequential. It feels more pressing than the Trump-Hillary election,” she said. “I think for some people, their bubble has been burst. After the Obama presidency they were thinking we’re a progressive society, things are great. And then this four years of Trump has really made some people come to the realisation that our country is not the democracy that it could be or should be.” But King, who runs an art collective, Shooting Without Bullets and who helped curate City Champions, the Guardian’s week-long focus on the city last year, said she met far less enthusiasm in one of the city’s poorest neighbourhoods, Hough, where she visited barbershops, a popular gathering place for discussion among African American men. “When I do voter registration in Hough, which is a majority black neighbourhood that has been disinvested from, redlined, a lot of that population is functionally illiterate, it’s a very different response over there. There’s a lot of people who are not interested and who don’t believe in electoral politics,” she said. “Many of their arguments were that whether it’s Trump, whether it’s Obama, whether it’s Bush, whether it’s Clinton, they’ve never cared about me. Me choosing them as leadership has never changed the conditions in which I’m living. And you look at that neighbourhood, and you look at those statistics, and you say, you’re damn right. I understand that frustration.” King said dire predictions for four more years of Trump are doing little to galvanise people in neighbourhoods like Hough. “That might work for white women who voted for Trump last time but that’s not going to work necessarily for the people on the fence. You can’t say to someone who has nothing, to someone who is constantly in a state of struggle, well this guy is gonna make it worse. There’s no more fear to be had. They’re not selling greatness here, they’re selling well, it’s worse or worse,” she said. “I’m thinking that there’s a lot of barbershops around the midwest where this conversation is happening. It scares me because I know that we need to turn out for this election.” Detroit and Milwaukee also saw a drop in voting in African American neighbourhoods in 2016 that local activists in part attributed to a lack of interest because Obama was not on the ballot or disillusionment because he was able to achieve less than they had hoped, in part because of Republican obstruction. Collins grew up in overwhelmingly black East Cleveland where his father worked for General Electric and his mother was a bus driver. “People feel like their vote is not going to make a difference. And people may be too concerned with other stuff that’s going on right in front of their face versus getting into politics. They don’t trust politicians, never have,” he said. “Up until Obama, there were never a lot of people voting around here because I don’t think they really saw them making a change.” Collins, who teaches at a school and a community centre, said coronavirus forced his classes online but some of young people he teaches don’t have computers. Others lack decent internet connections. They might rely on their phones for social media but that doesn’t work for interactive lessons. “These are the kinds of problems a lot of their families are focused on, not voting,” he said. Democratic politicians remain confident but have a different concern. Kent Smith is running unopposed for re-election as a state representative in Euclid, a majority black small city within Cuyahoga county that is effectively a suburb of Cleveland. He is less worried about turnout than whether the votes get counted. “I really think that in 2020, because of the global pandemic and the change in how people are voting, it’s really going to be turnout versus the number of votes that are ruled ineligible,” he said. Smith said a combination of voters not being used to filling out postal ballots – a common error is to put the date instead of date of birth – and efforts by Ohio’s Republican secretary of state, Frank LaRose, to throw roadblocks in the way of voting by post which is more favoured by Democrats, has raised concerns of large numbers of ballots being discounted. “Projections of turnout are healthy for the Democrats. It’s a matter of how many of those votes will actually count,” said Smith.
5||Better late than never –  how Rishi Sunak ended up with a planThree mini-budgets from the chancellor in four weeks isn’t normal. But then nothing much is these days. This trilogy started at the end of September, with the winter economy plan. The name gives you a clue that this was meant to be the plan for the whole winter. Far from getting through to the spring, the plan’s flagship policy didn’t make it to the end of October before being totally reinvented by the Treasury last week in the third instalment of this economic policy saga. The policy in question is the job support scheme (JSS), the replacement for the furlough scheme that ends a week today. For those returning to work for a fraction of their previous hours, the scheme pays them two-thirds of their wages for the hours not worked. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said its goal was to give businesses “the option of keeping employees in a job on shorter hours rather than making them redundant”. That is the right aim, but the scheme didn’t give many firms that option. It was too expensive, asking firms being hammered by this pandemic to pay a third of wages for hours not worked. This design flaw was obvious a month ago. As we at the Resolution Foundation pointed out within minutes of the chancellor’s announcement, there’s a reason other short-hour work schemes, like that in Germany, do not ask employers to pay towards the costs during downturns. Government’s response was that our analysis might be right on a spreadsheet but didn’t reflect the real world. You didn’t need a spreadsheet to tell you that the scheme incentivised firms to keep one worker on full time rather than two on half-time, which is not how you reduce the coming rise in unemployment. On Thursday, the chancellor recognised this reality, slashing the employer contributions from 33% to 5%. What sounds like a tweak is a revamp of the JSS, turning it into a functioning short-time work scheme. The cost to an employer of keeping two staff earning £17,000 on for half their usual hours has fallen from £233 to just £35 a month – an 85% reduction. This will make a huge difference to take-up, incentivising firms to cut hours, not jobs. It won’t be cheap, increasing its cost many times over, but it will lead to lower unemployment and protect household incomes. So we’ve got to the right place, albeit too late, with the now heavily revised scheme set to go live in seven days’ time. It’s worth asking how this mess happened, because there are lessons for policymakers. Fundamentally, this is a classic case of optimism bias. The hope that the summer pause in the pandemic would last was understandable, but a terrible basis for policymaking. It, combined with talk of a V-shaped recovery, lies behind this painful display of economic policy slowly catching up with the return of the virus. High employer contributions might have made sense if we were phasing out lockdown restrictions, but make little sense when we are ramping them back up. Optimism bias is something almost all of us are guilty of. In our private lives we tell ourselves we’ll make it on time even when it’s clear we’re running late and it’s a common pandemic survival technique not to admit to ourselves quite how long this will go on. This same optimism bias explains why it took until Wednesday for the government to confirm that this autumn’s spending review, which was set to hand our departmental budgets for the coming three years, had been scrapped. It’s been clear for months that we’re in no position to plan public spending three years ahead right now, and only placing a lot of value on hope over evidence would make you think otherwise. We don’t know what we’ll be spending next month, let alone in 2024. Underpinning this optimism bias is a misdiagnosis of our pandemic-stricken labour market. We’re regularly told that, while it’s sad jobs are going in sectors such as hospitality and leisure, it’s best for those workers to enter unemployment because they’ll swiftly find jobs in less pandemic-hit parts of the economy. This works in textbooks but ignores the evidence. The UK is seeing the largest rise in unemployment in over a decade. That is driven more by huge falls in the chances of someone out of work finding a new job than by increased job losses themselves. Far from growing fast and hiring, even firms less affected by the pandemic have stopped investing, given the huge uncertainty. The real lesson here is that, while optimism bias may be a human flaw that we all live with in our private lives, it’s a dangerous force in politics. History shows us that previous pandemics lasted years not months, and that second and third waves were common. In a pandemic it’s fair enough to hope for the best, but policy needs to be set with a closer eye on the painful and messy reality. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation
3||Biden gains as suburban women and elderly voters turn backs on TrumpJoe Biden’s hopes of reaching the White House could rest on two crucial demographic groups that appear to be deserting Donald Trump: elderly people and suburban women. They would join a broad coalition that includes strong support among African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans, the LGBTQ community and young people. With the gender gap potentially bigger than ever, the president appears more reliant than ever on white men. Little more than a week before election day, Biden enjoys a double-digit lead in almost every national poll and is ahead in the crucial battleground states. More than 52 million people have already voted, according to the US Elections Project. In the past four presidential elections, Republicans have led among the elderly by around 10 points. But about four in five Americans killed by the coronavirus were older than 65 and a majority of Americans say Trump has mishandled the pandemic. The president trails among elderly voters by more than 20 points, according to recent CNN and Wall Street Journal/NBC News polls. This swing could prove critical in states such as Arizona and Florida, which have a high number of retirees. “In terms of voting blocs, there are two that are absolutely dooming Donald Trump,” said Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota. “He won the senior vote by seven points in 2016; that was very important in Florida and a few other states. He’s now losing that bloc and the polls differ about how much, but the fact that he no longer has an advantage among seniors is really crippling for him. “And then he has so alienated suburban women that it’s put a whole number of states in play, including states you wouldn’t expect, like Georgia. This kind of macho presidency has gotten the ringing rejection by women, particularly educated women who are so tired of the 1950s.” The suburban revolt against Trump’s bigotry, hardline agenda and chaotic leadership was manifest in the 2018 midterm elections when Democrats gained 41 seats in the House of Representatives, the biggest such shift since the post-Watergate 1974 elections, and won the popular vote by 8.6%. Trump’s campaign to win back this constituency, variously known as “soccer moms”, “security moms” and “hockey moms”, has been anything but subtle. He has tried to tap racist fears of suburbs overrun by crime, violence and low-income housing. In one tweet, he promised to protect “the Suburban Housewives of America”. At a recent rally in Pennsylvania, he pleaded: “Suburban women, will you please like me? Remember? Hey, please, I saved your damn neighborhood, OK?” Polls suggest the plea is falling on deaf ears. Biden leads by 23 points among suburban women in swing states, according to the New York Times and Siena College, and by 19 points among suburban women overall, according to Pew Research. Pew also found that Hispanic women prefer Biden by 44 points and Black women go for the Democrat by a staggering 85 points. Andrea Moore, 45, a stay-at-home mom in suburban Wayne county, Michigan, voted for Trump in 2016 because she was tired of career politicians. “He was an unknown quantity, but now we know,” she told the Associated Press, explaining that she will not vote for the president again because of “a million little things” including his divisiveness, fearmongering and failed Covid-19 response. The trends were underlined this week by a national survey of 2,538 Americans by the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) that showed Trump haemorrhaging support among the elderly and suburban women as well as another, less expected group: white Catholics. Only 38% of people aged 65 or older approve of Trump’s handling of the pandemic while 61% say they disapprove, the PRRI found. Among white college-educated women, seven in 10 disapprove of Trump’s handling of the pandemic, seven in 10 disapprove of his response to racial justice protests and a similar share believe he has encouraged white supremacists. There are also signs of erosion among religious conservatives, a bulwark of Trump’s base. PRRI found that while three in four (76%) white evangelical Protestants still approve of the job Trump is doing, only 52% of white mainline Protestants and 49% of white Catholics agree. Biden would be only the second Catholic president. Robert P Jones, chief executive and founder of PRRI, said: “White Catholics are a group that particularly in those swing rust belt states – Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Ohio – are really on the president’s must-win list. They’re also important in a place like Arizona. They are as big or bigger than white evangelicals in those states, so in terms of religious groups they are quite an important constituency. “White Catholics in 2016 were basically evenly divided between Trump and Hillary Clinton at this stage in the race. We have them at 54% Biden, 41% Trump, so that’s a sea change. This group is going to play an outsized role in Trump’s path to the electoral college and he’s not doing well with them at all.” Clinton was beaten in the electoral college after suffering heavy losses among non-college-educated white voters – a majority of the population in battleground states such as Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin – and failing to turn out African Americans at levels Barack Obama achieved. Current polling suggests Biden will do better on both accounts. Whereas Clinton lost whites without a college degree by more than 20 points, Biden is trailing by just 12 in UCLA Nationscape’s polling, according to an analysis by the FiveThirtyEight website. This appears to vindicate strategists’ view that Biden, a 77-year-old white male from humble origins in Scranton, Pennsylvania, would resonate more with this demographic than the New York-based wife of a former president. But, FiveThirtyEight added, Trump is performing slightly better than four years ago among college-educated white voters, and has made modest gains among voters of colour. The president’s support among Black voters aged 18 to 44 rose from around 10% in 2016 to 21% in UCLA Nationscape polling. He is also at 35% among Hispanic voters under age 45, up from the 22% in 2016 – and potentially significant in Florida. Jason Miller, a senior adviser to the Trump campaign, told reporters on Friday: “We’re very proud of the president’s efforts to turn out Latino voters … There’s a lot of enthusiasm for the president, not just for everything that he’s done so far but also because people are really scared about Joe Biden’s appeasing the regimes from Cuba and Venezuela.” Older voters of colour remain overwhelmingly Democratic, however. Biden is also dominant among all people under 35 even in Republican strongholds, with leads in Texas (59% to 40%), Georgia (60% to 39%) and South Carolina (56% to 43%), according to Axios and SurveyMonkey.
27||Malcolm Turnbull signs Kevin Rudd's petition challenging News Corp media dominanceFormer Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has signed Kevin Rudd’s petition calling for a royal commission into News Corp’s dominance of the Australian media. Rudd, also a former Australian prime minister, launched the petition to the Australian parliament earlier this month, saying the media company employed tactics that “chill free speech and undermine public debate,” and calling for a royal commission to ensure a strong and diverse news media in the face of “new business models that encourage deliberately polarising and politically manipulated news”. Both Rudd and Turnbull faced negative campaigns from News Corp during their time in office. On Sunday, Turnbull shared that he had signed the petition. “Kevin has done well to get this petition going,” he said on Twitter. “I doubt it will result in a Royal Commission and Murdoch’s print monopoly (since 1987) is only part of the problem. But I have signed it and encourage others to do so.” Rudd said it was “good to have you on board”. “Supporting media diversity isn’t about left or right, Labor or Liberal, but preserving the lifeblood of our democracy,” he said on Twitter. In Australia, there is no requirement for the parliament to respond to a petition once it reaches a certain number of signatures. Rudd told Guardian Australia that he knew it was unlikely the current federal government would respond. “Obviously, the beneficiaries of the Murdoch protection racket, the Liberal National party, will not do that [act],” he said. “It will take some time to convince the Labor party that it’s in their interest as well. That will be influenced directly by the volume of public support.” The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has a distanced himself from the petition, saying Rudd was acting as a private citizen and it was not reflective of Labor policy. Rudd told the ABC on Tuesday that Turnbull had reached out to him to see how they could work together on curtailing Murdoch’s influence over Australian politics. “Malcom reached out to me a couple of days ago,” he said. “He wants to have a discussion about how we handle these matters in the future, so I’ll do that in due course.” He highlighted that NewsCorp campaigns against him and against Turnbull were a matter of documentary record. “That is all about the influence and the exercise of Murdoch’s media muscle and knocking over an Australian prime minister,” he said. “Now, I don’t support Mr Turnbull, as you know, for a whole range of policy reasons – although in some areas of policy we have a common view – but this petition of mine is not about partisan politics. “I’m no longer a player in national politics, I’m not seeking elected office but I am concerned about this cancer on our democracy and if Mr Turnbull wishes to join forces with me on this, well and good.” Rudd said News Corp’s owner, Rupert Murdoch, was a “virtual monopoly player” in Australia. In his home state of Queensland, which is currently in a state election campaign, every newspaper is owned by NewsCorp. “This is a one-newspaper state, not just a one-newspaper town,” he said “And anyone who thinks that’s fair in terms of every side of politics having a fair go has got rocks in their head.” The two former prime ministers have been strange bedfellows in the past 12 years of Australian public life. Turnbull was made opposition leader in 2008, after Rudd won the 2007 election, and then lost the leadership to Tony Abbott in 2009. In 2012 they appeared together on an episode of ABC’s Q&amp;A, when they were viewed as so similar – moderate, wealthy, and “not very popular in your own parties, but very popular among people” – that one audience member asked if they had considered joining together to form their own political party. Rudd quipped: “Malcolm and I could never agree on the leadership.”
14||We are railing: Britain embraces the joys of the humble train setIt started with a standard Scalextric set: two slot cars, some track, a 10-year-old boy and his enthusiastic father. Six months later, Ben Martin has a 75ft raceway in his loft and a growing collection of cars. “I went down a rabbit hole with my son,” Martin said. “There was a time when the postman was bringing track every day. He was laughing, ‘What’s all this about?’ But you can never have too many straights. It’s fulfilling a childhood dream. I played with Scalextric with my brother and I always wanted a track in the loft that lived there, that you could use whenever you wanted, not just taking over the living room for a few days before your parents made you pack it up and maybe get it out months later.” Martin is not alone. Slot cars, model railways and model-making have boomed during the pandemic. Hornby, that stalwart of the British hobbyist industry, said last month it had seen far higher sales between April and August than expected. Peco, which makes tracks and scenery, is struggling to keep up with demand. And hobby shops have seen a huge increase in customers. Hattons has supplied customers in Widnes and beyond for decades, and Richard Davies, the managing director, said sales had been “a blur”. “We’ve been inundated with orders,” he said. “Last year, people were buying three and a half items on average, but in March and April that went up to seven or eight. We were about 50% up. “The whole crisis has prompted people to take a look at how they use their time – people think they’ve been spending too much time at work, and now they want to make the model railway that’s been on their mind for the last 20 years.” Some are new model enthusiasts, like the Martin family. Others, such as Chris Chewter in Oxfordshire, are established hobbyists who have had more hours to invest in getting a little closer to perfection. For the last five years, Chewter and his daughter have been recreating Tetbury station in Gloucestershire, which was a victim of the Beeching railway closures. The layout is a “small piece of utopia where the sun is always shining and the world is Covid-free”, Chewter said. “I’ve always wanted to take a real location and model it as close to scale as I possibly could. There’s something about making a model when it looks like it’s been shot by a Bond villain’s shrink-ray that captures my imagination.” Steve Haynes, Peco’s sales and export manager, said: “It appeals to people who have artistic flair, to people who have a technical mind because they like the electronics, to people who have an interest in history. It stimulates the mind.” Peco had to shut its factory in Devon for five weeks at the start of the pandemic. “Now we’re trading at a much higher level this year than we were last year, even with that disruption,” Haynes said. “We’re recruiting more staff and we’re still behind the curve – the demand is relentless. Some of our retail customers have seen more business than at Christmas.” It helps that model railways now have a stamp of celebrity approval, and geek culture is not merely tolerated but feted. Rod Stewart was proud to show off his extraordinary reconstruction of an American city to Railway Modeller magazine last year. The sprawling layout of 1940s cars, trains and skyscrapers is 125ft by 23ft, and he is reportedly shipping it back to Essex from Beverly Hills. Musician Jools Holland, another enthusiast, has recreated the Channel tunnel and 1960s London. “There are plenty of people showing off their model railways on Instagram,” Davies said. “When I was 15, I was embarrassed by my model railway. I didn’t want anyone at school to know about it. It seems like we’ve moved forward.” Hornby, which owns many of the brands in British model shops, had been in the doldrums for some time, but its fortunes turned a corner after Lyndon Davies took over as chief executive three years ago. Stock market rules prevent him from revealing details before its interim results in November, but he is ebullient. “Whenever there’s a national crisis, people turn inwards and look for things of comfort,” he said. “And we’ve tried to give people more fun.” Hornby now makes Scalextric models of Batman and Joker cars, and Del Boy’s Reliant van from Only Fools and Horses. The track was more reliable now, Davies said, and customers also liked controlling their trains and cars with mobile phone apps. “I had a race with my grandson, he had Superman, I had the Reliant Robin,” Davies said. They have a range of Yellow Submarine buses and trains that has launched in time for Christmas.” “It’s so wholesome and innocent, and there’s absolutely nothing negative about it,” Ben Martin said. “It’s not like screen time. Everyone is interested. We’ve had load of visitors in the loft, from six-year-olds to my uncle in his 70s. “But I’m done now. I’ve got enough track. We’ve started collecting Star Wars figures.” • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to add a photographer credit to the main image.
15||Man in critical condition after shark attack on Great Barrier Reef north of TownsvilleA man is in a critical condition after being attacked by a shark at the Great Barrier Reef. He was airlifted to Townsville University hospital after being bitten at Britomart Reef around 12.20pm on Sunday, Queensland Ambulance says. The area, off the north Queensland coast about 150km north of Townsville, is a popular spear-fishing location. Seven Australians have died from shark bites in 2020 including six in unprovoked attacks – more than any year since 1934. While the total number of shark bites is in line with the annual average over the past decade, it has prompted experts to consider whether the La Niña weather event, associated with cooler sea surface temperatures in the central Pacific, may be affecting where sharks search for prey. According to the Australian Shark Attack File, it has been 86 years since six people last died from unprovoked shark bites in a single year. In 1929, nine people died from unprovoked shark bites in Australia – a record that preceded debate about introducing the first shark nets at Australian beaches several years later. There have been 18 unprovoked shark bites so far in 2020, one more than last year and the same as in 2018. In 2015, there were 22. In January, a 57-year-old experienced diver, Gary Johnson, was killed by a shark near Esperance in Western Australia, and in April, a 23-year-old wildlife ranger, Zachary Robba, was killed by a shark off the Great Barrier Reef. In June, Rob Pedretti, 60, died after he was bitten by a shark while surfing in northern New South Wales, and in July, a teenager died from a shark bite while surfing at another beach in the region. In September, 46-year-old Nick Slater died after being bitten while surfing near the Gold Coast. Authorities called off a search for the body of Andrew Sharpe earlier in October after friends saw the 52-year-old attacked while surfing near Esperance. While surfing is not considered provoking a shark, the death of a 36-year-old while spearfishing off Queensland’s Fraser Island in July is considered to be the result of a provoked bite, as the release of fish blood can attract sharks.
28||For the recordAn article said that Scotland “is due to conduct” a census in the spring. In fact, the impact of Covid-19 means its national survey has been postponed a year to March 2022 (“Census to ask about sexual orientation for the first time”, 18 October, page 12). The term of office served in the US House of Representatives is two years, not four, as we had it (“How the US Senate might change”, 18 October, page 39). Visiba, a company that undertook research into incidents involving people suffering from mental health crises in England, is a digital healthcare platform provider, not an online mental health care provider, as an article said (“Police 999 callouts to mental health incidents soar”, 18 October, page 28). A review of the documentary film White Riot referred to punk bands in the 1970s having “significant numbers of NF and Britain First supporters”. Britain First was not founded until 2011; the intended reference was to the British Movement (TV review, New Review, 18 October, page 29). A column described the artist Laura Knight as “the first female Royal Academician” (“Guess the painting”, New Review, 11 October, page 38). Knight was the first fully elected female Royal Academician, after the founding members Mary Moser and Angelica Kauffman. Other recently amended articles include: Coronavirus: 1 million young Britons ‘face jobs crisis within weeks’ Police call for urgent review of stop and search protocols after officer’s death in Croydon Pizza, kebabs, chicken tikka masala: make your own takeaway favourites Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736
5||Letters: Britain at fault for Brexit fishing woesYour interesting article did not explain why so much fish in British waters is now caught by boats from other EU countries (“Brixham fishermen hope Brexit will tip the scales for shrinking industry”, Business). In the late 1980s, grants from Europe were made available for fishing communities to modernise their boats and tackle. This funding had to be match-funded by national governments. Other governments supplied this funding, unlike the UK. The result was that British fishermen were unable to compete with the bigger, more efficient boats, and many sold their quota to French, Spanish or Dutch fishing companies. The quotas were introduced to preserve fish stocks. The reason the future of fishing is so fraught in the Brexit negotiations is that other European nations paid British fishermen to be able to fish for what had been British quotas. Veronica Hardstaff, MEP for Lincolnshire 1994-1999 and former member of the European parliament fishing committee, Sheffield The most serious threat to the UK fishing fleet is that 37% of fish caught by UK boats are landed in the European Economic Area, with the largest shares being exported to Norway, the Netherlands and France. The UK fleet may well want a larger quota of available stocks, but the main species found in UK waters are mackerel and herring, which do not have a UK market. The continuation of EU/EEA landing rights without tariffs, quotas or phytosanitary restrictions is far more important than sharing a few cod with France. A no-deal Brexit would result in the loss of substantial and valuable exports for the UK fishing fleet. Eric Goodyer Birsay, Orkney Rough justice on golf course It is regrettable that Aberdeen has granted planning permission for a new Trump golf course on the Menie estate (“New Trump golf course provokes fury in Scotland”, News). But had Trump been refused planning permission, he could have appealed directly to the Scottish government. But objectors to planning applications have no equal right of appeal, despite repeated attempts to get this introduced into Scottish law. Should Trump act on his granted permission, the invaluable coast and dunes will be further destroyed. Rose Harvie Dumbarton, West Dunbartonshire Arts bailout ‘blackmail’ I am appalled that arts organisations are being compelled to give public praise to named members of the government and to the Treasury and Arts Council England (“Want an arts bailout? Then you’d better praise Sunak &amp; co”, News). Were the artists told that this blatant blackmailing would be integral to the government’s culture recovery fund? It appears the government is shamefully taking advantage of the Covid crisis to bring the arts to heel and to give the appearance that artists are supportive of its notoriously unprincipled behaviour. Philip Hedley, director emeritus, Theatre Royal Stratford East, London WC1 Land is our heritage too Joe O’Donnell, the director of the Victorian Society, is not alone in his concerns about the government’s proposed changes to the planning system (“‘Greatest threat in a generation’ faces heritage buildings”, News). Heritage is just one of several qualities that places possess. He cites English Heritage research on the carbon savings of refitting existing buildings. In Wales, government agencies were quick out of the blocks, introducing in 2008 their unique land use information system, Landmap, with its all-Wales coverage of areas that merit being taken into account in land management and change decision-making. This information base of more than 10,000 areas is freely available online, just the kind of thing England’s public sector ought to introduce without delay to ensure a place’s qualities are properly understood and not wasted, for example, in carbon-costly new developments or habitat loss. David Eagar Birmingham Word ban is hard to swallow Barbara Ellen hit the nail on the head in her criticism of the powerful meat industry’s attempt to ban words such as “banger” and “burger” in relation to similar-tasting alternatives that cut out the cruelty (“Bangers and burgers belong to us vegetarians and vegans too”, Comment). It is obvious that the meat industry does not, and cannot, own words. The use of the phrase “cultural hijacking” by the meat industry is frankly hilarious and rather pathetic. The only “hijacking” I can see is directed towards our planet, exploiting its precious resources for the mere benefit of a consumer to buy a chunk of butchered meat. Sebastian Monblat Sutton, London Held back by my class I share Kenan Malik’s scepticism about the reporting, both political and academic, of the assumed educational disadvantage of “white”, working-class boys (“Being white won’t hold boys back. Being working class just might”, Comment). I am from a northern, white, working-class background, failed the 11-plus and then got to university from a secondary modern, which limited my academic choices and future. I found the work of the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu a useful insight into this “disadvantage”. Like Malik, he contended that the main factor was the constrained life chances of being working class; he contended that this was “operationalised” through “cultural capital”. Our heavily exam-based, traditional and elitist schooling and curriculums are biased towards “middle/upper class cultural capital”, with all the enrichment, private tutoring and access to literary/musical/cultural opportunities that go with it. Philip Wood Kidlington, Oxfordshire Sins of the Flesh Your article on the “lost” Nic Roeg Flash Gordon film does not mention that an “erotic” comedy version titled Flesh Gordon actually was released in 1974 (“Flesh Gordon? Artwork reveals erotic version that was never made”, News). Having sneaked in to see this film aged 15 in the days before ID was required, I can vouch that it was neither erotic nor particularly comedic, although I do remember many people in the audience rolling about with laughter at the heavy-handed script. But a Nic Roeg version I would love to have seen! Dougie Mitchell Edinburgh
3||Kleptopia review: power, theft and Trump as leader in Putin’s own imageIn a year dominated by a US presidential election between a kleptocrat and a democrat, a book about world-class thieves laundering trillions ought be the perfect bedtime reading for anyone curious about the unprecedented amounts of money that have been looted and hidden over the last 20 years. Tom Burgis, a reporter for the Financial Times, is certainly an impressive investigator. He works hard to explain how myriad financial institutions, from the Bank of New York to Merrill Lynch and HSBC, have tried to deceive regulators and wash the ill-gotten gains of countless dictators. The oligarchs of Putin’s Russia are big players in these pages. So are Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, British bankers turned regulators, a trio of Central Asian billionaires, and no fewer than 30 other major characters, all listed at the beginning. This results in so many competing storylines that it becomes almost impossible to keep track. We bounce back and forth, from the Russian and Italian gangsters of Brooklyn to the oil fields of the former Soviet Union, from the platinum mines of Zimbabwe to the copper and cobalt of the Congo. There are long sections about the wholesale theft of natural resources in post-Soviet Russia and the birth of the oligarchs, all of whom were forced to become Putin’s partners – or face imprisonment or death. For example, the purchase of a three-quarter stake in Yukos, for $350m, made Mikhail Khodorkovsky the richest man in Russia. Five years later, the vast oil company with 100,000 employees was worth $12bn. Khodorkovsky was arrested, jailed and eventually sent into exile. Burgis draws useful parallels between Putin’s kleptocracy and Hitler’s Germany, each home to both a “normative state” that generally respects its own laws and a “prerogative state” that violates most of them. According to the German-Jewish lawyer who was the author of the theory in the 1930s, “Nazi Germany was not a straightforward totalitarian system. It retained some vestiges of the rule of law, chiefly in matters of business, so that the capitalist economy had the basic rules it needed to keep going. But the prerogative state – Hitler’s political machinery – enjoyed … ‘jurisdiction over jurisdiction.” Putin has used his jurisdiction over everything to vanquish almost all of his enemies. And since Donald Trump has been collaborating with Russians in one way or another for almost 40 years, our kleptocrat-in-chief does finally make an appearance in Kleptopia, on page 250. After we’ve read a lot about Felix Sater, a second-generation Russian mobster connected to several schemes including the Trump Soho in lower Manhattan, Trump is identified as the “crucial ingredient” in Sater’s “magic potion for transforming dirty money”. Once the ratings of The Apprentice had washed away the public memory of multiple bankruptcies and “reinvented” his name as “a success”, Trump’s role in real estate deals became simply to “rent out his name”. “The projects could go bust,” Burgis writes, and “they usually did – but that wasn’t a problem.” The money had completed “its metamorphoses from plunder to clean capital”. Then there was the notorious sale of Trump’s Palm Beach mansion, to Russian oligarch Dmitry Rybolovlev for $95m, more than twice what Trump paid a few years before. According to Michael Cohen, Trump’s former fixer, Trump thought the real buyer was Putin – a story which hasn’t gotten nearly as much attention as it should. With his election as president, as Burgis puts it, Trump helped to construct a new “global alliance of kleptocrats”. Their whole goal is the privatization of power, and they control “the three great poles” – the US, China and Russia. In our new world of alternate facts, corruption is “no longer a sign of a failing state, but of a state succeeding in its new purpose”. The new kleptocrats have subverted their nations’ institutions, “to seize for themselves that which rightfully belonged to the commonwealth”. This is a ghastly and very important story. But the secret to great storytelling is knowing what to leave out. If Burgis had found a more focused way to tell this one, he would have written a much more powerful book.
5||Trump assaulted American democracy – here's how Democrats can save itBarring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. The vote on Barrett’s confirmation will occur just eight days before election day. By contrast, the Senate didn’t even hold a hearing on Merrick Garland, who Barack Obama nominated almost a year before the end of his term. Majority leader Mitch McConnell argued at the time that any vote should wait “until we have a new president”. Barrett was nominated by a president who lost the popular vote by nearly 3m ballots, and who was impeached by the House of Representatives. When Barrett joins the court, five of the nine justices will have been appointed by presidents who lost the popular vote. The Republican senators who will vote for her represent 15 million fewer Americans than their Democratic colleagues. Once on the high court, Barrett will join five other reactionaries who together will be able to declare laws unconstitutional, for perhaps a generation. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? For starters, increase the size of the supreme court. The constitution says nothing about the number of justices. The court changed size seven times in its first 80 years, from as few as five justices under John Adams to 10 under Abraham Lincoln. Biden says if elected he’ll create a bipartisan commission to study a possible court overhaul “because it’s getting out of whack”. That’s fine, but he’ll need to move quickly. The window of opportunity could close by the 2022 midterm elections. Second, abolish the Senate filibuster. Under current rules, 60 votes are needed to enact legislation. This means that if Democrats win a bare majority there, Republicans could block any new legislation Biden hopes to pass. The filibuster could be ended with a rule change requiring 51 votes. There is growing support among Democrats for doing this if they gain that many seats. During the campaign, Biden acknowledged that the filibuster has become a negative force in government. The filibuster is not in the constitution either. The most ambitious structural reform would be to rebalance the Senate itself. For decades, rural states have been emptying as the US population has shifted to vast megalopolises. The result is a growing disparity in representation, especially of nonwhite voters. For example, both California, with a population of 40 million, and Wyoming, whose population is 579,000, get two senators. If population trends continue, by 2040 some 40% of Americans will live in just five states, and half of America will be represented by 18 Senators, the other half by 82. This distortion also skews the electoral college, because each state’s number of electors equals its total of senators and representatives. Hence, the recent presidents who have lost the popular vote. This growing imbalance can be remedied by creating more states representing a larger majority of Americans. At the least, statehood should be granted to Washington DC. And given that one out of eight Americans now lives in California – whose economy, if it were a separate country, would be the ninth-largest in the world – why not split it into a North and South California? The constitution is also silent on the number of states. Those who recoil from structural reforms such as the three I’ve outlined warn that Republicans will retaliate when they return to power. That’s rubbish. Republicans have already altered the ground rules. In 2016, they failed to win a majority of votes cast for the House, Senate or the presidency, yet secured control of all three. Barrett’s ascent is the latest illustration of how grotesque the power imbalance has become, and how it continues to entrench itself ever more deeply. If not reversed soon, it will be impossible to remedy. What’s at stake is not partisan politics. It is representative government. If Democrats get the opportunity, they must redress this growing imbalance – for the sake of democracy. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a columnist for Guardian US
5||The Observer view on the Commons vote to let poor children go hungryIt speaks volumes of the government that it has taken a 22-year-old footballer to step into the vacuum to provide moral and compassionate leadership during a pandemic. Perhaps Boris Johnson thought that giving Marcus Rashford an MBE for his campaign for holiday food vouchers for poor children would muffle his voice. But Rashford has continued to speak truth to power in a way that puts the government to shame. Johnson last week instructed Conservative MPs to vote against a motion to uphold Rashford’s continued calls to extend holiday food vouchers for poor children. Just one Conservative minister, Caroline Ansell, thought this was a resigning matter. The rest of the sorry pack, including education secretary, Gavin Williamson and children’s minister, Vicky Ford, dutifully trooped through the lobby. That vote to deny children who get free meals during the school term food vouchers in the school holidays was bad enough. Even worse are the arguments MPs wheeled out to justify their decision. Brendan Clarke-Smith said giving food to hungry children was akin to “nationalising children”. Ben Bradley implied these vouchers were spent in crack dens and brothels over the summer. Mark Jenkinson argued that food parcels were being traded for drugs in his constituency. (Neither offered a shred of evidence for these ridiculous suppositions.) Selaine Saxby hoped those businesses in her constituency stepping in to provide free meals would not be seeking further government support. Philip Davies lambasted a 16-year-old constituent who wrote to him about the issue for being “intolerant”. Senior ministers know better than to openly voice these sentiments. But these views are far from fringe: they offer an ugly glimpse into a persistent strand of Tory thinking about poverty. Too many who have lived privileged lives on the Conservative benches believe their successes are down purely to their hard work, not the advantages that were handed to them on a silver platter. The corollary of this fantastical belief is that people who live in poverty, who cannot get a job that pays enough to support their family, are somehow morally deficient. This is nonsensical dogma. Poverty is less the product of individual life choices but overwhelmingly the inevitable result of the deficient economic and social orders that shape all of our lives. It is generated by low pay, unemployment and poor mental health. Minimum-wage jobs do not pay enough for parents to provide for their children without state support; little wonder that seven in 10 children in poverty come from working families. Just as bad is the poverty that sets in when large numbers of jobs vanish from an area and a lack of support to retrain consigns many to the scrapheap, making it hard for their children and grandchildren to escape the shackles of multigenerational joblessness. But it does not suit small-state Conservatives to acknowledge this. Even as they stigmatise people for relying on state handouts, they refuse to ensure cleaners and carers are paid enough to support their families. The Conservative MP Kit Malthouse justified voting against last week’s motion because a better way to help children in poverty was to “pump money into the welfare system”. We wholly agree, but this was an odd sentiment from someone whose party has spent the last decade eroding tax credits and benefits – many families lost the equivalent of thousands of pounds of support a year – in a way that has contributed to rising levels of child poverty. Conservative chancellors may have told us it was a necessary economy, but the tax cuts they handed more affluent families and businesses that cost billions of pounds a year suggested otherwise. If unemployment soars, as expected, in the coming months, things will get worse. The £20 a week boost to universal credit is set to be rescinded next April, dropping unemployment benefits to their lowest real-term levels since the 1990s. Meanwhile, the government has failed to mitigate the educational and mental health impacts of the pandemic on children. And, rather than address the root causes of the under-attainment of poor children at school over the last decade, Conservative ministers have flirted with the notion that it is somehow the widespread teaching of critical race theory in schools that is disadvantaging white, working-class children. Alongside asylum seekers and the legal profession, children now appear to be fair game in the culture-war politics of Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings: whether it is to take potshots at those campaigning against structural racism or to make Victorian-era aspersions about the feckless poor. They have made a massive misjudgment. The dogwhistle politics of Vote Leave cannot carry the country through a pandemic and the overwhelming response to Rashford’s call – the hard-pressed businesses, councils and individuals who have come forward to reduce the number of children going hungry – shows they have misjudged a nation. It is a heartwarming antidote to the callousness of ministers. But what do we teach our offspring when, though we can afford to, we choose not to ensure that all children have somewhere safe and warm to live, that they don’t go to bed hungry, that they have a pair of shoes without holes? We teach them that to be poor is to be shameful, that there is nothing wrong with a world where despite working all the hours under the sun you will never escape the fear and anxiety of what would happen if your fridge breaks or your landlord serves notice. We teach them that what should be theirs by right is theirs only through charity and benevolence.
4||Daniel Andrews under fire over delayed easing of restrictions after seven new cases reportedScott Morrison has criticised the Victorian government for delaying an announcement about the easing of coronavirus restrictions, saying Victoria’s public health systems “are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not”. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews on Sunday held off announcing opening dates for the retail and hospitality sectors pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs. It prompted criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. Morrison said the decision to delay the announcement – which he interpreted as a decision to keep businesses closed longer – was a “profound disappointment”. “At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave,” Morrison said in a statement “Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening.” The prime minister’s statement was another step in an increasingly bitter dispute between the Victorian and federal governments. In a heated press conference earlier on Sunday, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. “We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs,” Andrews said. “We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and [there] will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. “This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there … is more virus there than we think.” However, Andrews did announce a further easing of restrictions for regional Victoria. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday, the same number as on Saturday. Six of those were linked to other known cases in the outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs while the seventh was a healthcare worker with no known links. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 tests are among the 1,000 tests still awaiting results on Sunday. Andrews said it would be irresponsible to announce an easing of restrictions until those test results had been received and analysed, to determine whether any new cases were linked to the outbreak or if there were signs of untraced community transmission. That could take 24 hours, and Andrews said he would then be able to announce changes on Monday or Tuesday. After 60 minutes of questioning, he said that he still anticipated that restrictions would be eased by 1 November, as slated last week. “I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt,” he said. “November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening up before then.” Asked by a reporter why he did not say that at the start of the press conference, Andrews sighed and said he’d had a late night and early morning discussing the northern suburbs outbreak. From midnight on Sunday, greater Shepparton, which had been held back due to an outbreak, will be under the same rules as the rest of the regions. From midnight on Tuesday, 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funeral; 20 an outdoor religious service; and gyms and indoor pools will reopen to a maximum of 20 participants. Children’s indoor non-contact community sport will also be allowed to resume. Andrews had been foreshadowing a Sunday announcement for a week and said, as recently as Friday that the northern suburbs outbreak would not delay the “significant” easing of restrictions from Sunday. On Saturday he warned that he would “caution people from banking” on that announcement. The timeline for easing restrictions in Victoria has changed several times. In early September the government released a roadmap for reopening, which included a plan to lift Melbourne out of lockdown on 26 October provided the rolling 14-day average was fewer than five cases per day, and there had been no more than three mystery cases in the proceeding 14 days. The rolling average on Sunday was 4.6, and there have been seven mystery cases. Then in early October, Andrews brought forward the easing of restrictions to 19 October. On 18 October, he announced a limited easing of restrictions and promised a further easing from 1 November, with some changes to be outlined from 25 October. The shifting goalposts have caused frustration among some Victorians. At the press conference, Andrews rejected suggestions that the Victorian public had been on a rollercoaster of announcements. Asked if he had misled the public, he said “no”. The Business Council of Australia said it was “at a loss” to understand why Victoria was unable to reopen, when businesses in New South Wales have been able to operate with low numbers of locally-acquired cases for months. New South Wales recorded no new locally acquired cases on Sunday, for the third day in a row. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. “Victorians cannot hang on week to week,” the Business Council CEO, Jennifer Westacott, said. “People are at a financial and mental breaking point.” Earlier on Sunday, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said the only reason the Victorian government would not open up “is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system”. Andrews, the Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, and Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, all separately rejected that suggestion, saying that the number of tests conducted in connection to the northern suburbs outbreak, with up to 400 primary and secondary contacts identified and isolated, showed the system was working well. Andrews refused to comment on a comment from his recently departed health minister, Jenny Mikakos, who tweeted: “The set reopening is gradual and safe so any delay is unnecessary. It’s paralysis in decision-making.” “I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them,” Andrews said. “That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything.” Sutton said none of those criticising Victoria’s public health response were privy to all of the the health data. “None of them are in the tent,” he said.
2||Hopes for Kylie Moore-Gilbert after detained academic moved out of Iran's Qarchak prisonDetained British-Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert has reportedly been moved from Iran’s Qarchak prison, along with all of her belongings, but it is not known to where she has been taken. Family and friends who have been campaigning for her release hope the move is a positive sign, but there is no official word from the Iranian government. A Cambridge-educated Middle East scholar, Moore-Gilbert has served just over two years of a 10-year sentence for espionage. She was arrested in Tehran in September 2018 and convicted in a secret trial. No evidence of Moore-Gilbert’s alleged crimes has ever been publicly presented. She has denied the allegations against her and the Australian government rejects them as baseless and politically motivated. The Iranian Association of Human Rights Activists reported Moore-Gilbert was moved on Saturday – along with all her possessions – to an unknown place. That move came 11 days after she was shifted, along with 15 other political prisoners, to Ward Eight of Qarchak prison, formerly known as the Mothers’ Ward. Qarchak has been trying to quash an outbreak of novel coronavirus among inmates and guards at the prison. Iran, more widely, is suffering under a surging third wave of infections, with nearly 600 new cases and more than 300 deaths in the last 24 hours. Moore-Gilbert’s health has been poor in detention and she has had difficulty getting food that she can tolerate. But sources with knowledge of Iranian detention cases are cautiously hopeful the move could be good news in Moore-Gilbert’s case. “Obviously one hopes the move might be good news for Kylie, but we don’t know yet,” said Elaine Pearson, Australia director of Human Rights Watch. “Kylie has been detained for more than two years now, and she has endured very difficult conditions including extreme isolation. The Australian government should press forcefully and consistently for Kylie’s release and safe return to Australia.” Moore-Gilbert spent the first 22 months of her incarceration in Tehran’s Evin prison, including months in solitary confinement, before being moved to the desert prison Qarchak, widely regarded as the worst women’s prison in Iran, and known as a site of extrajudicial killings, torture and other rights violations. Sources have told the Guardian Moore-Gilbert was closely watched inside Qarchak – with two fellow prisoners assigned to follow her – restricting her contact with the outside world. Australia’s ambassador to Iran, Lyndall Sachs, has met with Moore-Gilbert in Qarchak and urged more regular consular access. In letters smuggled out of prison, Moore-Gilbert revealed she had rejected an offer to spy on behalf of Tehran in exchange for her freedom, but said she felt “abandoned and forgotten”. In a rare phone call earlier this year she said couldn’t eat anything in Qarchak: “I feel so very hopeless … I am so depressed.” On Friday, Human Rights Watch said Iranian judiciary authorities were prosecuting human rights defenders for reporting abuse inside detention, despite the presidential cabinet ordering its justice minister investigate claims of torture against an environmental conservationist, Niloufar Bayani. There has been no report. Born in Bathurst, New South Wales, Moore-Gilbert is a lecturer in Islamic Studies at the University of Melbourne. She hold both British and Australian citizenship, but was travelling on her Australian passport. She was arrested in September 2018 after attending an academic conference in Qom. Fellow conference delegates and an interview subject for her academic work flagged her as “suspicious” to Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, who arrested her at Tehran airport as she prepared to fly out of the country. Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said their efforts to secure Moore-Gilbert’s release were “an absolute priority”. “We remain focused on her health, wellbeing and safety,” a spokeswoman said. “We do not accept the charges upon which Dr Moore-Gilbert was convicted, and want to see her returned to Australia as soon as possible. Our Ambassador in Tehran has regular consular access to Dr Moore-Gilbert.”
4||Regional Victoria ‘step 3’ coronavirus roadmap restrictions and lockdown rules explainedRegional Victoria has consistently outperformed its metropolitan counterpart in suppressing the Covid-19 virus and as such is subject to significantly fewer restrictions. Currently, it is in the third step of the state’s roadmap out of lockdown allowing for a significant reopening of the retail and hospitality industries. On 19 October, premier Daniel Andrews announced some easing of restrictions, increasing capacity in restaurants and cafes as well as allowing more guests to enter private homes. Further changes were announced on 25 October. Here are the main things you need to know about the step three restrictions in regional Victoria: When can I leave my house? The only restriction on leaving home is that you cannot travel into areas with higher restrictions, which includes metropolitan Melbourne. Otherwise, there are no restrictions on reasons for leaving your house or on where you go within the state. People can gather in groups of up to 10 people outdoors. What are the rules for wearing masks? People must still wear a mask or covering whenever leaving the house. There are a few exceptions. People with a medical reason are exempt, as are children younger than 12. Those who have a professional reason “or if it’s just not practical, like when running” are also exempt, but those people will still be expected to carry a face covering at all times “to wear when you can”. In schools, teachers will not need to wear a face covering while teaching, but students attending classes will. Both teachers and students will need to wear a mask on the way to and from school. Andrews said “common sense” would guide how the new rules are enforced. People would not be required to wear one when it was impractical, such as when exercising or visiting a bank. Breaking the rules is punishable with a $200 fine. Can I have visitors to my house? Can I see my partner? Whereas previously regional Victoria operated under the “household bubble”system, this was replaced from 19 October. You can now have up to two people visit you at home once a day. These do not have to be the same people each time and the two people can come from separate households. Infants under 12 months are not included, and other children or dependents can come if they cannot be left unattended or cared for by another. There is no time limit on how long they can visit but you can only have a single visitation each day. Can I now dine-in at a restaurant or cafe? Hospitality businesses are now able to serve up to 70 people outdoors with a minimum of one person per two square meters. From 19 October, indoor spaces are allowed to operate with up to 10 people per distinct space, with a minimum of four square meters per person and no more than 40 indoor customers total. Tables must be spaced at least 1.5m apart, cleaned after every customer and the details of all patrons must be kept. Businesses must continue to ensure people from metropolitan Melbourne do not eat-in. Will the shops be open? Yes, all shops can open. Hairdressers, tattoo parlours and beauty servers are also open, but only where a mask can be worn for the duration of the service. What about other businesses and services? Similar to dining out, entertainment venues and events that are predominantly outdoors are now open. Real estate inspections are still by appointment only, but outdoor auctions can return, subject to gathering limits. Libraries and toy libraries can open for up to 20 people indoors, but no more than 10 people can gather in a single space, and there must be at least four square meters per person. Licensed tourism services that use open-air vehicles only are also now allowed to operate. A vehicle is considered an open-air if at least two sides are open to airflow at all times. What are the rules for exercise? All community sports have resumed for children in regional Victoria, but only non-contact sports are allowed for adults outdoors, within gather and density limits. Outdoor exercise is also now allowed for groups of up to 10 people. Outdoor skateparks have also opened. From 11.59pm on 27 October, indoor gyms will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with minimum space requirements in place. Children’s indoor non-contact community sports will also be allowed to resume, provided participants can remain 1.5m apart. Outdoor pools are open and from 19 October indoor swimming pools can open exclusively for those aged 18 and under. One parent or guardian is allowed per child to supervise, and swimming classes can resume. Indoor pools can also open for one-on-one hydrotherapy sessions with a limit of 10 people in the pool at one time. From midnight on 27 October, indoor pools will be open to up to 20 people. What is happening with schools? All students in regional Victoria will now be expected to return to onsite learning. The return will be staggered and will apply when term four begins during the week of 12 October. Childcare centres remain open while adult education remains restricted, with students encouraged to learn from home if they can. What happens to weddings, funerals or religious services? Weddings can now have up to 10 people, including the couple, two witnesses and a celebrant. Funerals are now allowed to have up to 20 people, not including children under 12 months and people required to conduct the funeral. From 28 October, up to 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funerals. Outdoor religious gatherings are allowed for up to 20 people plus one faith leader. This includes ceremonies, but no sharing of food, drink or utensils is allowed. From Wednesday up to 20 people plus one faith leader will be allowed to attend a religious gathering indoors, and up to 50 will be allowed to attend outdoor religious gatherings. Where can I travel? Restrictions on travel within regional Victoria have been eased, with people now allowed to travel within the state, with the exception of areas with higher restrictions. In this case, that means everywhere except metropolitan Melbourne. Tourist accommodation is open, but exclusively for regional Victorians travelling and holidaying within regional Victoria. Caps and density limits still apply, however. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
4||Australian production of non-protein Covid-19 vaccine may take an extra year, minister saysIt could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine if a non-protein-based version proves safe and effective, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews said CSL would be able to immediately start making a protein-based vaccine, but “significant work” would be required if it was another type based on mRNA, or messenger ribonucleic acid. Vaccines traditionally introduce proteins into the body to provoke the immunity system into responding but if an mRNA vaccine of the kind being developed by US company Moderna is approved it would be the first of its type, experts say. During an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday, Andrews was pressed to give a timeframe to get production up and running in Australia if an mRNA vaccine was approved. “I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe,” she said. “But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range.” Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades – with some of that work already under way. The rollout of a successful vaccine has implications for opening international borders and restoring a sense of normality to social and economic activity in Australia. The federal budget, released earlier this month, assumed that a population-wide Australian Covid-19 vaccination program would be “fully in place by late 2021”, with social distancing restrictions continuing until a vaccine was available. The health minister, Greg Hunt, moved to assure people later on Sunday that Australia was “very strongly placed” when it came to securing access to and producing vaccines. “We in a strong position, we’re progressing, there’s never a guarantee – but what we know is that we’ve been exceptionally cautious in relation to vaccines and each day the evidence is stronger and the proximity to distribution of that treatment is closer,” Hunt told reporters in Canberra. Hunt said Andrews had been asked a hypothetical question about non-protein vaccines and was “absolutely right that some of the mRNA ones will take longer”. But he said the protein-based vaccine candidate being developed by AstraZeneca and the University of Oxford remained “on track for first quarter [2021] commencement and significant rollout during the course of the year [2021]”. “So our timeframes are unchanged. On the hypothetical if there were no protein-based vaccine, Minister Andrews was 100% correct. But when you take away that hypothetical, when we look at the board reality, Australia is on track for first quarter commencement of that rollout.” Hunt said Australia had reached a deal to access 33.8m units of the Oxford and AstraZeneca vaccine, including 3.8m units brought in from overseas in early 2021, subject to approvals in the UK and Australia. He said Australian manufacturing would able to commence and be well under way in the first quarter of 2021. Hunt said CSL was also aiming to make sure that the vaccine developed by the University of Queensland was “available during the course of next year – about the middle of the year”. He said there were contracts for 51m units of the UQ vaccine to be manufactured in Australia throughout 2021. He said the government was also “highly advanced” in investigating other vaccine candidates, and had joined the Covax international buying facility.
4||Storm cuts power in Queensland as thunderstorm asthma alerts issued for southern NSW and CanberraAlmost 29,000 homes in south-east Queensland have been left without power due to wild thunderstorms. Large hailstones, damaging winds and heavy rain hit the region on Sunday afternoon. Electricity provider Energex reported 28,898 outages around 3pm (AEST), with about 7,000 of those in Brisbane. Social media photos have shown ice cube-sized hail in the city’s northern suburbs. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe weather warning for Redland City, parts of Ipswich, Logan, Scenic Rim, Lockyer Valley, Gold Coast, Brisbane City and Moreton Bay Council areas. Earlier this weekend, thunderstorm asthma alerts were issued for the Australian Capital Territory and New South Wales’s nearby Murrumbidgee region. The Bureau of Meteorology said a low-pressure trough and strong cold front would continue to cross NSW on Sunday, reaching the north-east of the state by evening and leaving significantly cooler conditions in its wake. A new high-pressure system was forecast to strengthen south of Tasmania early this week, with the potential to maintain showery conditions across eastern areas for a number of days. Health authorities warned that severe thunderstorms, combined with existing elevated pollen levels, could create a situation conducive to a thunderstorm asthma event. “Not all thunderstorms produce an asthma event, and thunderstorm asthma is a rare event,” ACT Health said in a statement. “However, people who suffer from hay fever or asthma are encouraged to be vigilant over the weekend for any worsening of their condition. Where possible avoid being outside during a thunderstorm – especially in the wind gusts that come before the storm. Go inside and close your doors and windows. If you have your air conditioning on, turn it on to recirculate.” The NSW public health unit director, Tracey Oakman, issued a thunderstorm asthma alert for the Murrumbidgee local health district area for the entire weekend. “If you know you have asthma, carry your asthma puffer with you at all times and try to stay indoors with the windows and doors closed during the storm period,” the NSW Health statement said. “Be aware that thunderstorm asthma can also affect people who have not had asthma before.” Ten deaths were attributed to a thunderstorm asthma event in Melbourne in November 2016 and 14,000 people were taken to hospital with breathing difficulties. A sheep graziers’ warning was also in force for the NSW south coast, southern tablelands, Snowy Mountains and parts of the Illawarra, south-west slopes, Riverina and Australian Capital Territory. And in Victoria, the north-central, south-west and central districts and parts of the west and South Gippsland and East Gippsland areas were subject to the same warning. The BoM said cold temperatures, showers and strong winds could cause losses of sheep and lambs on Sunday. A gale warning was in force for the Hunter and Sydney coastal areas on Sunday and a minor flood warning was in place for the Murray River around Jingellic. In Victoria there were also flood warnings for the Bunyip and Kiewa rivers and Dandenong Creek.
20||Investors fear there'll be no bright post-Covid dawn for oil majorsThe oil market may have heaved itself out of the darkness of “Black April” but investors are far from convinced that major oil companies will walk away unscathed from the coronavirus pandemic. Royal Dutch Shell and BP will both face investors this week with quarterly financial results that will deliver profits well below those achieved a year ago, against a backdrop of tumbling share prices and rising Covid infections across major economies. On Tuesday, BP is expected to report an underlying loss of $120m for the last quarter, according to analysts’ estimates. This would be a major improvement on its underlying loss of $6.7bn in the second quarter, following heavy writedowns on the company’s exploration business, but would still be well below the $2.3bn third-quarter profit reported in 2019. BP’s announcement will come days after its share price fell below 200p a share for the first time since 1994, and months after the company cut its dividend for the first time since the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and set out plans to cut 10,000 jobs. In the same week, Shell is expected to reveal a modest underlying profit, of $146m, for the third quarter, according to analysts, after plunging to a loss of $18.4bn for the second quarter. This is still a fraction of the $4.76bn profit recorded in the same quarter last year, and follows the company’s decision to cut 9,000 jobs and reduce the dividend for the first time since the second world war. This trend is expected to be followed across the world’s oil companies, tracking the fragile and uncertain recovery of global oil markets amid a second wave of coronavirus infections. The price of oil reached an average of $43 a barrel in the third quarter – stronger than the average of $30 a barrel in the second quarter, when US oil prices fell below zero for the first time in April – but still well below the $62 a barrel price that prevailed in the third quarter a year ago. Oil industry investors may have already weathered the darkest days of the pandemic, but in recent months it seems to have dawned on many that there is a very long road ahead – and that a full oil industry recovery may never happen. Many experts believe that the heavy hit to demand for oil during the pandemic may mean it is years before market prices recover to $50 a barrel. BP’s own global energy forecasts suggest that oil demand may never recover from the impact of coronavirus on the global transport industry, heralding a sooner-than-expected existential decline for fossil fuels. The company’s energy outlook report seemed to underline the importance of BP’s plans to reduce production of oil and gas by 40% over the next decade while investing billions in renewable energy to transform it from oil major to modern energy company. But in investors’ eyes the oil industry’s battered balance sheets don’t look in good shape for fuelling a green energy transition. BP’s shares have languished at 25- year lows for the past month, taking its £41bn market cap to less than a third of what it was a decade ago, following its failed bid to move “beyond petroleum” in the early 2000s. The company’s market value has been topped by offshore wind developer Ørsted, once known as Danish state oil company Dong Energy, which has a market valuation of £49.6bn on the Copenhagen exchange. Its valuation has doubled in the past two years after it switched from fossil fuel investments to renewable energy a decade ago. Ørsted is a stark reminder of what might have been possible for other oil companies had they seized the opportunity to invest in the nascent renewables industry, and may prove a formidable rival for the favour of investors, too.
2||Test-and-trace chief Dido Harding should quit, says senior ToryBaroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the government’s much-criticised test-and-trace programme, should be removed and replaced, a senior Conservative MP has said. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. He warned of a “vacuum of leadership in test and trace, which is destroying public confidence and compliance”, it was reported on Saturday evening. He went on to criticise the handling of calls and data in a “spaghetti of command and control” at the top of the organisation. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. “Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. “The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace,” he wrote in the Sunday Telegraph. His sharp criticism came as it was reported that officials on the Downing Street Covid-19 taskforce have been asked to consider cutting the self-isolation quarantine period for those infected from 14 days to between seven and 10 days. After a week in social isolation, people testing positive could be offered a second test, with the quarantine period ending as soon as a negative result is declared. The proposal came after the prime minister was apparently told that 14 days’ isolation is a major barrier to widespread support for the rules.
29||Azed crossword 2,524Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.
29||Speedy crossword No 1,308
2||Colombia due to surpass 1m cases; arrests made at London anti-lockdown protest – as it happenedWe’ll be closing down this blog shortly, as the Sydney team get a new one up and running. Thanks to everyone who wrote in with tips and suggestions for coverage. In the meantime, here’s a quick summary of recent key developments: Several European countries have reported record daily increases in coronavirus cases, including Italy, Greece, Austria, Luxembourg and France. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. The government is facing a legal battle with academics over its “unlawful” decision to reopen universities for face-to-face teaching last month. The UK’s largest academic union is seeking a judicial review of the government’s decision to ignore advice from its own Sage committee of experts to move all non-essential university and college teaching online in September. In a pre-action letter, sent to the education secretary Gavin Williamson and shared with the Observer, the University and College Union (UCU) argues the government’s failure to direct universities to move to online teaching this term was unlawful, unfair, unjust and irrational. The proportion of younger adults in the UK who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a new poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer shows the proportion of 18- to 34-year-olds who admit breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35- to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. Interesting Reuters update from Colombia amid global anticipation for a vaccine: As scientists around the world race to find a coronavirus inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine which proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme which offers 21 vaccines to everyone in the South American nation - among the region’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not just Colombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country distributes about 23 million doses per year. Colombia has already committed $213 million to the global COVAX initiative, guaranteeing COVID-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. In Australia, Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. This is a small figure on a global scale, but to residents of Melbourne it is worryingly high. Melbourne has been under stay-at-home orders for 109 days and the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to announce an easing of restrictions today. It comes as the 14-day rolling average of new cases in the city fell below the target of five cases per day, to 4.6. However, Andrews said on Saturday that the easing of restrictions could be in doubt because of a new outbreak in the city’s northern suburbs. Labour is ramping up the pressure on the UK government to U-turn and extend free school meal provision over the holidays, warning it will bring the motion back to parliament if ministers do not reverse their position before Christmas. Shadow education secretary Kate Green called on the prime minister to meet with the taskforce set up by footballer Marcus Rashford “as a matter of urgency” to discuss its proposals for ending child poverty. “There is still time to change approach, but the Government must act quickly. If you change your policy now, we can ensure that no child goes to bed hungry on Christmas Day,” Green wrote in a letter to education secretary Gavin Williamson. “Labour will not give up on the fight to ensure that no child goes to bed hungry, and if you do not change course we will bring this issue back to the House of Commons before Christmas.” Australians have become accustomed to the daily announcements of new Covid-19 cases. Although the majority of those cases – bar Victoria – have come through returning travellers from overseas, little has been known about Covid-positive cases that have passed through hotel quarantine, and how governments are tracking the origins of these cases. But data provided to Guardian Australia by three states – New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia – offers some important insights into Covid-positive returning travellers. The states each provided data from 29 March, when the travel restrictions were introduced, to 19 October, revealing that they were indeed monitoring countries-of-origin where returning travellers may have contracted the virus. Data from NSW Health shows the majority of 873 Covid-positive travellers who arrived in the state were returning Australian nationals. Melissa Davey with the full report here: Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police, some mounted on horseback, fired teargas and beat up the protesters, who had set up barricades along the roads using skips, boulders and burning tyres, while others set a national flag ablaze, according to an AFP photographer. A police source who asked not to be identified told AFP that the demonstration – demanding the holding of local government elections – “resulted in barricades and acts of vandalism”. Municipal elections, which had been scheduled for this year, have been postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic. “Those were acts of rioting, in a flagrant violation of (new pandemic restrictions), which do not allow street gatherings of more than five people,” he said. UK paediatricians have published an open letter calling on the government to extend provision of free school meals until at least Easter 2021 – you can read it here: The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. It took the country of 10.7 million seven months to reach 1,000 deaths after the first reported case. The number of patients in a serious state grew to 772 as of Friday, up from 438 two weeks ago. Hospitals were treating 5,314 people with coronavirus in total. Here are the main developments from over the last few hours: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. Net approval of the UK government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has fallen to a record low of -21%, a poll by Opinium shows. Public health officials and contractors in England have barely used check-in data from millions of people who have visited cafes, pubs and restaurants, the Guardian has learned. As a legal condition introduced last month, venues are obliged to record customer details in an effort to contain the spread of Covid-19, but the government’s hamstrung test-and-trace scheme has appeared unable to cope with the swiftly rising number of coronavirus cases. Mattha Busby reports here: France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. A further 138 people have died, taking the toll to 34,645. The Welsh first minister has said the government will be “reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets”, amid anger over a ban on selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. A petition to reverse the ban has gathered more than 30,000 signatures. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. Mark Drakeford has said the restriction is in place as a “matter of fairness” to non-essential shops that have been ordered to close. The US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections above 100,000 a day, health experts have warned, just as a presidential campaign with the pandemic as its core issue enters its final week. In a further blow to Donald Trump’s hopes of keeping the White House, the US death toll from Covid-19 will pass 225,000 by early this week, bringing extra scrutiny to the president’s repeated but evidently false claims that the crisis is “rounding the turn”. Richard Luscombe has the story here: Spain’s cabinet will meet on Sunday morning to discuss announcing a national state of emergency, the government announced on Saturday. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez “has called an extraordinary cabinet meeting at 10am to study the conditions for a new state of emergency,” it said, saying such a proposal had been “positively welcomed by most of Spain’s autonomous communities, who had requested it”. The meeting comes just days after Spain registered more than one million virus cases, becoming the sixth country in the world to pass the grim milestone – and the first in the European Union. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. Five further deaths were also reported, taking the country’s toll to 564. The previous highest increase in cases was on Thursday, when 882 cases were reported. New measures were announced on Thursday, including a 12.30am-5am curfew in areas with high numbers of infections which comes into force tonight. Face masks are now compulsory in outdoor spaces as well as indoors. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London, for offences including breaching coronavirus regulations, assaulting an emergency service worker, violent disorder and for being already wanted. Three officers suffered minor injuries, the force said. Commander Ade Adelekan, the Met’s gold commander for the protest, said: “Organisers did not take reasonable steps to keep protesters safe which then voided their risk assessment. At this point, officers then took action to disperse crowds in the interests of public safety. “I am grateful that the vast majority of people listened to officers and quickly left the area. Frustratingly, a small minority became obstructive, deliberately ignoring officers’ instructions and blocking Westminster Bridge.” Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The previous record daily increase in cases was on Thursday, when 595 infections were added to the tally. This brings the country’s total number of cases to 13,713, while the death toll stands at 144. It follow Friday’s announcement of new measures to tackle the virus’s resurgence, including a curfew between 11 and 6pm. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Last Saturday, 1,747 cases were reported – which was also a record at the time. The total confirmed cases in Austria rose to 79,770 cases, There are currently 25,825 active cases in the country, according to Metropole. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, entered self-isolation on Saturday after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Tebboune, who is 74, has been advised by medical staff to isolate for five days. Algeria has officially recorded 55,630 coronavirus cases and 1,897 deaths so far. Jason Rodrigues with the latest from the anti-lockdown protest at Westminster Bridge New coronavirus measures have been announced in Brussels. From 26 October, masks will be compulsory throughout the country, while cultural venues (museums, galleries) and sports facilities will be closed. Other measures include shops closing at 8pm, and takeaways operating until 10pm. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a nationwide lockdown like the one during spring. Several regions have imposed overnight curfews. It follows clashes between protesters and police in Naples late on Friday night after a nighttime curfew was ordered in the Campania region. Arrests have been made on the anti lockdown demonstration in London after a group of protesters decided not to disperse and instead carried on a march from Trafalgar Square to Westminster Bridge. Police blocked the path of protesters at the north end of the bridge, leading to scuffles as some tried to carry on marching and calls went up from some to rush the police lines. The Guardian saw police making at least three arrests. One group of protesters tried to stage a sit down protest on the bridge. They were being forced south by a line of police. Damien Gayle with a video from London’s anti-lockdown protest, which has been ordered to disperse: Jason Rodrigues also reports that there’s been “at least one arrest” by Westminster Bridge: There have been a further 23,012 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases recorded in the UK, according to government data. This compares with 20,530 new cases registered on Friday. A total of 854,010 people have tested positive. A further 174 deaths within 28 days of a positive test were reported on Saturday, bringing the total to 44,571. There were 224 deaths on Friday. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is mainland China’s first local case since 14 October, when one was reported in Qingdao. No new cases have been found in Xinjiang since 15 August, when a cluster of infections were reported. The case was identified after the patient, a 17-year-old woman, was tested during a regular inspection. She has been transferred to a hospital in the city and all close contacts have been isolated. Police have called time on the anti-lockdown protest in London, where several thousand people remain in Trafalgar Square after a long march through the city. In a tweet posted on a Metropolitan police account, the force said: “The protest under the name of ‘Stop The New Normal’ have failed to comply with the terms of their risk assessment, government guidelines and they are not maintaining social distancing. “The officer in charge has now determined their protest is no longer exempt from the regulations and is an illegal gathering. “We are now telling those participating in this protest to leave. Officers will be engaging with crowds and informing them of this development. “By leaving now, you can keep yourself safe and avoid any enforcement action being taken by officers.” The square was flooded with police asking people to leave soon after. The announcement came at the end of a long and noisy protest march through the city. Louise Creffield, founder of Save Our Rights UK, who organised the protest said: “We’re really pleased, the turnout was phenomenal and we’ve managed to get away with no one being injured or arrested. “It’s really good to be able to have a voice, and this is the only way we get it.” Among the protesters taking part was Chloe Toop, 32, a schoolteacher. “I’m doing it for the next generation, fighting for them,” she said. She said she was anxious about young people “not having a life that I have growing up, not being able to go on holiday or to festivals”. “Kids are now scared to go and meet each other, hug each other. Social interaction is so important,” she said. Hello, Clea Skopeliti taking over the blog for the next few hours. My Twitter DMs are open for any suggestions for global coverage, or you can drop me an email. Thanks in advance! I will shortly be handing over the blog to my colleague. Below are the latest updates. Welsh government called on to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit country tried to tackle its third wave of infections. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Thousands of people have signed a petition calling on the Welsh government to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown in Wales. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. Supplies for the “essential upkeep, maintenance and functioning of the household” - such as batteries, lightbulbs and rubber gloves - can be sold during the lockdown. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme that offers 21 vaccines to all Colombians, among the South America’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, the secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not onlyColombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country delivers about 23 million vaccinations a year. Colombia has already committed $213m to the global Covax initiative, guaranteeing Covid-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. Colombia’s cases have climbed steadily despite more than five months of a gradually loosened lockdown. The death toll is set to top 30,000 people over the weekend. Chile has identified more than 500,000 coronavirus cases since the outbreak began in March, the health ministry said on Saturday. The ministry said 500,542 Chileans were now confirmed to have suffered from the virus, including 1,631 cases added in the past day and 48 deaths, taking fatalities to a total of 13,892. Active cases are at a record low of 9,900, it added. Chile, which was among the worst-hit countries in July, ranking only behind Qatar globally for per capita cases , has gradually eased its lockdown over the past two months. Restaurants and bars have opened with limited capacity, office workers are returning and some schools have reopened. Chileans will vote on Sunday in a referendum on whether to replace the country’s Pinochet-era constitution. The charter, drawn up by a key lieutenant of the military leader Augusto Pinochet in 1980, is blamed for segmenting pension, health and education provisions and entrenching inequality. The organiser of a party attended by more than 50 people has been handed a £10,000 fine for “blatant disregard” of Covid-19 regulations. Police were called to a flat in Simpson Street, Angel Meadows, Manchester, shortly after 11.20 pm (BST) on Friday. Officers found DJ mixing decks, speakers, a buffet and about 50 people in attendance, Greater Manchester Police said. The force said the party was closed down and the organiser given a £10,000 fixed penalty notice for breaching coronavirus legislation, one of the first issued since Greater Manchester entered tier 3 restrictions. A further 1,324 people have tested positive for coronavirus in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 41,577. Public Health Wales said 16 people with Covid-19 had died, bringing the total number of deaths to 1,772. The government is set to deliver £75m in grants to 35 of the country’s top cultural organisations and venues, from the Old Vic to Shakespeare’s Globe. It is the latest tranche of money to be distributed from the government’s £1.57bn culture recovery fund. These grants are the largest to have come from the package to date and will go to bodies which require between £1m and £3m. Money was allocated based on whether applicants provided jobs, supported the wider community and engaged with the public through innovative means during the pandemic. More than £52m – 70% of the total awarded in this round - will go to organisations outside London. The culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, said: “As part of our unprecedented £1.57bn rescue fund, today we’re saving British cultural icons with large grants of up to £3m - from Shakespeare’s Globe to the Sheffield Crucible. The fund has also distributed £188m to the devolved administrations - with £97m for Scotland, £59m for Wales and £33m for Northern Ireland. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit nation battled the third wave. Latest officials figures showed coronavirus had killed 32,320 Iranians and infected 562,705, with 5,814 new cases and 335 fatalities in the previous 24 hours. Taking a swipe at arch-foe the United States, Khamenei said Iran must enforce curbs better and end disputes between institutions over the pandemic. Thanks, everyone for following the blog and for your emails. Please do get in touch if you have any news tips or want to share any information from where you are. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com Spanish regions are urging the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as the country battles a resurgent coronavirus epidemic. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. “I would say with almost total certainty there will be one. But it has not officially been called yet,” a source from the Spanish government told Reuters. While many regions favour some form of curfew, the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Thousands of anti-lockdown protesters have begun a noisy march through central London. After gathering at Speakers’ Corner in Hyde Park, crowds began to walk down Oxford Street in the direction of Oxford Circus. Before leaving, they heard from Piers Corbyn, the brother of the former Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who exhorted followers to “stop new normal, save lives”. Louise Creffield, the founder of Save Our Rights UK, one of the groups behind the protest, told the crowd: “Today we are standing in our power and we are not abiding by their rules. “It doesn’t matter what they say, it doesn’t matter what threats they bring, it doesn’t matter if they try and intimidate us, we are not going to accept it, because we don’t abide by their rules. We don’t listen because we do not consent.” As they marched down Oxford Street, protesters chanted for freedom and told passersby to take off their masks. Others played the drums, blew whistles and played music on portable sound systems. Here are the latest developments in the coronavirus crisis: More than 1.1 million dead The virus has claimed at least 1,145,847 lives worldwide since it first emerged in China late last year, according to an AFP tally based on official sources. At least 42,262,299 cases have been registered across the globe. The US is the worst-affected country with 223,998 deaths, followed by Brazil with 156,471, India with 117,956, Mexico with 88,312 and Britain with 44,571. WHO warning The WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. Germany deaths top 10,000 The Robert Koch Institute, a federal government agency, has recorded a total of 10,003 coronavirus deaths in Germany, where 14,714 new cases have also been diagnosed in the last 24 hours, a record figure. Lothar Wieler, the president of the institute’s disease control authority, said the country was facing a very serious situation. The chancellor, Angela Merkel, told citizens in a weekly video podcast that “the order of the day is to reduce contacts, to meet as few people as possible”. New daily record cases in US Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Poland president tests positive Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Naples clashes Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late on Friday during a demonstration against restrictions in the southern Italian city. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as a curfew in the Campania region started at 11:00 pm. Some protesterslit smoke bombs. Grants for UK arts institutions The British government has announced a £75m rescue package to save 35 cultural institutions hit by the pandemic, including London’s Globe Old Vic theatres. New coronavirus restrictions are to take effect in Madrid on Saturday as the Spanish government weighs declaring a national state of emergency to allow curfews to be imposed. Days after the country registered more than a million cases of Covid-19, the regions - which are responsible for managing public healthcare - have put pressure on the government to give them legal right to impose tighter restrictions. In practice, that would involve the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez declaring a national state of emergency that would enable the regions to impose curfews, a measure increasingly applied across Europe. Nine of Spain’s 17 autonomous regions have formally requested such a move, and a decision is expected to be at an extraordinary meeting of ministers on Sunday. The government can impose an emergency for up to a fortnight, but it would need parliamentary approval to extend it. Spain used the powers in spring to enforce one of the world’s tightest lockdowns, and a similar measure has been in force in Madrid for the past fortnight, although only to impose movement restrictions on the capital and various nearby towns. That measure ends at 4:47 pm (1447 GMT) on Saturday, when new restrictions drawn up by the regional authorities will come into force. Hello everyone. I am running the Guardian’s global live feed, updating you on all the latest coronavirus news from around the world. Please do feel free to contact me while I work today, providing any news tips or comments. Thanks Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and the World Health Organization (WHO), probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Istanbul’s mayor Ekrem Imamoğlu has been admitted to hospital after testing positive for coronavirus and suffering a fever. “Yesterday evening around 9pm I got a fever and with a temperature of 38 degrees. I came and spent the night in hospital,” he said in a video. “Now I am actually well. My fever is not bad. The process is continuing. There is nothing that can be viewed as negative in a medical sense.” Istanbul’s American hospital said in a statement that Imamoğlu, an opponent of the country’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, was admitted at 10pm (1900 GMT) after displaying symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection. It said he tested positive for coronavirus and that his treatment was continuing. Imamoğlu, from the secular Republican People’s party (CHP), was elected mayor in a re-run election in June 2019 in a blow to Erdoğan and his ruling AK party. There have since been sporadic tensions between his municipality and the central government, including disputes over fundraising and measures to combat the coronavirus pandemic in its early stages. Spanish regions have urged the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as coronavirus cases rise. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement, Reuters reported. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. Many regions favour some form of curfew, but the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Total cases rose to 1,046,132 on Friday, and the death toll is nearing 38,000. Catalonia said on Friday night that it would impose a curfew across the region, which includes Barcelona, as soon as the central government acted. The deputy Catalan leader, Pere Aragones, told a press conference: We need a decentralised state of emergency in which the Catalan government maintains all management capacity. The evolution is very worrying. Either we increase our efforts or Covid-19 increases. Some regions are considering imposing curfews by alternative means, such as going through regional courts, if the central government does not act. “We cannot wait any longer and we have to take steps forward,” Murcia’s regional president, Fernando López Miras, told the Spanish broadcaster TVE on Saturday. “If the central government does nothing, we will approve a curfew.” Malaysia reported 1,228 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, a record daily jump since the start of the pandemic, bringing the total number of cases to 25,742. The health ministry also said seven new deaths had also been recorded. Recent data has highlighted the struggle authorities around the world face in bringing the coronavirus pandemic under control, as the US reported 80,000 infections in a single day, France extended a curfew to two-thirds of its citizens and Germany’s death toll passed 10,000. The World Health Organization had earlier warned of an exponential rise in infections that threatened health systems’ ability to cope. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions to slow the resurgent virus’ spread. There were clashes overnight in Naples between Italian police and hundreds of protesters. Covid-19 has become a central election issue in the US ahead of the presidential election on 3 November. Donald Trump promised attendees at a Florida rally on Friday that “we’re going to quickly end this pandemic, this horrible plague”. Joe Biden matched Trump’s vow to make a vaccine available free to all who want it “whether or not you’re insured” and said the Republican incumbent has “given up” on controlling the outbreak. Johns Hopkins University had earlier reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Ministers may be forced to close schools in England to older children if coronavirus cases continue to increase at the current rate, a scientist has said. Prof Neil Ferguson, whose modelling led to the original lockdown in March, said the NHS would soon be unable to cope unless the spread of the disease was stemmed. He said there were 8,000 people in hospital with coronavirus - around a third of the peak earlier this year - and that numbers were continuing to rise. “It is a worrying situation,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “If the rate of growth continues as it is, it means that in a month’s time we will above that peak level in March and that is probably unsustainable. “We are in a critical time right now. The health system will not be able to cope with this rate of growth for much longer.” His warning came as South Yorkshire became the latest region to enter the tightest Tier 3 restrictions in England following Liverpool city region, Greater Manchester and Lancashire. Ferguson said it would be another week or two before it became clear whether the stricter measures would have an impact on case numbers. He said the restrictions on households mixing should have a significant effect, but that further action may also be needed. Bulgaria’s capital Sofia, home to about 2 million people, will close nightclubs and discos on Sunday for two weeks in an effort to contain a surge in coronavirus infections straining its health system. Speaking on national BTV television on Saturday, the city’s mayor, Yordanka Fankakova, also urged Sofia universities to switch to online education and appealed to businesses to let as many employees as possible work from home. “The situation is Sofia is becoming increasingly alarming. We have a new increase in infections and of people who need hospital treatment. This is straining the hospitals,” she said. Hello everyone and thanks for following the Guardian’s live feed today. I am keeping you up to date with all the news on coronavirus from around the globe. Please do email or message me if you want to share thoughts, comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com In the UK, Prof Neil Ferguson has said a decision about whether restrictions on households mixing should be relaxed over Christmas will be a “political judgment” . “It risks some transmission and there will be consequences of that. Some people will die because of getting infected on that day,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “But if it is only one or two days the impact is likely to be limited. So that is really a political judgment about the cost versus the benefits.” Indonesia reported 4,070 new coronavirus infections on Saturday, taking the total number of cases to 385,980, official data from the country’s Covid-19 taskforce shows. It also reported 128 new deaths, taking the total to 13,205, and 4,119 people recovered from the virus on Saturday, bringing the total to 309,219. Wales’ firebreak lockdown should bring the R value - the number of people each coronavirus case infects - below one, health minister Vaughan Gething has said. Gething told BBC Breakfast the 17-day period would be followed by a set of national measures to control the spread of Covid-19. Asked about economists warning that the lockdown could cost the Welsh economy more than £500m, Mr Gething said: “It’s not just about the direct costs within the firebreak, when we know there will be a challenge and loss in economic activity. “It’s about saving a much greater loss if we need to have longer, deeper, more sustained measures.” The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus and is subject to quarantine but is feeling good, presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country imposed new restrictions on Saturday to curb the spread of the illness. Poland faces a surge in the COVID-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of 13,632 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. Russia has reported 16,521 new coronavirus cases and 296 deaths in the past 24 hours, up from 17,340 new cases and 283 deaths the previous day. The Czech Republic reported 15,252 new cases for 23 October, the highest daily tally. Deaths rose by 126 to 1,971. In the UK, Sheffield city region mayor Dan Jarvis has said he will not hesitate to seek additional government support for South Yorkshire after the region entered the strictest Tier 3 coronavirus controls. Jarvis said a 41 million funding package had been secured after a “tough” process of negotiation and he had won an agreement from ministers to keep the situation under review. “The scale of the challenge is very significant,” he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “We are acutely aware of the pressures our NHS is under, not least because winter hasn’t bitten yet, so we are looking very carefully at what we need to do. “But if there is a requirement for more resource - whether it is economic support or it is other measures of assistance from the Government - I won’t hesitate to go back and ask for them.” Morning all from London, where it is 8am (BST). I am taking over the coronavirus live feed, bringing you all the latest information on the virus from around the world. Please do keep in touch with me while I work, by sharing any comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com That’s where I will leave you for now, but never fear Sarah Marsh is here to take you through the rest of the day’s news. The Czech Republic recorded 15,252 new Covid-19 cases on Friday, the country’s highest ever daily increase. It also recorded 126 deaths overnight, bringing the death toll to 1,971. The Czech Republic managed to escape the first wave of Covid-19 relatively unscathed, with case numbers rarely rising above 200 a day prior to September, but has been hit extremely hard as Europe battles a resurgence in the virus. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus but is feeling good, the presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country faces a surge in the Covid-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of more than 13,600 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role, but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. From Saturday, more restrictions to curb the spread of the virus are due to come into force in Poland, including a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. The health ministry reported 153 coronavirus deaths on Friday, taking the total toll to 4,172. The Conservative MP Ben Bradley has been accused of “stigmatisation of working-class families” over a tweet that labelled the free school meals programme as “20 cash direct to a crack den and a brothel”. Bradley replied to the post, which was by another user. The MP wrote: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did ...” The deputy leader of Labour, Angela Rayner, said: A Conservative MP has said that free school meals are effectively a direct payment to brothels and drug dealers. Notwithstanding the fact that the vouchers in summer could only be used to purchase food, this stigmatisation of working class families is disgraceful and disgusting. MPs rejected a campaign, started by the Manchester United player Marcus Rashford, to offer free school meals for local children during half-term. A vote on the measures was backed by Labour and made its way to parliament this week but it was defeated by 322 votes to 261. Bradley said the context of his tweet “wasn’t as clear as I’d thought it was”. Needless to say, I haven’t said what I’m being accused of, nor would I ever. I’m sorry if others get dragged into the fire. If you want a proper debate you have to accept that sometimes you get it wrong. Proper debate is important. You learn from it, you move on. We’re all human. More than a million people in South Yorkshire are now living under the strictest coronavirus rules in England after the region moved into the tier 3 controls as health officials battle to stem the spread of the disease. The region joined Liverpool city region, greater Manchester and Lancashire on the highest alert level for England with the new rules kicking in on Saturday at 12.01am. Meanwhile, talks were continuing between the government and local leaders in Nottinghamshire, with parts of the county expected to enter tier 3 on Wednesday. And the council in Warrington in Cheshire – where many residents commute to Manchester and Liverpool – has confirmed that it will be moving to tier 3 on Thursday. It means households will be banned from mixing except in parks and other open spaces while pubs and bars will have to close unless they serve meals. Three more areas – Coventry, Stoke and Slough – have now also moved into tier 2, the second highest alert level. It came as Wales began a two-week national “firebreak” at 6pm on Friday evening with a return to the “stay at home” message of the initial lockdown in March. In Scotland, the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has set out a five-tier series of controls that will come into force on 2 November if they are approved next week by the Holyrood parliament. In England, ministers have said they hope the latest measures will suppress the virus sufficiently to enable families to spend Christmas together. Thailand reported one more locally transmitted case of the coronavirus on Saturday, after confirming five domestic infections last week. The new patient is a 57-year-old French woman in the southern province of Surat Thani who tested positive for the virus a few days after she had completed a 14-day quarantine, the country’s coronavirus taskforce said. The patient’s husband and child tested negative, health officials said. Earlier in the week five people in the town of Mae Sot, on the border with Myanmar, tested positive, and in September a prison inmate in the Bangkok area tested positive. Before these six cases, Thailand reported its first confirmed local transmission in more than 100 days on 3 September. In total, Thailand has reported 3,731 cases of the virus and 59 deaths. Victoria’s Department of Health and Human Services has put out its daily press release, which gives us a bit more clarity on exactly where those seven cases came from. Six of today’s seven new cases are linked to known outbreaks and cases. One is a close contact already identified as part of the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak and was already in quarantine and one is a staff member from Estia Keilor. One is a student from East Preston Islamic College, one is a student from Croxton Special School, also linked to East Preston Islamic College through family and two are parents from East Preston Islamic College. The remaining case is a previously positive case that is currently under investigation. Of today’s seven new cases, there are three cases in Darebin, and single cases in Banyule, Greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. In his daily press conference, the premier, Daniel Andrews, suggested that one remaining case is being investigated as a possible reinfection, but is more likely to be someone who has recovered from Covid-19 but is still shedding the virus. The AFP has provided this wrap of the current Covid-19 situation in Europe: The European Union’s disease control agency has joined frantic health workers to sound the alarm over a coronavirus surge across the continent, as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in infections. Even countries that avoided severe outbreaks during Europe’s first wave of contagion in the spring have watched their case numbers surge, with Germany’s death toll passing 10,000 on Saturday. Governments have reintroduced containment measures to slow the renewed spread of the virus in nations that only weeks earlier believed they had triumphed over the crisis. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions, including overnight clashes in Italy’s hard-hit Naples between police and hundreds of protesters. After Spain became the first European country to officially record a million Covid-19 cases earlier in the week, the prime minister, Pedro Sanchez, said on Friday the real number of infections was likely more than triple that number. France followed Spain past the million-case milestone on Friday while Germany hit a fresh daily record of nearly 15,000 new cases, with health authorities urging the public to follow social distancing measures. Urgent new restrictions on daily life have come into effect in several nations, with France extending a curfew to cover 46 million people. Wales entered a full lockdown on Friday evening, a day after Ireland shut down, while Poland adopted a nationwide “red zone” lockdown mandating the partial closure of primary schools and restaurants. Only Sweden, which famously refused to lock down earlier this year, continued to stick to its guns despite a rise in cases. Belgium has seen one of Europe’s deadliest per capita outbreaks and has found itself suffering some of the highest second-wave infection rates in Europe. “We’re losing. We’re overwhelmed. We’re bitter,” said Benoit Misset, the head of the intensive care unit at the University hospital in the city of Liege, where several of his staff are having to work despite being positive – if asymptomatic – themselves. Queensland health officials are working to determine the strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Australian state’s Sunshine Coast. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland’s health department to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given [the cases] have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... [to] the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters. You can read the full story here: Hello, Matilda Boseley with you now to take you through the next few hours of Covid-related news. No new cases of Covid-19 in South Australia for today. A man who allegedly refused to comply with self-quarantine rules in Western Australia has been taken into custody and refused bail following a struggle with police, AAP reports. The 32-year-old New Zealander, who resides in Queensland, had been granted approval to enter WA to work and was issued a FIFO self-quarantine direction on 13 October when he arrived in Perth. He was required to remain in quarantine for 14 days at an East Perth apartment but police say that on Friday a compliance check found he was not there but in front of the complex. Police said it was further found he had been socialising with a 30-year-old man from the same company who was also quarantining in the complex. Both men were told they would be fined $1,000 for failing to comply with directions. But on leaving the complex police officers again found the 32-year-old man at the front of the property, WA police said in a statement on Saturday. The man was told he would be moved to a secure self-quarantine hotel for the remainder of his quarantine but he became “aggressive and hostile towards the officers”, refusing to comply with the direction, the statement said. “The man was arrested after a short struggle and was relocated to the Perth watch house.” He was charged with four counts of failing to comply with a direction and was refused bail to appear in the Perth magistrates court on Saturday. South Korea has reported 77 new cases of Covid-19, AP reports, mostly from the greater capital area where officials are scrambling to stem transmissions at hospitals and nursing homes. More location notifications from Victoria. I appreciate that they’re getting pretty speedy with getting these out now. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah will consult with other rulers to discuss proposals by the prime minister, Muhyiddin Yassin, the palace said on Saturday, after sources told Reuters the PM had asked the king to declare a state of emergency. Muhyiddin met with the king on Friday to present the emergency proposal that includes a suspension of parliament, sources said – a move the opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, denounced as an attempt by the PM to cling to power amid a power struggle. The proposal comes as Malaysia sees a resurgence in coronavirus cases and as Muhyiddin faces a leadership challenge from Anwar, who last month said he had majority support in parliament to oust the PM. The palace did not identify the recommendations made by Muhyiddin, and said the king would soon hold the consultation with other Malay rulers. “Al-Sultan Abdullah greatly understands the need for the country’s administration to continue to tackle the threat of Covid-19,” the palace said in a statement. The Council of Rulers, which groups the heads of Malaysia’s nine royal houses, has the power to withhold consent from any law and deliberate on questions of national policy. A source familiar with the matter said the rulers would meet on Sunday. Muhyiddin’s office has not commented on the emergency proposal. The government is scheduled to propose its 2021 budget on 6 November, and there have been questions over whether it can muster a majority in parliament for that. Defeat on the budget would count as a vote of no-confidence in Muhyiddin and could trigger an election. Emergency rule might mean the budget would not be put to a vote at that time. Western Australia has reported four new cases of Covid-19 overnight. The positive cases – all males aged between 30 and 57 – returned to Perth from overseas. They are all in hotel quarantine, and none are in hospital. This is probably a good time to summarise some of what we have learned so far today: The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19, and no new deaths. There are fewer than 100 active cases in the state for the first time since late June, as Victoria seeks to contain an outbreak in the northern suburbs of Melbourne before more restrictions ease. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country. Germany has reached 10,000 deaths from Covid-19. The country has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths.It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths. Authorities in Sri Lanka on Saturday closed at least two fishery harbours and many stalls after a surge of 609 cases linked to the country’s main fish market, AP reports. The government also widened the curfew in parts of Colombo. At least 11 villages were isolated in the densely populated Western province, which includes the capital. Health authorities on Wednesday temporarily closed the fish market on Colombo’s outskirts after 49 traders tested positive for the coronavirus. By Saturday, the number of cases went up to 609. Hundreds of traders and fishermen are being tested. Authorities say the outbreak is related to a cluster in a garment factory early this month, which has grown to 3,426 cases, almost half the country’s total of 6,287. It broke a two-month lull in infections. Several thousand people have been asked to quarantine at home. Schools and key public offices are closed, gatherings banned and restrictions imposed on public transport. Sri Lanka has had 14 deaths since March. Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late Friday during a demonstration against coronavirus restrictions in the southern Italian city, AP reports. Calls were issued on social media to challenge a curfew that took effect in the Campania region ahead of the weekend, enacted in response to a spiralling second wave of infections that saw nearly 20,000 new cases detected in the last 24 hours. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as the curfew started at 11 pm, with some lighting smoke bombs. One carried a makeshift sign that read: “If you close, you pay.” Regional president Vincenzo de Luca had called for stricter confinement measures to contain the virus in Campania, which recorded 2,300 cases over the last day. “We are on the verge of tragedy, we need a national lockdown,” he said. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte has so far avoided reimposing the kind of restrictions that saw the entire nation confined to home quarantine for two months earlier this year and precipitated the country’s worst post-war recession. Italy was the first European country to be badly hit by the virus. It has now registered nearly 500,000 cases and 37,000 deaths, according to health ministry figures. Some new exposure site information for Victoria. AFP has more on the Germany numbers: 14,714 were diagnosed in the last 24 hours – a daily record. Robert Koch Institute president Lothar Wieler said Germany was facing a “very serious” situation and asked the population to adhere to social distancing measures. Germany was spared during the first wave of coronavirus infections that hit Europe in spring but is now suffering a sharp increase in cases along with the rest of the continent. Authorities have tightened measures against the pandemic including the adoption of a public assembly ban. Chancellor Angela Merkel last weekend asked the country to reduce their social contact and stay home as much as possible. “What winter will be, what our Christmas will be, will be decided in the days and weeks to come,” she had warned. Queensland health officials are working to determine the mystery strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Sunshine Coast, AAP reports. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new mutated strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected with Covid-19 and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland Health to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given (the cases) have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... (to) the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters on Friday. He said the additional testing would take about a week. The Sofrana left New Zealand earlier in the month with fresh crew from the Philippines before stopping at Noumea in New Caledonia and then sailing for Brisbane. New Zealand requested Australian health officials perform the additional testing after an engineer who had previously worked on the ship tested positive in Auckland. Miles on Saturday said zero new cases of Covid-19 had been uncovered inside Queensland, meaning the state still had six active cases. It has been 44 days since the last locally acquired case in Queensland. Miles on Friday said it was likely an announcement would be made about Queensland’s border reopening to NSW late next week. Asked when Victorians would be free to travel to Queensland, Miles said it would be after health restrictions in that state were eased and several incubation periods had been completed. Earlier this week I reported former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott has been allowed to leave Australia not once but twice as part of his new trade envoy role for the Boris Johnson government in the United Kingdom. The former PM was allowed to leave on what was termed an “auto-exemption” because it was government business. I’d been trying to figure out how many people have been allowed to leave while Australia has had a travel ban in place during the pandemic. Australian Border Force refused to say how many auto-exemptions have been granted, but I just came across some data on how many exemptions in total. According to Border Force in documents tabled in the Senate, between April and September this year, a total of 73,848 Australians and permanent residents have been allowed to leave Australia. More are coming back, however. Border Force also reports 93,937 Australians and permanent residents have travelled to Australia in that time. It’s not clear how many have left and come back, or how many, if any apart from Abbott, have made multiple trips. Senate estimates heard Abbott would be expected to go into hotel quarantine for a second time when he returns. Meanwhile, our current prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said he will seek to get 26,000 stranded Australians back home before Christmas. Some extra capacity will be made available, with around 6,290 places in hotel quarantine available each week. Germany has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths. It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country, according to a Reuters tally. The spike in cases comes less than two weeks before the presidential election on 3 November and is hitting battleground states such as Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. On Thursday, the United States reported a near-record 76,195 new cases. The previous record was 77,299 new cases on 16 July. At the time, hospitalisations for Covid-19 patients hit 47,000 and two weeks later deaths rose to an average of 1,200 per day. Now, hospitalisations are over 41,000 and deaths average nearly 800 per day. Health experts have not pinpointed the reason for the rise but have long warned that colder temperatures driving people inside, fatigue with Covid-19 precautions and students returning to schools and colleges, could promote the spread of the virus. The United States has the most cases in the world at 8.5 million and the most fatalities with 224,000 lives lost. The United States has reported over the past week an average of 60,000 new cases per day, the highest seven-day average since early August. The Midwest has been the epicenter of the latest surge but infections are rising nationwide. The Northeast reported an 83% increase in cases in the past month. New cases have doubled in Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and New Jersey in the past four weeks as compared to the prior four weeks, according to a Reuters analysis. Western states including Montana, New Mexico and Wyoming have reported a 200% increase in cases in the past four weeks when compared with the previous four weeks. Mexico’s northern border state of Chihuahua returned to the highest level of alert and lockdown Friday after coronavirus cases jumped there and hospitals began to fill up. The Chihuahua state government declared the return to the “red” level of alert Friday, which closes down most non-essential services and encourages people to stay at home. The Health Department said the state’s hospital beds were now 69% occupied, and that only about 23% of intensive care beds were open. The department said steps were being taken to expand hospital facilities. The department also said that three other northern states — Durango, Coahuila and Nuevo Leon — were at risk of returning to maximum alert unless infections were brought under control. Nationwide, 19 of Mexico’s 32 states will be at high alert starting Monday, 11 will be at medium alert and one state was considered at moderate risk level. Mexico as a whole has seen 880,775 test-confirmed cases, up 6,604 from the previous day’s count, and 88,312 confirmed deaths, up by 418. Here is a bit more info on the Covid-19 situation in NSW today: It’s the second consecutive 24-hour period in which NSW recorded no new locally acquired virus cases, and comes as the state government from this weekend eases some restrictions. Up to 30 people are now allowed to gather outdoors, group bookings at hospitality venues have been extended from 10 to 30 people and up to 300 are allowed at places of worship. Protesters can also gather en masse, with up to 500 people allowed to convene outdoors. Staffing regulations at gyms across NSW have also been relaxed, with a safety marshal only required when more than 20 people are working out. Two drugmakers have announced the resumption of US testing of their Covid-19 vaccine candidates. Testing of AstraZeneca’s vaccine candidate had been halted since early September, while Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine study was paused at the beginning of last week. Each company had a study volunteer develop a serious health issue, requiring a review of safety data. The two coronavirus vaccines are among several candidates in final-stage testing, the last step before seeking regulatory approval. The drugmakers said they got the go-ahead on Friday from the Food and Drug Administration to restart tests in the US. Such temporary halts of drug and vaccine testing are relatively common. In research involving thousands of participants, some are likely to fall ill. Pausing a study allows researchers to investigate whether an illness is a side effect or a coincidence. You can read the full story below: Sutton was asked when the press conference will be held tomorrow, and he said “when it is called”. And that’s the end of that. Victorian chief health officer Prof Brett Sutton says he is “very confident” Victoria will get control of the cases associated with the northern Melbourne outbreak, but reiterates there is a need to find the links between the cases, and that will inform the easing of instructions. Sutton declines to comment on why he instructed lawyers acting for the health department not to include evidence where it showed he was included on emails on 27 March that mentions the use of private security guards well before he previously said he was made aware. Sutton says he is providing an affidavit to the inquiry and it is appropriate to wait for that to be provided to the inquiry. Andrews won’t cop criticism of the public health team who communicated with the family at the centre of the East Preston Islamic College outbreak. He said the family were advised what to do, but the message didn’t get through because one child went to school while infectious. Andrews disagrees with the suggestion it would be a miracle to have low case numbers tomorrow given all the tests waiting to be processed. I wouldn’t say that. We have done, haven’t got a weekly total, but we have had a very, very strong week in terms of test, right back to the weekend. And we have turned up a relatively low number of cases this week and the vast majority have been linked to other known cases. Andrews says the 25km radius limit and the Melbourne metro/regional border are on the table to be eased tomorrow, if that happens, but suggests both could remain in place to prevent potential spread of Covid-19 to popular tourism locations like Mornington Peninsula. Daniel Andrews says the school, community and faith leaders are calling people in the northern Melbourne area to get tested. The two schools involved are organising for everyone who hasn’t been tested to get tested. I had a conversation this morning, Jerome and I, with some of the school leadership. They have gone through and booked in family by family to come and be tested at the site that the testing station is on the school grounds. They will work through all those different appointments and that will give them a list of people who did not show and that is not a criticism, they may have gone somewhere else. Circumstances may have intervened. But then they will go back and do that for a second time, a third time. We are confident we will get all of those people to come and get tested and then we will get the results as fast as possible. Daniel Andrews says “it’ll be a very late night, and a very early morning” when it comes to making decisions around restrictions easing tomorrow. Earlier in the press conference he said the easing of restrictions tomorrow could not be “banked on”. We really do have to wait to see what those test results show us ... what we are hopeful of is connections and linkages to these cases and these cases do not speak to the virus being in the northern suburbs more than we had thought, so it is all about trying to find those linkages and that is why there is a very big team of people interviewing, re-interviewing, looking at things from every conceivable angle to try to find linkages. He says Victoria is still in a good position with low case numbers, and will proceed with easing of restrictions if possible. It’s just about getting those test results. I’m trying to be as frank as possible. A lot of people had banked tomorrow as the day where we would have absolute clarity about what the rest of October and November looks like. If we can do that, we will. But the appropriate thing to do if you have thousands of tests in the laboratory being processed, you have to wait for the results. Jeroen Weimar says the Victorian health department is focused on close and secondary contacts for the northern Melbourne outbreak, and says he doesn’t think schools opened up again too soon. “Some family members live in all sorts of housing, some in public housing, some in community housing, many in private accommodation. We are increasingly doing door-to-door testing for them so we are going to them to ensure that they get the care they need and support that they need but also to get tested,” he said. “If I look at the response of the school leadership of the schools that we are leading with, dealing with in this particular outbreak, they have taken prompt and swift action. We are talking about cases that happened on Monday this week.” The positive case at Croxton school is a student, they are part of a family of four, and all four of the family are positive, Jeroen Weimar said. One of the family’s other children attends the East Preston Islamic College, but it is not clear whether the cases are connected. The two children attended school while infected on one day. A total of 9,405 tests have been conducted for staff, students or close contacts at the East Preston Islamic College, Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, says. There are 101 close contacts associated with the college isolating, and 307 secondary contacts isolating. There are 34 close contacts of the Croxton special school also isolating. The Victorian health department sent out 22,000 text messages and emails to taxi and Uber drivers in the northern Melbourne area, and Weimar has encouraged the drivers to come forward for testing. Daniel Andrews flags the long-awaited easing of restrictions announcement tomorrow should not be “banked on”. He says the announcements will still come tomorrow, but the actual easing will depend on the thousands of tests results waiting to come back as a result of the testing blitz in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. Now is not the time for us to start ignoring when we find significant virus ... whether it be in a given community or in a given geographical area ... We are still optimistic that we will be able to have positive things to say, but I’m just ... It’s a note of caution, with so much information yet to come to us, we need to be guided by that. That has always been the way. That is what has delivered these low numbers. On the northern Melbourne outbreak, Daniel Andrews says he met with the community leaders this morning. I had a meeting early this morning with a number of community and faith leaders from the inner northern suburbs and, indeed, the northern suburbs more broadly. I want to thank them for the very proactive and cooperative way – the partnership that we have with them. They’re reaching out to literally hundreds and thousands of people in their own networks, whether they be faith-based or community-based networks, setting up telephone trees, calling upon people to come forward and get tested, making sure that they’re reminding people that, if you’ve been asked to stay in your home – either pending a test result or because you’re a positive or a close contact – that that’s critically important to do and that everybody, regardless of your background, everybody is in this together. This virus does not, in any way, discriminate between different members of the Victorian community and neither does the government and its agencies when it comes to providing the most appropriate public health response. He says there are thousands of test results from people in the area still waiting to come back, and hundreds if not thousands of more people are likely to be tested today. He says it is a 35% increase in the normal amount of testing you would expect to see in that community. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews says Victoria has under 100 active cases of Covid-19 for the first time since 19 June. Of today’s seven cases, Andrews says six are linked to outbreaks or known cases, including East Preston Islamic College, Croxton special school Northcote, the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak, and Estia in Keilor. One of those seven cases is under investigation. There are three new cases in Darebin and single cases in Banule, greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. There were 17,219 test results since yesterday, which Andrews says is “another very, very strong number.” Eight people are in hospital, and none in the ICU. There are seven active cases among healthcare workers. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. I am in Melbourne, the city with one of the, if not the, longest lockdowns in the world. Now we only have around 100 actives cases left, we are on the verge of opening up. We all crave a return to “Covid normal” as the politicians like to say, but there’s a fear it could return, and we might be forced to endure another lockdown. For the second day in a row, the Australian state of New South Wales has reported no new locally acquired Covid-19 cases. There were five cases reported in hotel quarantine. There were 12,890 tests reported to 8pm last night, compared with 13,686 in the previous 24 hours. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, will provide his daily update at 11.30am AEDT today. It’s the last update before tomorrow’s expected announcement of the further easing of restrictions in the state. Australia’s ABC has reported the principal of the East Preston Islamic College in Melbourne has said the family of the child who attended school while infectious with Covid-19 is considering leaving the area after being devastated that it has led to the virus spreading. The family had been isolating, but was told by the Victorian health department that two of the family’s children could return to school. English is not their first language, and it was interpreted that this meant all three children could go back to school, too. The child was meant to keep isolating, and tested positive on Wednesday. Now four new cases connected to the outbreak of 32 cases were reported on Saturday and around 800 people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne are currently isolating and being tested. A bright yellow helicopter rose into a blue sky on Friday carrying a Covid-19 patient from the Netherlands to a German intensive care unit, the first such international airlift since the pandemic first threatened to swamp Dutch hospitals in the spring, AP reports. The clatter of the helicopter’s rotors as it lifted off from a parking lot behind a hospital 30km east of Amsterdam was a noisy reminder of how the coronavirus is again gripping Europe and straining health care systems that struggled for equipment and staff during the pandemic’s first wave. Elsewhere on the continent, an absence of noise will underscore the virus’ resurgence. More than two-thirds of the people living in France were to be subject to a nightly curfew starting at midnight Friday, hours after health authorities announced that the country had joined Spain in surpassing 1 million confirmed cases since the start of the pandemic. “The epidemic is very strongly accelerating,” French President Emmanuel Macron said after visiting a hospital near Paris. France became the second country in Western Europe and the seventh world-wide to reach that number of known infections after reporting 42,032 new daily cases. Of the 445,000 confirmed cases the World Health Organization had recorded in the past 24 hours, nearly half were in Europe, Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on COVID-19, said. I’m Josh Taylor and I will be seeing you through the rest of the morning and early afternoon of Saturday, Australian time. Here’s what we know so far today: Victoria has reported no new deaths and seven new cases of Covid-19 overnight, including four new cases linked to an outbreak at the East Preston Islamic College. About 800 people who are either close contacts or secondary contacts of those associated with the school are currently isolating and awaiting test results. All staff and students from the nearby Croxton School have also been told to get tested and self-isolate, even if they aren’t experiencing symptoms. AstraZeneca has resumed the US trial of its experimental Covid-19 vaccine after approval by US regulators, the company said. It was paused on 6 September after a report of a serious neurological illness, believed to be transverse myelitis, in a participant in the company’s UK trial. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US infectious disease expert, said the White House coronavirus task force’s meetings have become less frequent, even as infections rise in dozens of US states. The EU’s disease control agency joined health workers across Europe in sounding the alarm about the surge in coronavirus infections as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in cases. Several countries in Europe are reporting infection rates higher than during the first wave of the pandemic in March and April, with Spain saying it has now more than 3 million cases. France’s second wave of coronavirus could be worse than the first, the boss of Paris public hospital group AP-HP said on Friday as the country registered a record number of daily cases. With pressure on hospitals rising fast, France has expanded a 9pm to 6am curfew to cover 46 million people, more than two-thirds of its population. Italy registered 19,143 new coronavirus infections, a jump of more than 3,000 within the last 24 hours. The northern Lombardy region, the worst hit region during the first wave of the pandemic, recorded almost 5,000 new cases while in Campania, in the south, there were 2,280. More than half a million people in the US could die from Covid-19 by the end of February next year, but about 130,000 of those lives could be saved if everybody were to wear masks, according to estimates from a modelling study.
0||Jürgen Klopp and Chris Wilder at odds over Anfield VAR callsJürgen Klopp claimed Liverpool were “disadvantaged” by VAR once again as his side overcame a controversial penalty award and a disallowed Mohamed Salah goal to beat Sheffield United 2-1 at Anfield. The Premier League champions moved level on points with Everton at the top of the table thanks to Roberto Firmino’s first goal of the season and Diogo Jota’s second‑half header, but had to come from behind when the VAR official, Andre Marriner, awarded Chris Wilder’s team a penalty for a tackle by Fabinho on Oli McBurnie. Mike Dean had awarded a free-kick outside the area before VAR upgraded the punishment to a penalty converted by Sander Berge. “There was no foul,” the Liverpool manager said. “It is now six games into the season and in three of them we have been on the wrong end of these kind of decisions. We are not asking for an advantage – we just don’t want to be disadvantaged. And that is the situation. The penalty gave Sheffield a proper boost. Until then they couldn’t get to us. “Then we lost a bit of patience but we scored a goal from our best attack of the first half, scored a second goal and I don’t know any more if it is offside or not. Then we did get the second goal and Mo had an incredible chance. They had their moments too but we defended with big hearts. It has been a tough week with a lot of minutes and tough opponents, so I am really pleased.” Chris Wilder disagreed about the spot-kick, saying: “I thought it was. I’ve been informed there might have been another couple as well. I thought their reaction to the challenge was quite telling.” Overall the Sheffield United manager was pleased with how his team had played. “The performance was good, it had to be to come here and get an opportunity to get a result and I thought we had opportunities to get a result. “There is lots of disappointment in our dressing room. We got on the bus believing we could get a result and we get back on the bus disappointed we haven’t got that.”
17||Sunak's £12bn scheme for self-employed was 'terribly targeted', says analysisRishi Sunak’s flagship scheme to help the self-employed through the pandemic has handed £1.3bn to workers who saw no loss of income while giving nothing to 500,000 people left without work, new analysis has revealed. In a sign of major flaws in the £12.7bn self-employment income support scheme (SEISS), more than 400,000 workers were able to claim support despite losing no income in the crisis. The analysis by the Resolution Foundation thinktank, to be published later this week, concluded that the scheme had been “terribly targeted”. The findings are part of its review of the labour market six months into the crisis. It finds that the self-employed have suffered “an even bigger labour market shock” than employees. Three in 10 self-employed workers stopped working altogether at the peak of the crisis. Many have returned to work but their recovery has been slow. Around one in six (17%) are still without work, rising to almost a quarter (24%) of 18- to 34-year-olds who were self-employed pre-crisis. The SEISS has been an expensive scheme to run for the Treasury and apparently more generous than the job retention scheme for employees. Some £2,518 was spent supporting each self-employed worker through the scheme, twice as much as the £1,128 spent per employee. However, the new analysis raises major doubts over how the money has been directed. While 78% of SEISS claimants lost income, in many cases that loss was smaller than the amount claimed. Meanwhile, 67% of self-employed workers who had not claimed under the scheme did lose income during the crisis. The thinktank blamed strict eligibility rules and weak assessment rules for the issues with the scheme. Applicants were not asked to prove they had been hit financially by the crisis. Hannah Slaughter, economist at the foundation, said: “The UK’s five million self-employed workers have been at the heart of its jobs crisis. A quarter of young self-employed workers are still without work today. This crisis is far from over for the UK’s self-employed workers. Future support should avoid excluding so many groups, while ensuring payments reflect genuine falls in income. And an immediate priority should be to strengthen universal credit for the many self-employed workers who will really need it in the months ahead.” It comes with the government under increasing pressure to increase its help for the self-employed further as Covid restrictions increase again. A slimmed-down version of the scheme is now in operation, though Sunak last week doubled the value of the grants the self-employed can access from 20% to 40% of average monthly profits. This is half the level available during the spring’s lockdown. Andy Chamberlain, director of policy at the Association of Independent Professionals and the Self-Employed, said: “Two-fifths of income simply will not be enough for many of the UK’s creative freelancers, who are the backbone of our vital cultural, entertainment and hospitality sectors. It’s also crucial to remember how many freelancers in these industries have been entirely excluded from claiming even 40% of their income – because they work through limited companies or are newly self-employed. “Government must take note and drive more and better targeted support to self-employed people in need – especially our forgotten freelancers and those working in badly struggling sectors.” The Treasury disputed the Resolution Foundation’s findings, arguing that there were safeguards designed to ensure the help only reached those who needed it. “As the report states, we were right to introduce the self-employment scheme – which has helped protect the livelihoods of 2.7 million people and is just one part of our £200bn package of unprecedented support.” “The scheme is targeted to help those most in need. All those who apply must confirm they have been adversely affected by the pandemic and the vast majority of those who do not qualify either earn more than half their income from another source or have trading profits of over £50,000.”
2||Ministers ‘still hiding’ full details of 2016 pandemic simulationThe government has been accused of withholding the full findings of a simulation exercise that warned ministers that the UK would not cope in the event of a pandemic. Campaigners have questioned what the government is hiding by choosing not to release all the documents relating to Exercise Cygnus, a three-day wargaming simulation that examined what would happen if there were an influenza pandemic in the UK. Last week, in response to pressure from the Information Commissioner’s Office, health secretary Matt Hancock announced that he had published the report into the exercise. However, it transpired the report was the same as that leaked to the press in May – but failed to include numerous other reports that are believed to make up the full filings. Now an NHS doctor and journalist who have been campaigning for the full disclosure of the documents relating to Cygnus have called on the government to release all the findings from the exercise. Dr Moosa Qureshi and Tommy Greene submitted a Freedom of Information request to see the full findings in April. They have lodged an application for judicial review into the government’s decision not to release the full report that is due to go to appeal on 19 November 2020. The pair have been told that the full findings of Exercise Cygnus are contained in numerous reports, not just the one released by Hancock. In their legal case they explain that it is their understanding that there is a “compendium” document containing all of the lessons and recommendations from Exercise Cygnus which does not resemble the report now published. They say that they are aware there are specific reports focusing on NHS population triage – the process for deciding how to treat patients – and what powers would have to be enacted legally to prepare for a pandemic. There are also individual reports assessing the performance of the different bodies and organisations that were involved in the three-day simulation. “This announcement by Matt Hancock to the House of Commons on Tuesday does not take us any further,” Greene said. “We already know what is in the version of the report he has ordered to be published. We want to see the full findings of the report that details in full the gaps in NHS provision that would have helped this country be better prepared when Covid hit and could still help us as we go into a the second wave of the pandemic.” The pair claim that further attempts by their lawyers, Leigh Day, to have the full findings published have been met throughout by “evasion” and “obstruction”. Recently, the Information Commissioner ordered Hancock to respond to Qureshi and Greene’s Freedom of Information request by Friday 23 October. Government lawyers said they required further time until 9 November to provide a substantive response. “We have been requesting Cygnus for many months now, and the government has repeatedly delayed disclosure, saying each time that it was ‘weighing the public interest’ while NHS frontline workers were struggling blindly, deprived of potentially life-saving data,” Qureshi said. “Now the government has published what the newspapers published months ago, and its document is preposterously bereft of the healthcare data expected from a national pandemic exercise, which begs the question, “What else is this government hiding?” Tessa Gregory, a partner at Leigh Day, said: “Our clients understand that there are other key documents which set out more fully the findings of Exercise Cygnus and the action which the government should have taken following the exercise. Our clients will continue to fight for transparency and seek the release of the full findings of Exercise Cygnus as the findings had and continue to have a bearing on the government’s response to the ongoing pandemic.” A government spokeswoman said it could not comment on a matter involving potential legal action. But she said: “Exercise Cygnus was a national exercise that looked at how well prepared the UK was to respond to a serious flu pandemic. “It was not designed to consider other potential pandemics, or to identify what action could be taken to prevent widespread transmission. “We have used the lessons learned from Exercise Cygnus to rapidly respond to this unprecedented global crisis.”
3||Obama campaigns for Biden in Florida as Trump heads to battleground Ohio – as it happenedIt’s been a lively day on the election trail. We’re closing this blog now but will be back with all the developments in US political news, as it happens, tomorrow. Here are the main events of the day: Alaska’s Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski has hopped off the fence and says she will confirm Amy Coney Barrett for the US supreme court in the vote expected on Monday. Barack Obama, speaking at a drive-in rally to support Joe Biden in the key swing state of Florida, laid into Donald Trump for his response to the coronavirus pandemic. Democratic vice-presidential nominee Kamala Harris, campainging in Ohio, also decried the Trump administration’s handling of Covid-19 and lamented that the crushed economy has led to a “hunger crisis” in America. Campaigning at two rallies in Pennsylvania today, Joe Biden said at each that he would not ban fracking - a very active industry in the swing state. Top infectious disease public health official Anthony Fauci supports the idea of a national face mask mandate if that’s the only way to get people to wear them and curb the spread of coronavirus. Both Donald Trump and his most controversial coronavirus adviser Scott Atlas have been spreading misleading info on Twitter about Covid-19. Democratic vice-presidential candidate Kamala Harris is calling for an administration that is frank about racist police brutality in America. “There isn’t a Black man I know, be it a relative or friend, who has not had some sort of experience with police that’s been about an unreasonable stop, some sort of profiling or excessive force,” she said. She said Donald Trump “says people who are protesting are looters and they are violent, and talking about law and order, not understanding that peaceful protest is part of how this nation was founded.” Harris said peaceful protest is what has allowed her to become only the second Black woman elected to the United States Senate (hat tip to groundbreaker Carol Moseley Braun). “But there is still a lot of work to be done” not just to speak out about police brutality but to do something about it.” She said she had spoken out about Breonna Taylor, shot dead by police in March during a botched raid on her Louisville, Kentucky, apartment, “but there are many Breonnas and Georges”, referring to George Floyd who was killed by police in Minneapolis this spring when an officer kneeled on his neck on the ground for almost nine minutes, reinvigorating the Black Lives Matter movement. “There needs to be ban on chokeholds and carotid holds, across the board. Let’s have a national registry of police officers who break the law.” She added that there needed to be “accountability and consequences” not just for individual police but for “the system”. The latest CNN opinion poll in Ohio has Democratic candidate Joe Biden and Republican candidate Donald Trump in a statistical dead heat, with 46% of those surveyed backing Biden for the White House in November, 47% favoring Trump. No Republican in modern history has lost Ohio but won the White House. The 2020 race continues. Donald Trump is on his way to begin another rally in Circleville, Ohio, about a 30-minute drive from Columbus, and Joe Biden is speaking now in Dallas, north-eastern Pennsylvania. This Dallas is not far from Scranton, Biden’s birthplace. The Democratic candidate for president just said “maybe it’s the Scranton in me” that gives him “a bit of a chip on my shoulder” about Trump’s flaunting of and focus on his own wealth. Biden is at his most fired up on the campaign trail right now, he doesn’t have the oratory skills of Obama, but he is impassioned. After so many months in the basement, campaigning online, it’s truly exciting to see Biden, as well as Harris and Obama out on the trail in person talking to motivated voters - not leaving it all to Trump. Biden just said once again that he won’t ban fracking. And he’s slamming Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. He’s using what has become one of his standard lines, bringing up the revelation from Bob Woodward’s book Rage that the president told him very early on in the outbreak that he knew exactly how dangerous Covid-19 was but downplayed it to the public because he didn’t want to spread panic (instead his stance just spread coronavirus). “The American people don’t panic,” Biden said. “Donald Trump panicked.” He called the president’s approach to controlling the outbreak “weak and chaotic”. Biden said he is determined to shut down the virus if he is president, without shutting down the economy, although it’s not entirely clear yet how he would thread that needle for the nation. Biden said Trump “hasn’t delivered on a damn thing”. Voters honking their car horns and cheering. Supreme Court nominee Amy Coney Barrett won crucial backing this afternoon when one of the last Republican holdouts announced her support for Donald Trump’s pick ahead of a confirmation vote expected Monday. Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska said during today’s Senate session that while she opposed her party’s decision to push ahead with the nomination process so close to the November 3 presidential election, she supported the federal judge, who is on track to lock in a conservative court majority for years to come, The Associated Press reports. Barrett already appeared to have enough votes for confirmation from Senate Republicans who hold the majority in the chamber and are racing to install her on the high court before Election Day. But Murkowski’s nod gives her a boost of support. Only one Republican, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, is now expected to oppose the conservative judge. “While I oppose the process that has led us to this point, I do not hold it against her,” Murkowski said. The Senate opened the rare weekend session despite Democratic efforts to stall Trump’s nominee. Democrats mounted more procedural hurdles during the day, but the party has no realistic chance of stopping Barrett’s advance. Barrett, a federal appeals court judge from Indiana, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. The fast-track confirmation process is like none other in US history so close to a presidential election. Democrats, notably the vice-presidential nominee and California Senator Kamala Harris, who sits on the judiciary committee, call it a “sham” and say the winner of the presidential election should name the nominee to fill the vacancy left by the recent death of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Senators planned to stay in session Saturday and Sunday. Read the Guardian’s latest report on the Amy Coney Barrett. Not only is her confirmation process controversial but she is a controversial judge and individual. Here’s our last report on Barack Obama’s rally in Florida on behalf of Joe Biden today. In his speech, which lasted almost an hour, he worked through several major election issues, such as the economy and the pandemic and touched on others as he continued to lash Trump. “Let me just see a show of hands, how many people here have a secret Chinese bank account?” Obama asked, referring to a story that emerged in the week that Trump had paid more than $200,000 in taxes in China, weeks after it emerged his federal income tax liability in the US was far less. “His first year in the White House he only paid $750 in federal income tax,” Obama said. “You’ve got secretaries, you’ve got construction workers, you got your health care workers, nurses, who pay a lot more in income taxes than that.” There was a staunch defense of Obamacare, his signature Affordable Care Act, which provided millions more Americans with affordable health insurance, that Republicans have tried numerous times to dismantle during the Trump administration. “When they’re asked about it they say, ‘Well look, we’re gonna have a great replacement. It’s coming. It’s gonna be there in two weeks.’ They’ve never had a replacement. Nothing. Nada. Zero. Zilch. “They’ve attacked the Affordable Care Act and every time they’ve driven up costs, they’re driving up the uninsured. Now they’re trying to get the Supreme Court to take away your health care as we speak, in the middle of a pandemic,” referring to the high court’s hearing into the constitutionality of the ACA on 10 November. Appealing to Florida’s sizeable Hispanic demographic, Obama had harsh words for Trump’s handling of the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, which devastated Puerto Rico in 2017, and efforts by some among Miami’s Cuban and Venezuelan communities to portray Biden as an extreme socialist. “Listening to the Republicans, you’d think Joe was more communist than the Castros. Don’t fall for that garbage,” Obama said. “Folks would know if he was a secret socialist by now. What is true is he’ll promote human rights in Cuba and around the world and he won’t coddle dictators the way our current president does.” The former prescient ended on an upbeat note. “I’m here to report that America is a good and decent place. We just see so much noise and nonsense,” he said. “Sometimes it’s hard for us to remember but I’ve been all across this country. There are a lot of good people here. There are a lot of folks who share the values of looking out for one another and doing right by one another.” Here we go again with Donald Trump’s antipathy to the wearing of face masks to help prevent the spread of coronavirus. Having just arrived in Columbus, Ohio, for his next campaign trail event, the president had a few words with reporters and is talking utter nonsense. First he said there are so many cases of coronavirus being reported in Wisconsin, where the disease is surging, at the moment because of all the testing. So if no testing, then no coronavirus? This is a highly misleading and wrongheaded argument that the president of the United States has tried numerous times over the months in order to downplay the coronavirus pandemic. And at a question from another reporter, Trump barked: “I can’t hear you with your mask on” and moved to the next reporter without waiting for the person to repeat the question. The Texas state supreme court this afternoon temporarily reinstated the governor’s ban on multiple drop-off sites for mail ballots, in a short-term victory for Donald Trump. The ban will remain in effect while the state supreme court fully reviews a Friday appeals court ruling that overturned the order by Governor Greg Abbott, a Republican like the president, who faces Democrat Joe Biden in a race for the White House on November 3, Reuters writes. The Texas 3rd court of appeals had unanimously agreed with a lower court that limiting the number of drop boxes would lengthen lines, increase the risk that voters could get infected with Covid-19, and infringe on their right to vote. Trump has repeatedly criticized mail-in ballots, claiming - without evidence - they would lead to widespread fraud. Abbott issued his order limiting mail-in ballot drop boxes to one per county on October 1, saying it was aimed at preventing fraud. The move, which closed more than a dozen satellite locations in at least two counties, drew condemnation from Democrats and voting rights advocates. Texas, which Trump won by nine percentage points in 2016, has not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate in more than four decades. But opinion polls have suggested it might be in reach for Biden, in part because of dissatisfaction over Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. The Guardian’s Erum Salam noted in this story from earlier in the month that large, populous counties such as Travis and Harris county will be disproportionately affected by Abbott’s order. These counties includes Texas’s most diverse cities: Austin and Houston, respectively. Nine per cent of Travis county’s population are black and 33% are Hispanic. In Harris county, 20% of the population are black and 43% Hispanic. Harris county is the third most populous county in the country with more than 4.7 million residents. As of 2018, it has nearly 2.4 million registered voters. After Abbott’s new order, the vast county has gone from having 12 ballot drop-off sites to just one, located at the NRG Stadium in central Houston. Full story here. Richard Luscombe writes that Barack Obama is delivering a sparky speech at a drive-in rally for Joe Biden in North Miami, Florida. His event continues with him highlighting the difference between Trump’s “empty promises” for a second term and Biden’s plans for his first. “Tweeting… doesn’t fix things. Inventing conspiracies doesn’t make people’s lives better,” he said. “You’ve got to have a plan. You’ve got to do the work. And along with the experience of getting things done, Joe Biden has concrete plans and policies that are going to turn our vision of a better, fairer, stronger country into reality.” Seeking to heap blame on Trump’s lack of response for a coronavirus pandemic that has killed almost 225,000 Americans and cost millions of jobs, Obama pointed out that his own administration had left plans. “We literally left this White House a pandemic playbook that showed them how to respond before a virus reached our shores,” Obama said. “It must be lost along with the Republican health care plan. We can’t find it, eight months into this pandemic.” Also squandered, Obama said, was the nation’s strong economy: “Unemployment was steadily going down during the Obama-Biden presidency. And then he gets elected and it keeps on going down and suddenly he says, ‘Look what I did there.’ “He did inherit the longest streak of job growth in American history that we got started but just like everything else he inherited he fumbled it. “The economic damage inflicted by [his] pandemic response means that Donald Trump will be the first president since Herbert Hoover that actually loses jobs.” Obama also teased Trump for ending his interview early for 60 Minutes, with journalist Lesley Stahl, early. The interview airs tomorrow night, ditto one with Biden. A quick reminder that Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which they accuse the senior White House advisers of showing “indifference” to Americans suffering and dying under Covid-19. Saying the billboards would stay up, the group called Kushner and Trump “entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people”. My colleague Martin Pengelly has just updated the story with the following: In an email to the Guardian on Saturday, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said: “It does seem unlikely that Ivanka and Jared would actually sue the Lincoln Project, especially before election day, while after that hopefully they won’t care, can return to New York and stop pretending to be public servants. “Her father has honed litigation abuse as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias added, but “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Read the full story here: And here’s the latest tweet from the project: Barack Obama is wasting no time in mocking Donald Trump during the former Democratic president’s appearance in North Miami, Florida this afternoon. “He’s had a tough week. Everybody has been very unfair to Donald Trump, this week,” the former president said to joyous honks of car horns at a drive-in rally. Referring to the final presidential debate between Trump and Joe Biden on Thursday, Obama said: “Trump was asked, ‘What is your plan for the new phase of Covid?’ which is a pretty good question considering that we just saw the highest number of cases spike up yesterday. “So you think he’d be ready for a response. Instead, he just said it wasn’t his fault, he didn’t have one. He said, ‘It’s now gone and a bunch of states.’ Just as states are reaching new record highs nationwide he doesn’t have a plan. He doesn’t even acknowledge the reality of what’s taking place all across the country.” As he did earlier in the week at a rally in Pennsylvania for Biden, his former vice-president, Obama kept the focus firmly on Trump. “It’s a good idea to have an answer to this question. It’s a good idea if you’re running for reelection to say, ‘Here’s what I want to accomplish.” What did Trump say? He got mad and walked out of the interview,” Obama said, referring to an ill-tempered 60 Minutes due to air on CBS Sunday night but already posted on Trump’s Facebook site. “He thought the questions were too tough. If he can’t answer a tough question like, ‘What would you like to do in your second term?’ then it’s our job to make sure he doesn’t get a second term.” Obama said he didn’t know Biden very well when he picked him to be his Veep. But he said he got to know his character as their administration proceeded, and that Biden “made me a better president”. Also campaigning today in Pennsylvania is Bernie Sanders. He’s out on the trail for Joe Biden, who defeated him in the primary process this spring to become the Democratic nominee for president. Here’s a post from the Sanders event from the Democratic councilwoman at large for Allegheny county, Bethany Hallam. Hallam has become a little bit famous of late for her unique campaign to persuade voters in Pennsylvania to be careful to enclose their mail-in ballots in the privacy envelope issued by the state, inside the outer envelope, if you follow me. Read all about it here. And in North Carolina, former Democratic presidential candidate and New Jersey Senator Cory Booker is campaigning today to help get Joe Biden elected next month. More from Edward Helmore… Facebook has demanded that New York University stop collecting data about its political ad targeting practices, arguing the engineering project violates its terms of service. The argument between the social media giant and NYU’s Ad Observatory project, which launched last month with more 6,500 volunteers assigned to collect data about political ads, flared up on Friday, according to the Wall Street Journal. In a letter to the engineering department, Facebook said “scraping tools, no matter how well-intentioned, are not a permissible means of collecting information from us”. Facebook went on to say that if the university does not cease harvesting the data and delete it, it “may be subject to additional enforcement action”. Last month, Facebook said it would stop political advertising for a month ahead the 3 November presidential election, seeking to prevent the spread of misinformation. After the 2016 election of Donald Trump, Facebook was accused of allowing Russian disinformation and political profiling to flow almost unchecked. NYU has said the Ad Observatory is designed to provide the public, journalists, researchers and policy makers with the ability to search political ads floated to specific audiences and to see how those ads are funded. Facebook’s demand that NYU cease the program met with criticism. “Facebook is making it harder for Americans to get information about online political ads,” Democratic senator Amy Klobuchar, a sponsor of a bill called the Honest Ads Act, said in a statement to the Journal. Social media platforms, she added, have pledged to make online advertising more transparent – but Facebook’s threatened action “is further evidence that voluntary standards are insufficient”. After the Journal’s article was published, Facebook partially retracted its threat, signaling the sensitivity of the issue. It said it would not take any action until after the election. The Democratic vice-presidential nominee, Kamala Harris, is offering a searing view of the Trump presidency in Cleveland, Ohio, right now. She decries, loudly and in a sharply scathing tone, Donald Trump’s having politicized mask-wearing in relation to the coronavirus pandemic, when the president indicates that if you don’t wear a mask you’re for Trump, if you wear one then you are against him. “Can you imagine?” she asks rhetorically. She’s talking as Barack Obama just took the stage at a drive-in rally in North Miami, Florida, where the former president just jogged in wearing a “VOTE” mask. Harris, in the swing state of Ohio, went on to describe Trump as the kind of vain man “who looks in the mirror rather than looking into the faces of the American people.” “And so we find ourselves in this crisis,” she said. With the pandemic decimating the public health and the economy, Harris said that in Ohio right now, one in 10 families are concerned that they don’t have enough food, one in six families are concerned that they won’t be able to pay the rent next month, and one in five businesses have closed “with no prospect of being able to reopen.” “We are in the middle of a hunger crisis in America,” the California Senator said. She called the Trump presidency the greatest failure of an administration in US history. New Yorkers are jamming polling places and standing in line for hours to cast ballots on the state’s first day of early voting today. They are rushing to record their choices 10 days ahead of the November 3 presidential election, Reuters reports. Lines formed before polls opened across New York City and neighboring Long Island, videos on social media showed, as New Yorkers joined a flood of more than 56 million Americans across the country who have cast early ballots at a record-setting pace. Saturday was the first time that voters in New York, a reliably Democratic state where Democrat Joe Biden has a wide lead in polls over the Republican president, Donald Trump, have been allowed to vote early in a presidential election. A majority of New York voters haven’t supported a Republican candidate for president since Ronald Reagan’s re-election in 1984. Early in-person voting will continue in the state until November 1. “Patiently waiting for Mommy to vote early!” the New York City Board of Elections tweeted, showing a photo of a young girl sitting in line with a drawing book. About 56.1 million Americans already have cast early ballots across the country either in person or by mail, a pace that could lead to the highest voter turnout rate in more than a century, according to data from the US Elections Project. The high level of early voting has led Michael McDonald, the University of Florida professor who administers the US Elections Project, to predict a record turnout of about 150 million, representing 65% of eligible voters, the highest participation rate since 1908. Donald Trump’s long-sought after tax records, obtained by the New York Times, appear to show he may have given far less to philanthropic causes than he has claimed. According to the documents, the Times reports, Trump has given at least $130m since 2005. But the majority of that total, $119.3m, came from simply agreeing not to move forward on land development projects. In three cases the agreements, known as conservation easements, came after Trump had abandoned the projects but was permitted under US law to keep title and receive a tax deduction equal to their appraised value. Trump’s tax records, the Times also reported, show that much of his charitable giving has come during periods of financial or public-image duress, including as he faced high tax bills from earnings related to his long-running reality TV series, The Apprentice. One land deal, currently being investigated by the New York attorney general, involves land donated for a state park. The investigation focuses on whether the appraisal used to secure a tax easement was improperly inflated. According to an earlier report at least four Trump properties – the Trump International Hotel and Tower in Chicago, a 212-acre Seven Springs estate in Westchester county, New York, the Trump National Golf Club in Los Angeles and a skyscraper at 40 Wall Street in Manhattan – are being reviewed by state and federal authorities for potential tax, debt or insurance irregularities. The latest reporting contributes to a perception that Trump’s claims to philanthropic largesse are inflated or misleading at best. His charitable foundation was shut down two years ago. Former New York attorney general Barbara Underwood said at the time the foundation functioned “as little more than a checkbook to serve Mr Trump’s business and political interests”, and had engaged in “a shocking pattern of illegality.” The current New York attorney general, Letitia James, is investigating whether the Trump Organization falsely reported property values to secure loans or tax benefits. Investigators with her office this month deposed Eric Trump, the organization’s executive vice president, in what is currently a civil matter. The president’s son described the investigation as “the highest level of prosecutorial misconduct”. In response to questions posed by the Times about public philanthropic promises that appear either to have been exaggerated or non-existent, Trump Organization spokeswoman Amanda Miller said: “President Trump gives money privately. It’s impossible to know how much he’s given over the years.” Everyone’s on the move. Donald Trump is en route from North Carolina to his next campaign event, in Ohio, and Joe Biden has another rally in Pennsylvania, this one featuring rock god Jon Bon Jovi, who 10 years ago described himself to the Observer (the Guardian’s sister Sunday newspaper) as “overweight, drinking too much and bored to tears”! And very soon, Barack Obama is speaking at a drive-in rally in support of Joe Biden in Florida. Obama began hitting the campaign trail in person a few days ago, giving a blistering critique of Donald Trump’s presidency at a raucous rally in Philadelphia. The timing appeared very strategic - don’t campaign too early as if your former vice-president needs rescuing, but skid in for the closing when Biden has a strong lead in the polls but some of those last few swing voters in key states are still deciding which way to go.... Here’s Lauren Gambino’s report on that event in Philly. Richard Luscombe will bring us some reporting from Obama’s event in North Miami in a few minutes. Joe Biden is repeating that he has no plans to ban hydraulic fracturing in Pennsylvania, a critical battleground state where many jobs depend on the industry. Speaking at a drive-in rally on the grounds of a community college in Bristol, near Philadelphia, earlier The Assocated Press reports that he said: “Let me be clear, I’m not banning fracking in Pennsylvania or anywhere else.” People in about 100 cars blared their horns. Still, Biden noted that climate change could lead to more catastrophic floods in places like along the nearby Delaware River. “We can do something about it,” he said. “But we’ve got to come together.” Donald Trump has repeatedly accused Biden of supporting a ban on fracking. Biden mistakenly suggested during a Democratic presidential primary debate that he did, but his campaign quickly corrected that. The former vice president has promised to end fracking on federal land. Biden also said during this week’s presidential debate with Trump that the country would have to “transition away from the oil industry” to combat climate change -- something he didn’t mention at his rally today. Biden has since clarified that the process would be gradual and not cost people who rely on the energy sector their jobs. The comment pleased environmentalists but drew criticism from Republicans and even some national Democratic politicians in close congressional races in oil country. Jill Biden wore a “vote” mask to the rally this morning - here’s a reminder of the great Guardian piece from a few weeks ago about “vote” fashion. The war of words on the campaign trail is heating up. Donald Trump is still talking in North Carolina, about an hour in, in 82F heat under sunny skies (according to the pool report - your blogger is in the cloudy, cool Big Apple) and the president is mocking Democratic rival Joe Biden’s drive-in rallies and the focus on the coronavirus pandemic. Trump said all he hears about is “Covid, Covid, Covid” asserting that on November 4, the day after the election, the topic will disappear from headlines and Biden’s utterances. That seems unlikely as the autumn surge in cases continues across the country, and dire warnings from experts that the death toll, which is currently 224,000 in the US, could more than double to 500,000 in the next four months. Those attending Trump’s rally lined up for hours and can be seen on the television failing to keep social distance or wear a mask, while also hugging each other and cheering loudly. Biden held one of his drive-in rallies in Pennsylvania earlier, where voters listen from their cars and cheer, clap and honk in appreciation while keeping away from each other in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. “People in cars. People in cars!” Trump said sarcastically of Biden’s methods, getting his crowd chuckling. Some Trump supporters in cars made a point of creating a hullabaloo close to Biden’s rally, interrupting the candidate, who called them “chumps”. Just 10 days to go, folks. Meanwhile, Barack Obama is getting ready to hold a drive-in rally for Biden in North Miami within the hour. Meanwhile, top infectious diseases expert and the leading public health official on the White House coronavirus task force, Anthony Fauci, has suggested in his latest interview that it could be time to mandate mask-wearing across American in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. With the pandemic still out of control and infections rising, Fauci expressed exasperation. “If people are not wearing masks, then maybe we should be mandating it,” Fauci told CNN later yesterday. The doctor has been reluctant to talk about a national mandate, hoping that information campaigns, local efforts and facts about the effectiveness of masks would sway the public. Now he appears to be running out of optimism that common sense will prevail. “There’s going to be a difficulty enforcing it, but if everyone agrees that this is something that’s important and they mandate it and everybody pulls together and says, you know, we’re going to mandate it but let’s just do it, I think that would be a great idea to have everybody do it uniformly,” he said last night. Unfortunately, Fauci has been undermined all along the way by Donald Trump and now by the president’s newest official adviser, Scott Atlas (see previous post), whom Fauci has acknowledged is being allowed to edge him out and capture the president’s ear. Fauci also said late Thursday that Trump hasn’t met with the whole task force for months and whereas the White House coronavirus task force met daily earlier in the pandemic they are now only being convened about once a week. While the US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections that could exceed the grim threshold of 100,000 cases a day, Donald Trump’s most controversial official White House coronavirus adviser, Scott Atlas, has put out a tweet, backing up misleading information from the president. CNN’s ace fact-checker Daniel Dale is not having any of it. The country set a record daily number of new coronavirus cases on Friday at more than 83,000, eclipsing the previous high set on 16 July by more than 6,000. Dozens of states have reported their own surge in numbers, with the governor of Utah, Gary Herbert, warning that health services are at breaking point. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. “If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” Good afternoon, Joanna Walters in New York now taking over the reins from my colleague Bryan Armen Graham. Trump just arrived in Lumberton, North Carolina, and has begun addressing a rally there. He’s out of the gate with an entirely unsubstantiated assertion (and a split infinitive) that: “We are going to quickly end this pandemic.” Trump also remarks to the crowd that the sun is hot and he might have to cut his speech short because: “I’m going to be a lobster”. The crowd is having a whale of a time. And then, Christmas greetings. Joe Biden told a rally crowd in the key battleground state of Pennsylvania that he misses up-close campaigning, but doesn’t want his supporters to become “superspreaders”. “I wish I could go car to car and meet you all,” the former vice-president said at the top of his 25min remarks. “I don’t like the idea of all this distance but it’s necessary. I appreciate you being safe. What we don’t want to do is become superspreaders.” Biden’s speech at a drive-in event at Bucks County Community College in the Philadelphia suburb of Bristol came as Donald Trump embarked on a three-state, three-rally jaunt in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin as campaign season hurtles down the homestretch with early voting under way in all 50 states. A Rose Garden event in late September has been labeled a “superspreader” for the virus. More than two dozen people linked to the White House have contracted Covid-19 since the president’s reception on 26 September announcing Amy Coney Barrett as his nominee to the US supreme court. The US Senate has convened a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. Barack Obama was promising to step up for his former vice-president with an appearance in Miami on Saturday afternoon. The problem is nobody seems to know exactly when or where. Democrats have posted only vague details about the event on social media, leaving in the dark hordes of supporters keen to hear the most recent president speak. Not even the hometown Miami Herald appeared to be in the picture, noting only that Obama “planned a drive-in rally Saturday in North Miami”. “Does anyone know where in Miami Obama is going to be at,” one woman asked on Twitter on Saturday lunchtime, echoing dozens of similar messages from baffled supporters. Others speculated there were no details because the event was invite only. The Florida Democratic Party, meanwhile, isn’t saying either way. Florida, a traditional battleground state which Obama carried in his successful 2008 and 2012 campaigns, is crucial to both candidates’ hopes of winning the White House. Donald Trump flipped the state back red in 2016 but trails Biden in latest polls, albeit by a percentage inside the margin of error. National Guard soldiers in the North Dakota capital of Bismarck have helped notify 800 people who tested positive for the coronavirus but initially weren’t told due to a backlog of cases, the AP reports. The backlog was due to a recent sharp increase in coronavirus cases. North Dakota leads the nation with more than 1,272 new cases per 100,000 people over the past two weeks, according to the COVID Tracking Project. This week, North Dakota National Guard soldiers began telling people they tested positive for the virus. They previously were informing people who had contact with someone positive and should monitor their health for signs and symptoms of the virus. North Dakota reported 886 new infections on Friday, down from a record 1,038 cases on Thursday. Health officials reported nine deaths Friday, increasing the statewide death toll to 440. A surge of coronavirus cases in Wisconsin and the Dakotas is forcing a scramble for hospital beds and raising political tensions, as the upper midwest has emerged as one of the nation’s most troubling hotspots. Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new coronavirus cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. The World Health Organization (WHO) chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and WHO, probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Donald Trump has just cast his ballot in the 2020 presidential election at a library in West Palm Beach not far from his Mar-a-Lago resort. “It was a very secure vote, much more secure than when you send in a ballot, I can tell you that,” the US president says. “Everything was perfect. Very strict, by the rules. When you send in your ballot, it can never be like that. It could never be secure like that.” Early voting began in Florida on Monday. More than 52m Americans have already voted, according to the Election Project. Asked by a reporter which candidate he voted for, he smiles and says: “I voted for a guy named Trump.” A busy Saturday lies ahead with 10 days to do until election day: three rallies in three states (North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin). A fascinating and troubling read from Johnny Kaufmann in Georgia, part of our ongoing series The Fight to Vote: Tariq Baiyina has lobbied politicians, shaken hands with governors, set up a college program, and delivered dozens of sermons. Despite all this, the 42-year-old has never voted. And the reason is simple: since 2002, when he was convicted of a felony, he hasn’t been allowed. Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the group of anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which the White House advisers are accused of showing callous disregard for Americans suffering under the Covid-19 pandemic. On Friday, the Project posted to Twitter a letter from Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented Donald Trump. “I am writing concerning the false, malicious and defamatory ads that the Lincoln Project is displaying on billboards in Times Square,” Kasowitz wrote. “Those ads show Ms Trump smiling and gesturing toward a death count of Americans and New Yorkers, and attribute to Mr Kushner the statement that “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem” … with body bags underneath. “Of course, Mr Kushner never made any such statement, Ms Trump never made any such gesture, and the Lincoln Project’s representation that they did are an outrageous and shameful libel.” The Lincoln Project’s response, posted by members including the former GOP strategist-turned-bestselling author Rick Wilson, was typically pugnacious. “The level of indignant outrage Jared Kushner, and Ivanka Trump have shown towards the Lincoln Project for exposing their indifference for the more than 223,000 people who have lost their lives due to the reckless mismanagement of Covid-19 is comical,” a statement said. “…The billboards will stay up. We consider it important that in Times Square, the crossroads of the world, people are continuously reminded of the cruelty or density and staggering lack of empathy the Trumps and the Kushners have displayed towards the American people.” On 22 October, almost three weeks before one of the most consequential presidential elections in recent history, more than 6 million Californians had already voted. The number was several times that of the same point in 2016. The pandemic, massive wildfires and the ongoing fight against police brutality have galvanized voters in America’s most populous state. “We knew the Covid-19 pandemic would pose significant challenges, but elections officials have prepared and voters have responded,” said Alex Padilla, the secretary of state. California has sent mail-in ballots to 22 million registered voters, and the flood of votes that have been returned so far make up about 25%. It’s still unclear whether voter turnout will be higher than in previous years. But the early turnout is “shattering prior election returns”, said Paul Mitchell of Political Data, a bipartisan voter data firm based in California. “We’ve been tracking this kind of stuff for over a decade, and there’s just nothing that compares to how quickly voters have been returning their ballots this election cycle.” Here’s some of the Associated Press report on yesterday’s worrying coronavirus milestone in the US, a record caseload of more than 83,000 in one day. States from Connecticut to the Rocky Mountain West are reeling under the surge. The US death toll has grown to 223,995, according to Johns Hopkins University. The total US caseload reported on the site Friday was 83,757, topping 77,362 cases reported on 16 July. The impact is being felt in every section of the country – a lockdown at the Oglala Sioux reservation in South Dakota, a plea by a Florida health official for a halt to children’s parties, dire warnings from Utah’s governor, an increasingly desperate situation at a hospital in northern Idaho, which is running out of space and considering airlifts to Seattle or Oregon. “We’ve essentially shut down an entire floor of our hospital. We’ve had to double rooms. We’ve bought more hospital beds,” said Dr Robert Scoggins, a pulmonologist at the Kootenai Health hospital in Coeur d’Alene. “Our hospital is not built for a pandemic.” Utah governor Gary Herbert proclaimed Friday “a record day for Utah – but not a good one” as cases reached an all-time high. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” By public health order, masks are required in 21 counties, said Herbert, urging Utah residents to wear one whenever they are around someone outside their immediate household. The seven-day rolling average for new daily cases in the US surpassed 61,140 on Thursday, compared with 44,647 two weeks ago. The record was reached on 22 July when the rolling average was 67,293. The head of the World Health Organization warned that countries in the northern hemisphere are at a “critical juncture”. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. According to scientists at the University of Washington, things could be about to get much, much worse: Joe Biden’s remark in Thursday’s final debate that he would support a “transition” away from oil in the US, in favour of renewable energy, has given Trump an in – and he has tried to seize it. “That could be one of the biggest mistakes made in presidential debate history,” the president said on Friday at a rally at The Villages, a retirement community in central Florida where thousands of people gathered outdoors on a polo field – most not wearing masks. Later, in Pensacola, Trump recounted the moment with glee. “It looked like he made it, it looked like it was going to be OK. He got off the stage, going back to his basement, and then they hit him with the energy question. They hit him with a thing called oil.” Here’s what Oliver Milman, an environment reporter, wrote for us on Friday: Biden attempted to mend potential political damage after the debate when he told reporters he wanted to end subsidies for fossil fuels rather than the industry itself. But two vulnerable House Democrats in oil-producing states, Kendra Horn in Oklahoma and Xochitl Torres Small in New Mexico, quickly used Twitter to distance themselves from Biden’s remarks, perhaps mindful of the persistent attacks on Hillary Clinton in 2016 when she was portrayed as being happy to eliminate coalmining jobs. Climate activists have pointed out that a phase-out of the oil industry is simply a logical consequence of Biden’s climate action plan, which calls for 100% clean energy within 15 years and the negation of all planet-warming gases in the US by 2050. Even some major oil companies, such as BP, have embraced a similar goal of net zero by 2050. Scientists have warned that emissions must hit zero globally by mid-century to avoid the worst ravages of the climate crisis, including mass suffering and displacement of people due to heatwaves, flooding and wildfires. Biden’s comments on the oil industry “now count as the conventional wisdom”, said Bill McKibben, co-founder of the climate group 350.org. “That matters.” States such as Texas, which Democrats are trying to shift from being reliably Republican, have large numbers of workers in the oil and petrochemical industries. But the economic and political terrain is shifting – Texas is also the largest wind energy-producing state in the US while polls show that nearly eight in 10 Americans want the country to focus on boosting renewable energy rather than fossil fuels, including a clear majority of Republican voters. … and welcome to another day of coverage of the US presidential election, US politics in general and of course the coronavirus pandemic, ever a subject of political debate. There are 10 days to go until election day, and Donald Trump is trailing Joe Biden in most national and battleground polls, some deficits by more than 5%, suggesting that even polling inaccuracies of 2016 proportions might not see the president right the ship. This morning, Trump will vote in Florida, then travel to North Carolina. Here is a story about how one leading expert thinks turnout is heading to be the highest since 1908, early voting surging because of the pandemic – and perhaps because of Trump himself. More than 52m votes have been cast, with 100m or so more expected. It’s a three-rally day for Trump, with Ohio and Wisconsin after North Carolina. According to the fivethirtyeight.com averages, he’s a fraction ahead of Biden in Ohio, a fraction behind in North Carolina – and quite a long way behind in Wisconsin. Biden will be in Pennsylvania, where he also leads by more than 5%, for two drive-in rallies, one attended by … Jon Bon Jovi. “To continue our movementI am going to rely on you,” Trump told supporters in Florida on Friday. “Get out and vote. Vote early. Bring your friends, your family, your neighbors, your co-workers. Even grab your boss and say: ‘Come on, boss. You got to vote.’” Don’t, to put it efficiently, expect much evidence of Covid-19 mitigation measures at the Trump events today. Don’t expect much discussion of how case numbers have now hit record highs – and could reach terrifying levels, according to one new report. More to come, of course, from me and other Guardian writers. In the meantime, here’s something I helped Ed Pilkington write, about Trump’s dirty tricks …
2||Poll reveals steep rise in younger adults flouting UK's Covid restrictionsThe proportion of younger adults who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer showed the proportion of 18 to 34-year-olds who admitted breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35 to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. While the poll showed the overwhelming majority were complying with the regulations, the figures came as infections continue to rise ahead of a winter predicted to be very difficult for the NHS to manage. The survey also revealed that the public’s approval of the government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has dropped to its lowest levels since polling began. Currently, 50% disapprove of the government’s handling of the crisis, while 29% approve, down from 31% two weeks ago. Labour has a two percentage point lead over the Tories. The Conservatives are down two points from a fortnight ago, while Labour is stable. The public is split on who would make the best prime minister. Keir Starmer leads by just one point, the same as a fortnight ago. While 31% thought the Labour leader would make the best prime minister, 30% opted for Boris Johnson. Following the battle between the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, and the government over funding, Burnham has a net approval rating of +23 points among those living in the Greater Manchester area. The prime minister has a national net approval rating of -14 points. The public is divided on the clarity of the new tiered system of Covid restrictions. Half (50%) said they thought the system was clear, 44% thought the opposite. Nearly two in five (38%) thought the new measures had not gone far enough, 32% thought the measures were about right and 18% thought they had gone too far. A third (34%) said they were not confident they know what the rules are in their area. Opinium polled 2,002 adults online from 22 to 23 October. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the question over the first graphic; an earlier version said the poll results showed numbers of people abiding by the Covid-19 rules, rather than those who admitted breaking them.
1||Dustin Martin cements status as AFL great with another standout showingAs Richmond underlined their AFL dynasty with a third premiership in four years, the club’s talisman during its era of success, Dustin Martin, secured his status as one of the all-time greats of the game after adding a third Norm Smith medal to his collection. In a breathless finale on Saturday night to a season that will never be forgotten for its singular unpredictability, it was with a contrasting sense of inevitability that the Tigers star added to his individual wins of 2017 and 2019. Martin was the pre-grand final favourite to do what no other player has done before and win a third best-on-ground award in a premiership decider. And when it came to it, the man who seems to thrive on the biggest stage lived up to expectations. Having already kicked goals either side of half-time and with Richmond in the ascendancy as the full-time siren loomed, Martin iced back-to-back flags for the Tigers with a characteristic moment of magic, skidding a dribble kick through to open up a 22-point lead with just under eight minutes remaining. That was probably enough to hammer a nail into Geelong’s coffin – and to ensure he would go home with another Norm Smith medal around his neck. But Martin saved his best for last, snapping a fourth goal as time ran out, having won possession and fended off the attentions of Patrick Dangerfield. Added to his goal tally on a historic night under the lights in Brisbane, Martin had 21 disposals, 10 contested possessions, three tackles and four clearances in yet another outstanding grand final performance. There could have been no argument when the announcement was made on the Gabba stage. The vote was unanimous: each of the five judges put Martin top of their lists, giving him a maximum 15 points, well ahead of Jayden Short (six), Shane Edwards (four), Mitch Duncan (three) and Nathan Broad (two). The medal sees him move ahead of the already elite group of players to have won two Norm Smiths – Hawthorn pair Gary Ayres (in 1986 and 1988) and Luke Hodge (in 2008 and 2014), and Adelaide’s Andrew McLeod (in 1997 and 1998). Asked after the game in an interview with Channel Seven if the enormity of his feat had sunk in, Martin was as understated as ever. “It’s just surreal,” he said. “I can’t believe we’ve won three premierships and that’s just an added bonus. It’s pretty cool.” Tigers coach Damien Hardwick was more effusive. “He’s an incredible athlete isn’t he?” Hardwick told Channel Seven. “He’ll go down probably now as the best finals player of all time ... the way he just controls a game and knows where to be when to be, is incredibly important.” Martin had earlier played an important role in stemming the Geelong tide in the second quarter, breaking a run of five consecutive Cats goals with his first of the night to keep the Tigers in touch going into the major break. And an opportunistic snap from 50m with six minutes remaining in the third quarter gave the Tigers the lead and set them on the path to victory. Martin adds his record third Norm Smith to the Brownlow medal won in 2017 – and his three premiership rings. “It still doesn’t feel real,” he said. “I don’t know what to say. I’m just so grateful to be a part of such an unbelievable group. I’m lost for words to be honest. It’s been a tough road. I couldn’t be prouder of the way we faced a bit of adversity this year and the way we stuck at it. That’s why we’re a great club.”
3||Trump tells GOP donors that holding Senate will be 'tough' – reportShortly after Donald Trump insisted to reporters in Ohio he expected a “red wave” on election day, 3 November, it was reported on Saturday that he told Republican donors this week it would be “tough” for the party to hold on to the Senate. Trump trails Joe Biden in most national and battleground state polls. Democrats hold the House of Representatives and expect to keep it, while many forecasters think they have a good chance of re-taking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47, thereby achieving unified government. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” the Washington Post said Trump told donors in Nashville, Tennessee, on Thursday, before his last debate against Biden, according to an anonymous attendee. “The Senate is very tough.” The Post said Trump also insisted Republicans “are going to take back the House”. As Democrats hold that chamber by 232-197, few forecasters think there is much chance of that. Senate Republicans face defeat in Colorado, Maine, Arizona and perhaps North Carolina. Supposedly safer seats in Georgia, Iowa and Montana look far from secure. Trump reportedly told donors North Carolina would hold and Alabama would be taken back, but said there were “a couple” of senators he did not want to help. “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in,” the Post quoted him as saying. “I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” Trump has clashed with senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who offered harsh criticism and predicted “a Republican bloodbath in the Senate”. Sasse is among conservatives eyeing post-Trump presidential runs. Others usually loyal but under pressure at the polls, such as John Cornyn in Texas and Martha McSally in Arizona, have mounted cautious bids to be seen as independent. Even Mitch McConnell, the ruthless architect of the Republicans’ push to install federal judges under Trump, has said he thinks his party has a “50-50” chance of keeping control. The majority leader, 78, set for re-election despite a tough fight in Kentucky, has rebuffed questions about his health after he appeared with severe bruising to his hands and face. Control of the Senate has allowed Republicans to rush through the nomination of Amy Coney Barrett to succeed Ruth Bader Ginsburg on the supreme court, thereby tipping it 6-3 in favour of conservatives. If the White House and Senate are lost, a reactionary court would be Republicans’ bulwark against a Biden legislative agenda that could include reform to the court and the Senate. The court is due to hear a challenge to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, on 10 November. Trump has said he wants the justices to bring the ACA down, thereby depriving millions of healthcare in a pandemic and kneecapping his own drive to defeat HIV. One senator who initially stood against the push for Barrett said during debate on Saturday she would vote to confirm. When the nomination comes to the floor on Monday, said Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, “I will be a yes. I have no doubt about her intellect … I have no doubt about her capability to do the job.” Generally a defender of abortion rights Democrats say Barrett will threaten, Murkowksi had said no new justice should be named before the election.
0||England's Keira Walsh relishes her new-found freedom after strugglesManchester City’s Keira Walsh is preparing to anchor England’s midfield against Germany on Tuesday with a new-found freedom. It has been a long time coming. Despite a domestic cup double and an almost unbeaten season having meant that the 23-year-old travelled to the 2019 World Cup full of confidence, the pressure of her first major tournament hit hard and the criticism that followed even more so. She told the Guardian in January: “There were times when I thought: ‘Is this actually for me? Do I want to play football any more?’” and conceded that she still struggled on England camps even then, six months after the tournament. Whether it is having had time to settle or a new crop of young players alleviating the pressure that comes with being one of the least experienced, Walsh is starting to thrive “in my own head and my own mentality”, she said after England’s internal friendly on Friday. “I was playing a bit reserved. Now that I’ve taken the reins off a little bit and am not afraid to make mistakes I’m definitely playing a lot better and feeling a lot better on the pitch.” For that match, she was part of a formidable midfield trio with the Arsenal defender Leah Williamson and her City teammate Georgia Stanway and ran rings round England stalwarts Jill Scott, Izzy Christiansen and Fran Kirby, who picked up an ankle injury and is returning to Chelsea. “I definitely feel more comfortable,” Walsh said. “It makes it easier when you’ve got great teammates and players around you. They’re always there to encourage you and make you feel better if you make a mistake. That’s something the staff have spoken about, that if you’re making positive mistakes then they are not too bothered. If you’re trying to play forward and make something happen then they’re happy with that. That’s something I’ve been trying to work on.” Now it is about taking the next step. “I need to be scoring more goals and getting more assists. I play a slightly different role at England and City, I sit a little bit deeper at City, but especially with England there is no reason I can’t be getting in the box and adding more goals to my game.” Playing alongside her close friend Williamson in midfield was special because Walsh has “not played with her since I was about 12, in midfield”. She added: “We’re such good friends and it definitely makes it easier. We knew what each other wanted on the pitch, especially with Georgia in there as well, we spend a lot of time together off the pitch so in terms of the relationship there today we were playing a lot of one-two touches and it just clicked.” Phil Neville said his management team were looking at combinations when asked about the fresh partnerships on show. “We put two teams together two weeks ago and we wanted to change the dynamics a little, play some of the younger ones with different personnel to see if they could handle different scenarios and different systems. “We’re always looking for partnerships across the pitch, where we can get them playing together and gelling together and making sure there’s that connection in different units.” The FA has struggled to find opponents in this run of international breaks. With the Lionesses having no competitive fixtures, having qualified for the Olympics through their World Cup finish and for the Euros as the host nation, it has been hard to get teams to commit given the constantly changing Covid restrictions. That situation places even more importance on the games they do have, the first against Germany, ranked No 2 in the world behind the USA, on Tuesday and then Norway on 1 December. One method has been to take a smaller squad to Germany than they have had at St George’s Park to force players to play for a place in the travelling party. “We’ve 28 in the squad but we’re not taking 28 to Germany so there’s a decision to be had over the next 24 hours,” said Neville. “Every single player has trained really well, knitted in and deserves to go but unfortunately some won’t.”
0||Liverpool 2-1 Sheffield United: Premier League – live reaction!Premier League: Andy Hunter was at Anfield to see Liverpool come from behind to win against much-improved Sheffield United. Here’s how our man on Merseyside saw the action unfold. “It was hard, as expected,” he tells Sky Sports. “Sheffield United are a good side, they worked hard and made it difficult. They were in the game for long periods but we’re delighted that we kept going and got the three points in the end, which was important for us. On Liverpool’s centre-back pairing: “They were brilliant. It’s always going to be difficult against McBurnie up top, who’s very good in the air. I thought they worked the game out well, especially in the second half. We created some good chances and probably should have killed the game off with another goal or two. Overall, we’ve got to be delighted with the three points.” Have Liverpool answered a few questions from people critical of some recent results? “I’m not really interested in that, to be honest. I’m only interested in what I see in the dressing-room and I see hunger and desire every day to improve and win games. We’ve shown resilience and character tonight, digging in when we’re not playing as well as we should be.” The table: Liverpool go second, level on points with Everton having played one game more. Sheffield United remain second from bottom with just one point from a possible 18 but can take a lot of positives from their performance against the champions tonight. View the Premier League table Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeep! It was intriguing without being especially entertaining and Mike Dean draws proceedings to a close and Liverpool take all three points. They went behind to a controversially awarded Sander Berge penalty, but fought back to win courtesy of goals from Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota. 90+3 min: One suspects that was the chance for United. Liverpool have the ball back and are in no hurry to give it away. 90+2 min: Oli McBurnie wins a flick-on and puts the ball into the path of Oliver Burke. He shoots high and wide when he should have at least hit the target. He puts his head in his hands and berates himself in the strongest possible terms. 90+1 min: Ben Osborn is crowded out as he tries to drill the ball across the Liverpool penalty area. 89 min:Time is running out for Sheffield United, who are struggling to get a touch of the ball at the moment. There’s a break in play as Jordan Henderson takes a breath after coming out second best from an accidental collision with Oli McBurnie. 87 min: Sadio Mane leans back as he shoots from distance and the ball sails high over the crossbar. 85 min: Diogo Jota takes his place in the stand and has a big bag of ice taped applied to his right calf, strapped in place by a physio with far more Cling Film than is necessary. Won’t somebody please think of the environment?!?!?! 84 min: Liverpool substitution: Takumi Minamino and James Milner on, Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota off. 82 min: With his back to goal and the ball travelling towards him at speed, Mo Salah rolls John Egan and finds himself through on goal. He dinks the ball on to the upright and it bounces back into the grateful arms of Aaron Ramsdale. 79 min: Sheffield United remain in the game, with Ethan Ampadu playing a diagonal for Ben Osborn to chase. He gets in by the byline and looks up, but there’s nobody in a green shirt for him to pull the ball back towards. 76 min: Sheffield United substitution: David McGoldrick on for John Lundstram. The Republic of Ireland international almost has an instant impact, pouncing on a loose header from Fabinho and sending a half-volley wide of the upright. 75 min: Another header from Gomez, who puts the ball out for a throw-in as Sheffield United enjoy a spell of dominance. 74 min: John Egan plays a ball from deep down the touchline for George Baldock to chase. He picks out Sander Berge, who forces a smart save out of Alisson. 72 min: Ben Osborn sends in a half-decent cross from the left flank, which Joe Gomez thumps clear with a good header. 69 min: Going back to that disallowed Mo Salah goal - his two-touch finish was sublime, but the curtain-twitchers at Stockley Park got this decision right. He was marginally offside when he made his run to meet Alexander-Arnold’s cross. 68 min: As impressive as Sheffield United have been tonight, they’ll be ticked off that both Liverpool goals have come from preventable crosses sent in from the touchline. The first came from Jordan Henderson, the second from Sadio Mane. 67 min: Another corner for Liverpool as Sheffield United fail to clear properly. 66 min: Enda Stevens is booked for a foul on Jota and Liverpool have a free-kick wide on the right in a good position. Alexander-Arnold swings the ball in towards the near post and Firmino’s header is put out for a corner. Liverpool lead: Sadio Mane sends a cross to the far post from the left flank and Diogo Jota leaps to thump a header past Aaron Ramsdale. There was nothing wrong with that one! 63 min: Liverpool fans will love this - Salah’s goal has been ruled out for offside following a VAR intervention. Trent Alexander-Arnold picks out Salah with a cross from the right to the edge of the six-yard box. He controls it beautifully with his first touch, then turns and spanks it past Ramsdale with his second. 60 min: Past the hour mark we go and Sheffield United continue to play very well against the reigning champions. Oliver Burke takes on and beats Fabinho around his outside and scurries into the Liverpool penalty area. His shot from a narrow angle is blocked by Joe Gomez. 58 min: Jurgen Klopp effs and jeffs on the touchline, prompting Sky’s commentator to apologise for the Liverpool manager’s potty mouth. It’s after the watershed, there’s really no need. 55 min: Good play from Liverpool, as Jordan Henderson tries to play a low, curled pass from outside the area into the path of Sadio Mane, who was making a run to the far post. There’s a mite too much welly on it but Mane keeps it in play at the byline and pulls it back to Firmino. His shot from the edge of the penalty area is blocked. 54 min: Sheffield United substitution: Oliver Burke comes on for Rhian Brewster, who’s seen little of the ball and had a fairly quiet game. 51 min: Enda Stevens dives to head a Trent Alexander-Arnold cross out for a corner. From that set-piece, Liverpool win another. Alexander-Arnold’s inswinger is cleared by Oli McBurnie, but only as far as Mo Salah. He tries to arrow the ball into the top corner, but sends his effort high and wide. 50 min: Andy Robertson picks up a pass in space on the right flank but is quickly closed down by Ben Osbourn and forced to pass backwards. Liverpool are dominating but Sheffield United are doing a good job of keeping them at arm’s length. 48 min: Oli McBurnie has been making life very difficult for Joe Gomez and takes advantage of a poor touch from the central defender to win the ball in the Liverpool penalty area. It’s worked towards George Baldock, who tries his luck with a shot from distance. It’s a decent effort but fizzes wide of the left upright. 47 min: Liverpool begin on the front foot, dominating possession in the early stages of the second half, much like they did in the first. Diogo Jota dribbles across the face of the Sheffield United penalty area but has the ball nicked off his toe. 46 min: Play resumes, with Liverpool getting the ball rolling as they play into an empty Kop for this second half. There are no changes in personnel on either side. An email: “I assume that we will see those fine sportsmen from Liverpool vociferously protesting that the Blades should get a penalty for that trip,” writes Jonathan Leiper. “Given that they have invested so much emotional capital in Mane’s offside and all that.” Sheffield United have been excellent in that first half, with George Baldock standing out in a team full of players who are having good games. How on earth have they only got one point from their first five games? Peep! The sides traipse off with a goal apiece. Liverpool started in the ascendency but went behind after Sander Berge slotted home a penalty awarded when Fabinho was penalised for a fould on John Lundstram right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area. Bobby Firmino equalised for Liverpool shortly before the break, tapping into an empty goal after Sadio Mane had forced Aaron Ramsdale into a decent save. 45+3 min: ANother Baldock cross - the man is relentless on the right flank for Sheffield United - is cleared at the far post. 45 min: Another cross from Baldock is cleared by Fabinho, as Lundstram charges into the Liverpool penalty area with a late run. The ball drops for Basham, whose shot is blocked. 43 min: A tip of the hat to Jordan Henderson for his role in the build-up to that goal. His cross from the right touchline was a beauty and at the far post, Mane got a powerful header on the ball. Ramsdale kept it out but couldn’t hold on to it and Firmino’s task couldn’t have been simpler. The sides are level. Roberto Firmino taps in from a few yards out on the follow-up after Aaron Ramsdale could only parry a Sadio Mane header from point-blank range. 40 min: Yup, replays show that Jota tripped Berge but no spot-kick was awarded. Perhaps Andre Marriner and his VAR officials have gone for their half-time cuppa early. 38 min: Chris Basham intercepts a cross from Firmino from the left, with Mo Salah and Jordan Henderson lurking with intent behind him. Moments previously, Sander Berge was denied what looked a clear penalty for a trip on him by Diogo Jota inside the Liverpool penalty area. 37 min: Another George Baldock cross into the Liverpool penalty area is cleared by Jordan Henderson. 34 min: Trent Alexander-Arnold and Andy Robertson aren’t getting forward down the wings as much as usual this evening, with Sheffield United’s wing-backs keeping them pinned back as much as possible and forcing them to play the ball inside. As I type that, young Trent makes an eejit of me by getting forward and playing a raking pass into the Sheffield United penalty area, where Mo Salah tries to lift the ball over Aaron Ramsdale. Enda Stevens does well to distract him and the ball goes out for a corner from which nothing comes. 32 min: Joe Gomez plays a wonderful crossfield pass to Mo Salah on the right flank and the Egyptian jinks inside. He runs into traffic, turns and tees the ball up for Jordan Henderson, whose shot from just outside the penalty area is blocked by Enda Stevens. 30 min: Liverpool get the ball back to Alisson courtesy of headers from Fabinho and Robertson, while Rhian Brewster tracks both players waiting to pounce on any mistakes. 28 min: Nothing much to report as the game settles into something of a lull following periods of dominance from both sides. 24 min: Sheffield United have certainly found their groove now. A crossfield pass from George Baldock is caught on the volley by Ben Osborn. His ferocious rasper from about 12 yards is saved by Alisson. 23 min: Replays of that most recent Sheffield United penalty appeal show that George Baldock’s cross from the right definitely struck Andy Robertson’s arm. It wasn’t outstretched or in an “unnatural” position, which is probably why no spot-kick was awarded. 22 min: Alisson wins a free-kick as Sheffield United take a corner. He was being shoved as he tried to fist the ball clear. 20 min: Oli McBurnie squanders a glorious chance to put Sheffield United two up after beating the Liverpool offside trap, running on to a glorious cross-field pass, controlling with a wonderful first touch and then sidefooting wide of the far post from a narrow angle. 19 min: Another penalty shout from Sheffield United as a George Baldock cross from the right appears to hit an arm. The appeal goes unheeded. 17 min: Diogo Jota drifts into the centre from the right and picks out Salah with a pass before being fouled. Free-kick for Liverpool, in line with the right side of the United penalty area, a long way out. Trent Alexander-Arnold sends the ball into the penalty area, it finds its way to Gini Wijnaldum and he shoots high and wide. 14 min: Fabinho looks very aggrieved about that penalty decision that went against him. He stuck his foot in right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area, getting a little bit of ball and a little bit of John Lundstram’s foot. Mike Dean didn’t consult his pitchside monitor, choosing to take his VAR official Andre Marriner’s word for that the Brazilian had committed the foul. Sheffield United lead! Alisson dives to his right, Sander Berge shoots down the middle. Mike Dean signals for a penalty following a consultation with his VAR official. 9 min: John Lundstram is tackled by Fabinho on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area and goes down. That might be a penalty. 8 min: Liverpool have settled into the game quickly and are bossing the game, while Sheffield United have yet to find anything resembling a groove. 6 min: The foul that led to that free-kick was a daft one by John Lundstram on Mo Salah, which earned the Sheffield United midfielder a yellow card and almost cost his team a goal. 3 min: Liverpool win a free-kick inside their own half and Trent Alexander-Armstrong spots Ramsdale off his line and shoots for goal. The Sheffield United is almost embarrassed but backpedals furously enough to stretch and tip the ball over his crossbar. That was a great effort from Alexander-Arnold. Nothing comes from the corner. 2 min: John Egan is forced to slide in and prevent the ball reaching Mo Salah in front of an empty net after Aaron Ramsdale charged off his line to chase a long ball from Andy Robertson. Sadio Mane got to it first and squared it, only for Egan to get back and intercept. 1 min: Sheffield United get the ball rolling, their players wearing green shirts, yellow shorts and yellow socks. Liverpool’s players wear their usual home kit of red shirts, shorts and socks. Not long now: The teams are out on the pitch, Sheffield United trouping out first, closely followed by Liverpool. Alisson points to the sky, getting a quick prayer in before lining up with his team-mates in a socially responsible fashion. It’s all about the optics - they’ll be getting up close and personal in just a minute or so. Jurgen Klopp speaks: “Having ALisson back is good news,” says Liverpool’s manager, upon being asked the alarmingly stupid question: is having Alisson back good news. “It was his decision and he’s old enough and experienced enough to make it.” Chris Wilder: “He’s a talented young player and we’re delighted we brought him to the football club,” says Sheffield United’s gaffer upon being asked about Rhian Brewster. “I’m looking forward to watching him play tonight. Elsewhere in the Premier league In torrential rain, Manchester United and Chelsea have just played out a very boring stalemate in a match both managers seemed more intent on not losing than winning. Manchester United were lucky to survive a first-half penalty shout, when Harry Maguire clearly grappled Cesar Azpilicueta at a corner. Those teams: Jurgen Klopp makes three changes to the side that drew with Everton last weekend, two of them enforced. Gini Wijnaldum comes into midfield in place of Fabinho, who drops to fill the Virgil van Dijk-shaped hole in Liverpool’s defence alongside Joe Gomez. Thiago Alcantara has not recovered sufficiently to make the matchday squad, which means Diogo Jota is in. Joel Matip is also out injured, but Alisson returns to the side. A liverpool player until recently, Rhian Brewster makes his full debut for Sheffield United. Max Lowe appears to have been stood down after suffering a blow to the head against Fulham last week, while Oliver Norwood drops to the bench. Ethan Ampadu and Ben Osborn come into the side. Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Gomez, Fabinho, Robertson, Henderson, Wijnaldum, Salah, Firmino, Jota, Mane. Subs: Adrian, Milner, Jones, Minamino, Shaqiri, Phillips, Williams. Sheffield United: Ramsdale, Baldock, Basham, Egan, Ampadu, Stevens, Berge, Lundstram, Osborn, McBurnie, Brewster. Subs: Verrips, Sharp, Burke, Jagielka, Norwood, McGoldrick, Robinson. Tonight’s match officials Referee: Mike Dean Assistants: Darren Cann and Mark Scholes Fourth official: Andy Madley VAR: Andre Marriner Early Sheffield United team news Having scored just twice in five Premier League thus far, Sheffield United are in dire need of goals and former Liverpool player Rhian Brewster could be the man to provide them if he is handed his full debut for the club following his recent move. Left-back Max Lowe got a bang on the head against Fulham last week and was due to be assessed before the blades boarded their bus to Merseyside. Early Liverpool team news It’s flown below the radar so you may have missed the news, but Liverpool are going to be without Virgil van Dijk for the foreseeable future after he tore his ACL during last weekend’s Merseyside derby. The victim of an ludicrous Jordan Pickford challenge that went unpunished and has prompted no end of Liverpool supporters to call for the Everton goalkeeper to be brought to the Hague and tried for crimes against humanity, Van Dijk could miss the rest of the season and we wish him well as begins his recovery. Also clattered in that game, Thiago Alcantara will be assessed before kick-off. Having been out with a shoulder injury, Alisson Becker is reported to be returning to full fitness and may return tonight. Midfielder Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and defender Konstantinos Tsimikas are both out, while Naby Keita and Joel Matip are major doubts. Sheffield United’s bad start to the season could be about to get a whole lot worse as they travel to Anfield to take on the reigning champions. A revelation last season following their promotion from the Championship, Chris Wilder’s side picked up their first point of the current campaign in a slightly fortuitous draw against fellow strugglers Fulham last weekend. They’ll have their work cut out to take anything home today, but will fancy their chances against a team that have been imperious at times, but occasionally bang average and – against Aston Villa – downright awful. Kick-off is at 8pm (BST), but stay tuned in the meantime for team news and build-up.
2||Welsh government to review ban on sales of non-essentialsThe Welsh government is to review how the ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the 17-day lockdown is working, Mark Drakeford has said. The move followed growing calls to reverse the ban in the nation, with a senior police figure saying it benefits only Amazon and more than 30,000 people signing a petition calling for a U-turn on the restriction, which had led some shops to seal off shelves housing children’s clothes and books with clingfilm. “We’ll be reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets and making sure that common sense is applied,” the first minister tweeted. “Supermarkets can sell anything that can be sold in any other type of shop that isn’t required to close. In the meantime, please only leave home if you need to.” His announcement on Saturday evening came after he said the ban was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retailers have to close during the period, which began at 6pm on Friday. However, North Wales police and crime commissioner Arfon Jones said the move would only enrich online internet giants at the expense of high street retailers – concerns echoed by the Welsh Conservatives. “Personally I think the Welsh government decision to ban the sale of non-essential goods in shops that also sell essential goods is wrong and the only people that will benefit will be online sellers like Amazon,” he tweeted. “Bad move on this occasion by Mark Drakeford.” Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”, and it defended the ban on Saturday. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. “Supermarkets can keep selling items you can find in other essential shops – such as stationery/greeting cards,” it tweeted. “The purpose of selling essential items only during firebreak is to discourage spending more time than necessary in shops and to be fair to retailers who have to close. This is not for the sake of being difficult – we need to do everything we can to minimise the time we spend outside our homes. This will help save lives and protect the NHS.” A video posted on social media appeared to show a man ripping down plastic sheeting that was covering clothing aisles in a supermarket. “We do not agree that this is a prudent or rational measure, and will create more harm than good,” the petition stated. “We do not agree for example that parents should be barred from buying clothes for their children during lockdown while out shopping. “This is disproportionate and cruel, and we ask that the decision be reversed immediately.” On Saturday, Andrew Davies, the Welsh Conservatives’ shadow health minister, called for the ban to be “dropped immediately” and has written to the presiding officer of the Welsh parliament calling for members to be recalled to discuss the ban. “I have never witnessed such a fierce backlash against a decision from the Welsh Labour government,” he said. “This ludicrous ban has caused real anger across Wales and it’s not fair on those staff working in our supermarkets, and the general Welsh public who are already at their wit’s end with a difficult fortnight looming. “The Wales-wide lockdown is disproportionate, unnecessary and biting our economy hard. I’d rather see people being able to buy items in shops in their communities that provide employment to local people than see millions spent at online internet giants.”
0||Diogo Jota completes Liverpool's comeback win over Sheffield UnitedAnother Saturday, another dose of VAR torment for Liverpool; only this time Jürgen Klopp’s champions would not be denied victory by strange goings-on at Stockley Park. Diogo Jota’s header lifted Liverpool level on points with Everton at the top of the Premier League after VAR had awarded Sheffield United a dubious penalty and disallowed a sublime goal from Mohamed Salah. Despite the interventions that are driving Klopp to distraction his team extended their unbeaten run at Anfield to a remarkable 62 league games. The 9,999th goal in the club’s history means Liverpool can equal their record of 63 home league games unbeaten – set between 1978 and 1981 – when West Ham visit next Saturday. Klopp will be seeking improvement in his team’s performance, this was more hard-fought and dogged than slick and stylish, but their focus and resilience was faultless yet again. Jota’s winner, coming two minutes after Salah’s disallowed volley, was the hallmark of a single-minded side. The wait for a first league win of the campaign continues for Chris Wilder, although there was plenty to encourage the United manager here. Oli McBurnie and Oliver Burke, a second-half replacement for the former Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster, caused all manner of problems for the home defence but did not find the composure in front of goal to capitalise. Alisson, returning to the side after missing four games with a shoulder problem, was gainfully employed all evening as United created enough chances to claim a point. “They had more possession and control of the game but it wasn’t one-way traffic,” Wilder correctly stated. “We could have done better with the positions we got into in the final third. They did that and we didn’t. This league is ruthless and cruel and it is a cruel one to take tonight.” Jota brought even more quality and adventure to the Liverpool attack as Klopp made a rare formation switch to 4-2-3-1 with the Portugal international on the right and Salah leading the line. Jordan Henderson in particular relished the extra options ahead of him while Sadio Mané flourished as usual on the left. Mané almost put the champions ahead on 67 seconds when he latched on to Andy Robertson’s fine pass and beat Aaron Ramsdale as the United goalkeeper unnecessarily rushed from goal. The covering John Egan, one of several impressive defenders in the visiting ranks, cleared before Salah could tap into an empty net. Moments later Trent Alexander-Arnold almost scored with an audacious free-kick from inside his own half but the back-peddling Ramsdale tipped over to deny the defender one of the goals of the season. Liverpool were dominant from the start. United had not constructed an attack of note before they were awarded a penalty that altered the complexion of the first half. As with the finale at Goodison Park last week, when Henderson had a 92nd minute winner ruled out for a fractional offside against Mané, Klopp was left aghast at the intrusion of VAR. It looked a harsh decision to the naked eye when Mike Dean penalised Fabinho for a foul on McBurnie. The Brazilian appeared to win the ball just outside the area as he attempted to atone for a poor clearance. The VAR official, Andre Marriner, however, ruled that contact was made on the 18-yard line and upgraded Dean’s decision to a penalty. It was the first spot-kick awarded against Liverpool at Anfield for two years. Sander Berge sent Alisson the wrong way from the spot and United were emboldened by their lead. George Baldock’s crosses were a constant source of danger. McBurnie should have doubled United’s advantage from a superb crossfield ball by the wing-back but his shot lacked any conviction and sailed well wide. Another Baldock delivery teed up Ben Osborn for a volley that the Liverpool keeper pushed away and United had three more penalty appeals dismissed before the interval. Two – for a handball by Robertson and a push by Alexander-Arnold on McBurnie – were rightly ignored but Jota was fortunate VAR chose not to review his challenge on Berge when the midfielder darted into the box. Baldock and Osborn were effective in denying space to Liverpool’s marauding full-backs but Alexander-Arnold was involved in the hosts’ equaliser late in the first half. His lay-off was swept towards the far post by Henderson and Mané, somehow left unmarked, met the excellent cross with a powerful header. Ramsdale saved but the ball dropped kindly for Firmino to tap home his first goal of what by his elevated standards has been an underwhelming season so far. Salah thought he had edged Liverpool ahead with a stunning strike as pressure mounted on the visiting defence in the second half. The striker’s first touch to control Alexander-Arnold’s cross into the area was beautiful. His second was even better, volleying beyond Ramsdale in the same movement for his 101st goal in Liverpool colours. But no, it was back to 100 when VAR spotted he was just offside when the cross was played. Liverpool were not deflated by their latest slap from technology. Two minutes later the irrepressible Mané crossed from the left and Jota, left in too much space by Enda Stevens, steered an unstoppable header beyond Ramsdale. Salah could have given his team the comfort of a two-goal lead when he turned Egan inside the box but chipped against a post from close range.
2||'This song is the struggle': Vanuatu's treehouse troubadour on love, loss and languageVanuatu singer-songwriter Tio Bang Massing writes from a place that few still remember. He tries to live there too, with an almost Buddha-like simplicity, in a makeshift home tucked among the roots of a sprawling banyan tree. Massing has been performing most of his adult life, as a founding member of Vanuatu’s renowned fire dance troupe, and as one of the anchors of Dropvkal Groove, a roots music collective. But now he has emerged – from his first ever visit inside a recording studio – with a debut album, Sorousian, drawing inspiration from his volcanic home island of Ambrym, as well as his new arboreal place on Efate island. The album was produced by Wantok Records, a Brisbane-based label that specialises in fostering indigenous talent from Melanesia and Timor. Studio head David Bridie was one of Sorousian’s producers. Massing, he says, “is an effortless artist, in the way he sings and plays guitar ... he comes up with these very textured vocal layers, adds in overdubs of shakers and tam tam and percussion”. Black Butterfly, Massing’s first single, is about, ostensibly, a black butterfly. But the metaphor runs deeper, invoking the fleeting evanescence of the creature’s existence when he sings: “I’m still living, so I must sing, for the voices that can’t be heard any more.” Is Massing the black butterfly? “Maybe I am one of the black butterflies, one of the people who dream to live free with the land,” he tells the Guardian. “But you know it doesn’t really work today. It’s a dream … everyone loves it, they’re talking about it, but I’m not living it. Something we all claim to love, something we all say we want. Something we don’t have the courage and the frailty to be,” Massing says. “That’s the life I named black butterfly.” Living in Vanuatu, the country ranked the most vulnerable on earth to natural disasters and the impacts of climate change, the environment, its decay and its fragility, are recurrent themes. “I have to do something for this earth, as well as for the next generation: for my kids and their kids, you know?”, Massing says. He finds music – or rather music finds him – everywhere. “What is happening around inspires me to share my world through music. And I’m representing communities of other people as well,” he says, such as in Morning Star Bae Kam, a paean to Melanesian neighbour West Papua’s struggle for independence, where he urges a continued resilience: “This song is the struggle/The struggle is this song.” On the outskirts of Port Vila, Massing has built himself a single tiny room out of bamboo and cast-off timbers tucked into the roots of a towering banyan tree, known in Vanuatu as a nambanga. It’s an unhurried existence in his treehouse, an atmosphere that informs his songwriting. Massing’s songs shift from line to line between Vanuatu pidgin Bislama, Ambrymese, and English. Is he worried that his magpie lyrics will leave people behind? “It’s what I believe in, what I’m seeing.” But will people understand? “Maybe, or maybe not… like, if I get one person out of the crowd, then that’s alright, you know? If someone is trying to think of what I’m trying to see, then that’s all right. And if it’s no one, that’s all right.” He smiles broadly, “This album is kind of like an experiment of the local music of Vanuatu.” In polyglot Vanuatu, language is a potent bearer of history, and custom, and place. Mumbwe, Massing’s second single, is derived from from the custom of his home island of Ambrym. The bare bones melody is a reworking of a song used in the Rom customary dance Massing used to watch as a child. The language used in the song is lost from everyday use, but preserved in song. “That,” Massing says quietly, “is the kind of experimenting I’ve been doing.” Recording Sorousian was Massing’s first ever time in a studio, and there is quaint juxtaposition to the album that time has produced. The album, now, lives everywhere, on streaming services to every corner of the globe: Massing remains at home, under the banyan tree, just living.
1||British & Irish Lions could tour Japan in wake of sides meeting at MurrayfieldThe British &amp; Irish Lions have opened the door for a future tour of Japan after announcing only the third “home” match in their illustrious history against the Brave Blossoms next summer. Warren Gatland’s side will face Japan at Murrayfield on 26 June – the same day as the Premiership final – and while they will do so without any England players, the fixture will serve as a key part of the Lions’ preparations before facing the world champions. The trip to South Africa will be the first since the San Francisco agreement in 2017, when it was decided by the game’s powerbrokers that tours would be cut to eight matches. That meeting was controversial because the Lions were not properly represented and while the Murrayfield match increases the number of fixtures to nine, the Premiership clubs’ refusal to make any of their players available demonstrates further how the Lions are becoming increasingly marginalised. Their place on the international schedule is at least guaranteed up to 2032, according to the San Francisco agreement, but the global calendar is up for debate with a number of unions eager to move the existing summer window to October. Should that happen, a tour of Japan – which cemented itself as rugby’s biggest new broadcast market during last year’s World Cup – could move closer to becoming reality. The Lions’ managing director, Ben Calveley, said: “We’re developing a relationship here with Japan, this is the first time that the Lions has played against Japan and it will be a historic Test. My view is that the Lions can offer an awful lot to the growth of the global game and we should consider how best it can do that. “I will absolutely continue to represent the Lions as best I can within those global negotiations when they take place, whereas the Lions may not have been directly represented in the room previously, we are now directly represented and I make all the points that I need to make as any of those global season negotiations take place.” Calveley also revealed that Gatland, who has spent the past month attending a host of club matches, will delay naming his assistant coaches until the new year but confirmed discussions had opened with the home unions. Four years ago, Gatland wanted Gregor Townsend, who had just been appointed Scotland’s head coach, to be part of his backroom staff but he could not secure his release. Calveley, though, is optimistic no such problems will happen this time. The Ireland head coach, Andy Farrell, has been part of the coaching team for the past two tours and while he recently said he has not been approached by Gatland he did not rule out a third Lions trip. Calveley also said club coaches will also be considered, raising the prospect of the Crusaders’ Scott Robertson, who has expressed an interest, Stuart Lancaster from Leinster or Exeter’s Rob Baxter being involved. Calveley said: “What Warren and I have been doing is getting round the head coaches and the chief executives from each of the four unions and I can confirm they’re all incredibly supportive, as you would expect them to be because they absolutely understand the value of the Lions. “I don’t think there’s any assumption the coaches have to come from within the union constructs, they could come from a club environment. “We’re very open we’re interested in appointing coaches that can help us win in South Africa and that’s the main criteria. Anyone that can help us win these Test matches would be interesting to Warren and ultimately it’s his call.”
1||Henry Slade the rock as unstoppable Exeter roll on to cherished doubleNo scorching May heat or packed stands, just damp autumn leaves on a windblown concourse and a soaking, empty colosseum. On the face of it this was as far removed from grand theatre as a small flapping tent on a sodden campsite but Exeter are increasingly a team for all seasons and stages, whatever the opposition or the weather throw at them. It was properly Hitchcock shower-scene wet by the end but, when it absolutely counted, the Chiefs’ grip on a cherished double proved impossible to shake. They are in excellent company with only Leicester (twice), Wasps and Saracens (twice) having previously won the European Cup and Premiership in the same season. None of those fine sides had to contend with the unique challenges of this prolonged campaign, nor were they playing in the second tier of English rugby just a decade previously. It is not just what Exeter are achieving that sets them apart but where they have come from. Once again, though, they kept their absent supporters on edge, only a crucial late lineout steal by Jonny Gray and a concluding penalty by Joe Simmonds, his 33rd consecutive successful kick dating back to the end of August, finally relieving the suffocating pressure. Not for the first time in recent times, an English club clad all in black simply refused to be denied. Wasps also deserve massive credit, especially considering the Covid-disrupted buildup that cost them the services of four of their first-choice 23. At times Jacob Umaga played as if it were a midsummer night in the tropics, which was some feat, while Jimmy Gopperth played the angles beautifully alongside him. Until the Chiefs scrum finally began to ratchet up the pressure in the second half, it was anybody’s game. Did the conditions play into the hands of Exeter’s big forwards? Maybe to an extent but at times it was virtually impossible for anyone to do anything beyond the absolute basics. There is a reason why union administrators prefer their finales to be played in late spring or early summer, on hard, fast tracks rather than inside the equivalent of a dishwasher halfway through its cycle. The elements, though, could not stop Henry Slade displaying the class that makes him an increasingly sharp attacking threat. Ball in two hands, he was swift to spot a mismatch with two rather less mobile Wasps forwards and a little step took him over for another important big-game contribution. It is reaching the point where England need to think about building their starting midfield around Slade rather than endlessly agonising about where he might fit in. Over the next few weeks, however, Eddie Jones will have to do without Jack Nowell, who was on the field here despite having severed ligaments beneath his big toe. The injury will rule him of autumn international consideration but there was no way he was going to miss out on a second major final in eight days. Even on one tattooed foot, the winger is still guaranteed to give everything and, one day, he will enjoy the prolonged run of injury‑free rugby his Cornish fan club is yearning for. There will be no more active outings, though, for Exeter’s other backline totem, Gareth Steenson, for whom this was the final game before retirement. Along with Phil Dollman and others he helped set the tone for what has followed back in the Championship days, not least an instinctive ability to rise to the biggest occasions. This time there was no need for the extra-time penalty winner that sunk Wasps in the 2017 Premiership final but, had there been, the Ulsterman would not have flinched. Perhaps the only unanswered question is this: what would have unfolded had Saracens’ salary cap misadventures not removed them from this season’s equation? None of us will ever know but this is now a more confident, wiser Exeter team than the one overtaken in the closing quarter of last year’s Premiership final. Where Saracens faltered at the death in their European semi-final against Racing 92, too, the Chiefs have now twice held firm when it really mattered. This has been a season like no other and yet still, 12 months on, they remain tougher to shift than a superglued barnacle. Their key men all have plenty more mileage in them, Devon is suddenly a magnet for any ambitious player and they will be even harder to beat when their besotted fans are finally allowed back in Sandy Park. Assuming they can find a way to celebrate over the next few days without joining the Barbarians on the naughty step, it would appear the West Country feelgood factor will endure for a while yet. Exeter have just won a double and still have a good deal of improvement in them. If that is not the definition of club rugby heaven, nothing is.
22||Strictly Come Dancing 2020: week one – as it happenedAnd that’s IT for Week One of Strictly! So great to be back on the dancefloor. I’m predicting Jacquie and Anton to go next week, and a four-way final featuring Clara, Maisie, Nicola and HRVY. Feel free to make your predictions in the comment box, I’m hoping it will stay open a little longer than last week. Thank you for joining in and being hilarious as always - there’s no Halloween Spooktacular next week as it’s a bit early in the season for a theme week, but don’t let that stop you putting on fishnets and bat wings if that’s your thing. It all kicks off at 7.15pm on Saturday; in the meantime you can find me on Twitter @heidistephens, so please come and say hello. Have a great week, and I’ll see you then! Hx Bruno is on Zoom! DRINK. He’s been to the same hairdresser as Jamie, Karen and Gorka. It Takes Two is back throughout the week, maybe this will be the year I FINALLY get an invite. Summary of this VT: there is a great deal of Strictly content available if you’re so inclined. Scores: 8,8,9 - a total of 25 for HRVY and JNTT. Craig though it was spectacular, and Shirley thought it was fierce, fast and furious and HRVY is definitely one to watch. Motsi thought it was the best first dance she’s ever seen, and asks where we go from here. Well, quite. HRVY is humping a microphone, which just made me shout ‘EW NO’ like an absolute mum. His toes are very turned in but he’s definitely got some moves. Great timing and energy, that’s a pretty good outing for Week One. Good work, consonant boy. And finally it’s HRVY and JNTT! Their first dance is the Jive to ‘Faith’ by Stevie Wonder feat. Ariana Grande. Getting your Jive out on Week One is either genius or insanity, what happened to the days when everybody did a Cha Cha or a Waltz and eased themselves in gently? Next week in the bingo: ‘this is the favourite song of *insert relative here*’. Scores: 3,6,6 - a total of 15 for Bill and Oti. THREE, Craig? That’s just RUDE. ‘You two are a whole mood, guys,’ said Motsi. Great commitment but the technique needs work. Craig thought Bill created a whole new dance genre, like dancing on hot coals after a dozen double espressos. Shirley thought it was inspiring for every man watching, but his posture needs work. Everything about this is amazing. Oti is a goddess, Bill has amazing rhythm and some pretty decent footwork, despite it all looking a bit clunky in places. I don’t care, it’s pure joy and I want to watch it again. MORE PLEASE. Next up it’s BILL AND OTI! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Pata Pata’ by Miriam Makeba. Bill looked very promising in the group dance last week, and I suspect he’s going to throw himself into this Cha Cha with both barrels. Wouldn’t you if you got the chance to dance with Oti? You’d have to tie me down. Only two couples left! Hooray, but also boo. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Nicola and Katya. Shirley thought it was a partnership she’s really going to enjoy watching, and Motsi wasn’t disappointed either - Nicola needs to work on getting her upper body more stable, however. Craig though it was absolute dynamite, a fantastic partnership. Already this is incredibly cool, and Nicola and Katya look great together. Some nice footwork too, although a bit tentative from Nicola in places and the transitions need work. Nice timing though - another couple with bags of potential, can’t wait to see what they bring to the dancefloor in the coming weeks. It’s time for NICOLA AND KATYA! Their first dance is the Quickstep to ‘Get Happy’ by Ella Fitzgerald. I can’t wait to see these two dance together for the first time, it feels like such an exciting step for Strictly and I’m really intrigued to see what Katya is going to do. That said, a Quickstep in Week One feels…bonkers. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Ranvir and Giovanni. How do we feel about Gio’s hair? I can’t decide. It’s a bit One Direction. Part of me wants to brush it lovingly out of his eyes, the other part wants to take a pair of kitchen scissors to it. Craig thought Ranvir used her dress like a diva drag queen, it was a great first dance. Shirley thought Ranvir’s hands were exquisite, and she was a superstar. Motsi thought Ranvir has really improved since the launch show, she adored it. Ranvir looks absolutely FIERCE in her red Paso dress, I love it. Some nice skirt work to open, and some good footwork in hold. Giovanni is prancing about trying to steal the limelight, but Ranvir is giving it both barrels. I thought that was a really nice job for a Week One Paso. Next up it’s RANVIR AND GIOVANNI! Their first dance is the Paso Doble to ‘End of Time’ by Beyoncé. I love this song, and I love a Paso, and I have high hopes for this pairing. This show seems very long considering there are three fewer couples than usual. Is everyone still with me? Maybe I’m just out of practice. Scores: 4,6,6 - a total of 16 for Jason and Luba. Jason is quite...enthusiastic, isn’t he? Motsi loved the joy that Jason brought to the dancefloor, but Craig wasn’t fond of the Jackson 5 thing going into the Foxtrot. Shirley thought Jason gave 100% and didn’t hold back, and his footwork was fantastic - lots of potential. AGREE. Jason has some lovely performance skills for a sportsman, and this has bags of charm - his footwork and posture definitely need work but he’s another one that could go on a journey this year. It’s time for JASON AND LUBA! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘My Girl’ by The Temptations. It’s quite early for cutesy faux-romance that makes your teeth hurt, but I’ll let it go just this once because maybe cheesy love stories are what the world needs right now. Scores: 8,8,8, - a total of 24 for Maisie and Gorka. Rein it in Maisie, go on a journey. It’s the only way to win. Shirley thought Maisie was an absolute firecracker and Motsi loved the authenticity of it. Craig thought it was a-may-zing. Maisie’s dress is some kind of flamingo/peacock hybrid, and Maisie is shaking those tail feathers like she’s got ants in her knickers. It’s a proper full-on Samba and I love everything about it; it’s my favourite kind of chaotic party Latin. Maisie is clearly a great dancer, which means she’ll make the final but won’t win. Such is the way of Strictly. It’s time for MAISIE AND GORKA! Their first dance is the Samba to ‘Samba (Conga)’ by Gloria Estefan. Last year Kelvin and Oti did a Samba in Week One that was really quite special, I feel like that set quite a high bar. That said, Maisie strikes me as the kind of woman who would drink Woo Woos out of a fishbowl then shake everything she has on the dancefloor, so why the hell not. Scores: 6, 6, 7 - a total of 19 for JJ and Amy. Families on Zoom! DRINK. Craig thought there was gapping and it needed more drive, but had some nice rise and fall. Shirley agrees with Craig about the drive but it was simple, beautiful and lovely. Motsi got a bit emotional, it had lovely atmosphere and great chemistry. I’ve just realised what Motsi’s dress reminds me of. She looks like she’s got a full body plastercast, like they were supposed to fix her arm but somehow did the rest of her body instead. This is a lovely Waltz and it’s impossible not to find JJ a bit dreamy, although he’s got a few posture issues. But there’s a nice connection between these two and I’m looking forward to seeing his dancing journey. Liked that very much. Next up it’s JJ AND AMY. Their first dance is the Waltz to ‘What A Wonderful World’ by Louis Armstrong. This is next level 2020 denial and I can’t even be annoyed about it. Scores: 3 (drink),5,5 - a total of 13 for Jacquie and Anton. Motsi thought Jacquie looked comfortable on the floor, but needs to express herself more. Craig thought it lacked musicality and looked a bit lumpy, but on the bright side it was ten times better than Theresa May. Shirley was pleasantly surprised, it was a huge improvement compared to the launch show. This has a random election theme that means the first 30 seconds are spent faffing about with a ballot box. It’s a very odd song for an American Smooth, but Jacquie’s doing her absolute best despite hats and canes and superfluous props. No killer moves, but also not the worst partner Anton’s ever had by a country mile. It’s time for JACQUI AND ANTON! Their first dance is the Foxtrot to ‘Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life’ by Monty Python. Does anyone else feel like Anton has resigned himself to the early bus home next Sunday? Last week’s group dance would suggest Jacquie isn’t the world’s most natural dancer, although it would be kind of amazing if that was the biggest ruse of all time and she’s actually got killer moves. Scores: 5,6,7 - a total of 18 for Clara and Aljaz. Bit mean, Craig. I didn’t think that was stompy at all. Shirley loved the rhythm and the chemistry between Clara and Aljaz and Motsi loved the determination and the energy. Craig thought it was stompy and needed straighter legs, although he loved the disco elements. Clara looks incredible in electric blue fringing and has legs to die for. This is a great Cha Cha with lovely energyfrom Clara and some really nice footwork. She has loads of attitude and I think these two are going to be real contenders. LOVED that. Next up it’s CLARA AND ALJAZ! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Don’t Start Now’ by Dua Lipa. Am very glad to see they’ve binned off Week One ‘let’s do a song about your job’, because all the songs about DJs are rubbish. Apart from ‘God Is A DJ’ by Faithless, which I’m not sure quite works as a Cha Cha. Scores: 6,5,6 - a total of 17 for Max and Dianne. Am getting the feeling that the music brief this week was DO SOMETHING UPLIFTING EVERYTHING IS AWFUL. Not that I’m complaining, I’m very much here for happy happy joy joy on my telly every weekend. I think we can all agree that nobody ever needs to hear the Dave Arch version of Roxanne by The Police again. Craig didn’t like the free arm placement and Max needed to lead the dance more, but he’s very watchable and left Craig wanting more. Shirley thought Max has great chemistry and potential, but she wanted a traditional Tango without sections out of hold. Motsi thought Max had a beautiful neck and a good frame but Max was overthinking it and it inhibited Max’s energy. What’s the obsession with Max’s neck? It’s just a neck. We’ve all got one. So this is definitely a Tango, but lacking drive and thrust from Max. He’s got some half-decent timing, but his top line is all over the shop. Great effort for Week One though, feels like he could improve a lot over the coming weeks. It’s time for MAX AND DIANNE! Their first dance is the Tango to ‘Best Fake Smile’ by James Bay. My best fake smile wore out some time in April. Now it’s just a grimace. Some days I wake up looking like the Joker from Batman. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 31 for Caroline and Johannes. Motsi didn’t see a dancer, she saw a dancing queen. Caroline had lovely attention to detail. Caroline is WEEPING, and it’s only Week 1. Craig thought her feet were a bit turned out but Caroline’s musicality was sensational. Shirley thought it was graceful, charming and elegant, albeit her lower half needed some work. Honestly, I think that might be one of Tess’s worst outfits ever. Those wet look flares are just horrible, what was she thinking? I LOVE Caroline’s yellow dress, and she has lovely musicality and performance. A few balance issues in hold but some good solo sections. All rather charming and entirely joyous, enjoyed that very much. Next up it’s CAROLINE AND JOHANNES! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘9-5 (Morning Train)’ by Sheena Easton. What a song, and what a coupling; definitely one of my favourites this year. Becks has also worked with her a few times and confirms she is LOVELY. The emotion in training is all a bit overwhelming, I want to give her a hug. Scores: 4 (drink), 5,5 - a total of 14. Anyone else (whisper it), not really missing Bruno? Shirley thought it was a nice performance and full of enthusiasm. It needs work, but Jamie has potential. Motsi, who appears to be wearing a towel, thought it needed better technique. Craig thought it was stiff and flat-footed, and agreed that it was restricted due to the tightness of the trousers. But he loved the energy and commitment. Poor Tess, forced to socially distanced so she can’t manhandle the couples. What will she do with her hands? OK this is the campest thing I’ve ever seen, and Jamie is joyously terrible. Although I have no idea how he’s supposed to perform any kind hip action in white jeans that tight. This is not a great Cha Cha Cha by any standards, but I love Jamie’s enthusiasm and effort levels. Good work. First up tonight it’s JAMIE AND KAREN. Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Think About Things’ by Daði og Gagnamagnið. This was the Icelandic song that would have won Eurovision had it not been cancelled this year, and I can’t tell you how thrilled I am to see it on Strictly. It’s like my two liveblog worlds have collided, and honestly it feels like Christmas. Out come the stars! Nobody seems to have upset Wardrobe yet, but it’s early days. Bubble DRINK! Also many fake tans, so keep drinking. Out come the judges! Shirley has got tangled in some tights. Send help. TESS AND CLAUDIA DRESS WATCH: Tess has been dipped in tar, and Claudia is in a spotty prom dress. One of these outfits is quite nice. And we’re off! Time for a slow-mo intro VT with some washed out filters. Everyone is scared but excited, and can’t wait to get on the dancefloor. Ah, it’s good to hear that theme tune again. Ooh, pro dance! We don’t normally get one of those on a Saturday night. It’s a hectic latin hot mess with some truly hideous outfits, but it features Shakira and that’s never a bad thing. And Lionel Richie! Love a bit of Lionel. This week’s Strictly Come Bingo – a swig of something medicinal for any occurrence of the following: Zoom-based relatives Fake tans Craig giving a 4 or lower Mentions of tallness The word ‘bubble’ Also I’ve got HOUSEGUESTS this weekend, which is very exciting. My friend Becks is staying; she’s a huge Strictly fan and lovely to have company while I tap away madly. We’re also making room for a dog and a cat between us, so it’s quite busy on my liveblog sofa. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing liveblog! After last week’s launch it’s time for our couples to take to the floor for the first time, so we can make wild predictions about who’s going to make the final and who will be leaving the Strictly bubble next Sunday. There’s no elimination or Sunday results show this week, so let’s just enjoy a joyous evening of dancefloor fun. I’ll be analysing every flailing arm and pigeon toe from up here, so please feel free to join in in the comment bubble below, but only if you’ve quarantined for two weeks, had two Covid tests and are adhering to all government guidelines. Kick off is at 7.25pm, so join me then!
0||Frank Lampard makes case for the defence as forwards take back seatSplurge on the attack. Make yourself the envy of the world by signing Hakim Ziyech, Timo Werner and Kai Havertz in one wild summer. Make the journey to Old Trafford, where Manchester United were last seen losing 6-1 to Tottenham, and pick a back-five. Take Werner and Havertz off with 20 minutes left. Give Ziyech 10 minutes at the end. Settle for a second consecutive goalless draw. Flip the narrative on its head. By the end of a grim match it was clear Frank Lampard had no interest in another defensive aberration from his leaky Chelsea side. He will not apologise for setting out to contain United. Attacking cohesion can wait: for a manager accused of failing to focus on shape and resilience during his time at Chelsea, a shutout inspired by Thiago Silva’s serenity in central defence represented another step forward. Both sides played as though they were spooked by visions of a defensive calamity on a slick, treacherous surface. The handbrake was on, as Arsène Wenger would say. Chelsea wanted to suffocate, United wanted errors and wonky defending from the visitors. The result was a stalemate for 45 minutes, notable mainly for loose touches, misplaced passes and a host of gifted attackers waiting in vain for a defensive midfielder to give them the ball. It seemed fitting the half ended with Havertz picking up a booking after a frustrated tug of a red shirt. Perhaps he just wanted to get involved, to make his presence felt, to remind the world he does exist. Otherwise the opening period passed him by, although at least he could console himself with the knowledge the same was true for United’s creators, with Bruno Fernandes searching in vain for space. Nobody wanted to break the structure. Chelsea set the tone with their system, bringing to mind José Mourinho’s jibe that they always go to a back-five when results are indifferent. With Mason Mount dropping to the bench, César Azpilicueta came in to provide an extra defensive bolt, sweeping behind Reece James on the right, leaving Marcus Rashford so deprived of service for long spells that the United forward probably had time to log into his Twitter account to embarrass a Tory MP. Had Lampard channelled his inner José? Conscious no Chelsea manager in the history of the Premier League has conceded at a higher rate than him, had he set out to kill the spectacle? Maybe – or perhaps he knew United, back to 4-2-3-1 after defeating Paris Saint-Germain with a back three, like teams who attack them. The risk for Lampard was that ceding the initiative risked negating the effectiveness of his attack. Chelsea controlled the ball but lacked menace. United bided their time, waiting for the errors. Édouard Mendy almost obliged, screwing a pass just wide of his own goal as Lampard congratulated himself on including Petr Cech in his Premier League squad to provide emergency goalkeeping cover – you know, just in case. Mendy redeemed himself with a couple of fine saves before the interval. The second came from a curling effort from Juan Mata, the first after United had managed to catch Chelsea cold. It came from a sudden spurt of pressing from United, exposing slackness from Jorginho and Thiago Silva, resulting in a loss of possession that would have led to Rashford scoring but for Mendy saving with his feet. At the other end Werner waited in vain for a chance to stretch his legs and run beyond Harry Maguire. Bar a few surges from Havertz in the second half, Chelsea were pallid in the final third. Yet they were happier with the draw. United made the attacking changes, introducing Paul Pogba and Edinson Cavani, but there was no change of shape from Lampard when he brought Tammy Abraham and Mount on. His priorities were clear.
6||Children’s doctors attack Tories over free school mealsThousands of Britain’s child-health specialists have joined forces to condemn the government for its refusal to fund free meals for disadvantaged children in England over the school holidays, amid a spreading grassroots campaign on the issue led by England and Manchester United footballer Marcus Rashford. With a growing number of councils and businesses this weekend offering to provide free meals, more than 2,000 paediatricians across the UK have signed a letter expressing their shock at the decision. They state that ensuring children have enough to eat is one of the “most basic human responsibilities”. The letter, co-ordinated by the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health and seen by the Observer, says: “Every day, we see the impact of hunger and malnutrition in our work as paediatricians. It is not unusual for us to care for children who don’t have enough to eat or who don’t have access to a substantial meal outside of what is provided in school. “We call on the UK government to match the pledges of the Welsh and Scottish governments and the Northern Ireland Executive, to continue to provide children from low-income backgrounds with free meals over the coming weeks and to then extend this at least until the Easter school holiday.” The letter praises Rashford as a “source of inspiration” for his campaign, which continued to attract a groundswell of support last night. Hundreds more businesses have signed up to help provide meals this weekend and scores of councils, including prominent Tory-led authorities, have agreed to fund local programmes. An online petition set up by Rashford now has more than 700,000 signatures, while Labour is planning to embarrass the government by holding another Commons vote on the issue. Russell Viner, president of the Royal College, told the Observer that he had “rarely seen such anger among our members”. He added: “We care for children who don’t have enough to eat. We see far too many of them. It is heartbreaking that it has become a normal part of our jobs and hunger is all too common for millions of families in the UK. There is an opportunity to put this right. It is pointless to talk about levelling up the country, an ambition which we support, while refusing to offer temporary relief to children and families.” The intervention comes amid frustration among many Conservative MPs, who want the decision to be reversed before the Christmas holidays. One senior figure said ministers were making a “massive mistake” by refusing to back Rashford’s campaign. Rashford’s successful campaign to provide food vouchers during the summer holidays is estimated to have cost £126m. However, other Tory MPs caused anger by criticising the free meals drive. Ben Bradley, the Mansfield MP, was accused of linking free meals with “crack dens” and “brothels” in social media comments. He said his remarks had been taken out of context. North Devon MP Selaine Saxby apologised after appearing to criticise businesses giving away free food. Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley, also faced a backlash for a withering response to a 16-year-old constituent who had questioned his opposition to extending free school meals. Ministers are also facing criticism after it emerged that schools in some of the most deprived areas of the country were told they will not now receive the laptops to help pupils learn remotely. Allocations of laptops for disadvantaged pupils have been slashed by around 80%. A Department for Education spokesperson said allocations of laptops were being “more effectively” targeted to the children, schools and areas of the country that have “greatest need”. The Scottish and Welsh governments have already extended free meals during school holidays until next Easter. In Northern Ireland, children will be given meals over this month’s half-term break. Official figures from earlier this year suggested 1.4 million disadvantaged children were eligible for free school meals in England, but that is thought to have increased during the pandemic. The concern among child health experts heaps further pressure on ministers. Dr Max Davie, officer for health improvement at the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said: “We’re a rich country. We shouldn’t have to fight for food vouchers when we’re in the middle of a pandemic.” Dr Liz Whittaker, consultant paediatrician at St Mary’s Hospital, London said: “Missing meals isn’t just about going hungry on an individual day, it has a lasting impact on a young person’s life. It is impossible to justify any argument that this saves the state money.” Meanwhile, Covid cases continue to mount. A further 23,012 positive tests were announced on Saturday, along with 174 more deaths. A further 1,139 were admitted to hospital. Robert Halfon, the Tory chair of the education select committee, called on the government to rethink and overhaul food provision for poor children. “The government has got to sort this,” he said. “They need to sit down with people like Marcus Rashford and his taskforce, which has got some of the biggest food companies involved. They need to set out a long-term plan to combat child food hunger, not only looking at rolling out free school meal vouchers at Christmas temporarily during the coronavirus pandemic, but also rolling out breakfast clubs, introducing a holiday activities programme, and examining [the level of support in] universal credit.” Late on Saturday, former children’s minister Tim Loughton became the latest Tory to call on the government to change course. “I will now lobby ministers to reverse this decision for the Christmas break,” he said. However, ministers insisted that there was a “better way” to deal with the issue of child hunger. Baroness Barran, the civil society minister, told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: “The government has made over £200bn available to protect people’s incomes and people’s livelihoods. We have worked very closely with charities who operate food banks across the country. There are different approaches to how we do this but we have used all the levers possible to try to make sure that people are safe and well as we go forward. “We have provided more money through universal credit, we have provided more money to local authorities and we believe that is a better way of approaching this problem.”
3||Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump threaten to sue Lincoln ProjectJared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which they accuse the senior White House advisers of showing “indifference” to Americans suffering and dying under Covid-19. Saying the billboards would stay up, the group called Kushner and Trump “entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people”. More than 8.4m cases of Covid-19 have been confirmed in the US, according to Johns Hopkins University, with a record high of 83,757 on Friday. As the virus surges, with the presidential election only 10 days away, the death toll has passed 223,000. Last month, the virus reached the White House, infecting Donald Trump, his wife Melania Trump, their son Barron and senior members of staff. The president spent time in hospital. Kushner and Ivanka Trump did not announce positive tests. The Lincoln Project is staffed by Republican operatives supporting Joe Biden, the Democratic nominee. It announced itself in February at Cooper Union in New York, where Abraham Lincoln gave a famous speech in 1860. Then, group member Rick Wilson cited “the great political philosopher Liam Neeson” when he said his team had “a particular set of skills, skills that make us a nightmare for people like Donald Trump”. In August, Sarah Lenti, the executive director of the Lincoln Project, told the Guardian a key aim was simply to distract the president. “Some of these ads have an audience of one,” she said. “That’s always been part of the strategy. Because every time he gets off message, spewing grievances, he’s not campaigning. The idea is to get him off message again and again and again.” Trump is currently staging rallies at which coronavirus mitigation measures are not observed, and claiming the US is “rounding the turn” in containing the surging pandemic. But with its billboards in Times Square, a stone’s throw from Trump Tower, it seems the Lincoln Project may have succeeded in distracting the president’s daughter and son-in-law. On Friday, the Project posted to Twitter a letter from Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented Donald Trump in cases involving allegations of fraud and sexual assault, in which he spelled out the billboards’ message. “I am writing concerning the false, malicious and defamatory ads that the Lincoln Project is displaying on billboards in Times Square,” Kasowitz wrote. “Those ads show Ms Trump smiling and gesturing toward a death count of Americans and New Yorkers, and attribute to Mr Kushner the statement that ‘[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem’ … with body bags underneath.” In September, Vanity Fair reported that at a meeting on 20 March, as the pandemic accelerated, Kushner railed against Governor Andrew Cuomo and said: “His people are going to suffer and that’s their problem.” Ivanka Trump’s gesture on the billboard is taken from a controversial picture, tweeted in July, in which she promoted Goya black beans. Kasowitz wrote: “Of course, Mr Kushner never made any such statement, Ms Trump never made any such gesture, and the Lincoln Project’s representation that they did are an outrageous and shameful libel. If these billboard ads are not immediately removed, we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages.” The Lincoln Project’s response was typically pugnacious. “The level of indignant outrage Jared Kushner, and Ivanka Trump have shown towards the Lincoln Project for exposing their indifference for the more than 223,000 people who have lost their lives due to the reckless mismanagement of Covid-19 is comical,” a statement said. “While we truly enjoy living rent-free in their heads, their empty threats will not be taken any more seriously than we take Ivanka and Jared. It is unsurprising that an administration that has never had any regard or understanding of our constitution would try to trample on our first amendment rights. But we fully intend on making this civics lesson as painful as possible. “Jared and Ivanka have always been entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people. We plan on showing them the same level of respect. The billboards will stay up. We consider it important that in Times Square, the crossroads of the world, people are continuously reminded of the cruelty or density and staggering lack of empathy the Trumps and the Kushners have displayed towards the American people.” In an email to the Guardian on Saturday, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said: “It does seem unlikely that Ivanka and Jared would actually sue the Lincoln Project, especially before election day, while after that hopefully they won’t care, can return to New York and stop pretending to be public servants. “Her father has honed litigation abuse as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias added, but “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.”
0||White House chief of staff says 'we're not going to control pandemic', after Pence staffers test positive – liveVladimir Putin has made it clear that he’s happy with Donald Trump’s coziness with Russia, but the Kremlin today contradicted Trump and said that he doesn’t believe Joe Biden’s ties with Ukraine are criminal. Trump used Thursday’s debate with Biden as an opportunity to accuse Biden’s son of having unethical ties to Ukraine, accusations that have not been verified and that Biden has denied. According to Reuters, Putin said today that he is willing to work with any US leader, but noted that Biden has “sharp anti-Russian rhetoric”. Here’s more from the Reuters report: Putin appeared less friendly towards Trump in remarks broadcast by Russian state TV on Sunday. In what may be seen by some analysts as an attempt to try to curry favour with the Biden camp, the Russian presdient took the time to knock down what he made clear he regarded as false allegations from Trump about the Bidens. “Yes, in Ukraine he [Hunter Biden] had or maybe still has a business, I don’t know. It doesn’t concern us. It concerns the Americans and the Ukrainians,” said Putin. “But well yes he had at least one company, which he practically headed up, and judging from everything he made good money. I don’t see anything criminal about this, at least we don’t know anything about this [being criminal]”. Mike Pence, who as vice president is technically the president of the Senate, is coming under criticism from Democrats for planning to come into the chamber to preside over the vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s confirmation to the Supreme Court. At a rally in Florida yesterday, Pence said “I wouldn’t miss that vote for the world”. Pence’s appearance would be symbolic as he does not need to be physically present in the Senate for the confirmation to go through. Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer denounced Pence’s plan to attend the vote tomorrow, saying it sets “a terrible, terrible example for the American public”. “It is clear to me that their closing message is that they’re going to personally deliver Covid to as many people as possible,” Brian Schatz, a Democratic senator for Hawaii, told a reporter. At least five people close to Pence, including his chief of staff, have tested positive for Covid-19. A White House official said Sunday that Pence and his wife have tested negative for the virus. His office said that the vice president does not plan to quarantine. Guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) say a person should quarantine for 14 days if they were in close contact with a person who tested positive, even if they themselves do not have symptoms or tested negative. Pence, who is head of the White House’s coronavirus task force, has said that he can bypass CDC guidelines because he is an essential worker – a claim that has been questioned by health experts. Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York state, is having a field day over the comments of the White House chief of staff Mark Meadows this morning. In a rare moment of transparency, Meadows admitted to a Sunday political talk show that the Trump administration had no intention of containing coronavirus, saying: “We’re not going to control the pandemic”. Cuomo said that thinking was tantamount to giving in to the virus. “They surrendered without firing a shot. It was the great American surrender,” he said on Sunday, as reported by the Daily News. The New York governor said that the Trump administration’s approach to Covid was summed up from the start by such capitulation. “They have believed from the beginning that they can’t control the virus,” he said. By contrast, Cuomo prides himself on having wrestled coronavirus to the ground. After a bad start to the pandemic, which saw New York City become the world’s top hotspot, the rate of infection has been reduced to one of the lowest in the country through an aggressive program of testing and contact tracing. There have been a total of almost 500,000 confirmed cases in the state, and 25,730 deaths. About 120,000 New Yorkers are being tested every day. “What we learned in New York was, if you put up a fight you will have won. Because New York won,” Cuomo said. After the Senate voted to move forward with the final vote to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court, Mitch McConnell spoke on the Senate floor, celebrating the lasting influence of the vote for posterity. “By tomorrow night, we’ll have a new member of the United States Supreme Court,” he told the chamber. McConnell acknowledged that this election could change the tide in Washington but said that not much could be done to change the nature of the court “for a long time to come”. One Capitol Hill reporter noted that it appears the bruising on McConnell’s face and hands that were seen on Friday appeared to have gotten better. Apparently, getting three judges onto the Supreme Court in four years can do wonders to one’s health. The Senate just made a 51-48 vote to move forward with the final vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s nomination to the Supreme Court. Republicans overrode a Democratic filibuster with today’s vote, and the final vote for her confirmation will take place tomorrow night. With the Republican majority in the Senate, Barrett’s nomination is pretty much a guarantee, despite weeks of criticism from Democrats about a Supreme Court nomination weeks before the presidential election. The NFL has fined the Tennessee Titans $350,000 for violating protocols leading to the league’s first Covid-19 outbreak during the season, multiple outlets are reporting. The Titans had 24 people, including 13 players, test positive for the coronavirus between 24 September and 11 October. The outbreak led the NFL to postpone two Tennessee games and the rescheduling of a game against Pittsburgh from 4 October to today and the second against Buffalo from 11 October to 13 October. The league and its players association sent officials, including infectious disease experts, to Nashville where they reviewed video and interviewed players, coaches and other personnel. ESPN reports the NFL informed the Titans last week that their review had concluded and the organization would face a potential fine. Individuals would not be disciplined and there was no discussion of forfeiture of draft picks. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). The US Senate has started day two of a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. More from Richard Luscombe… Joe Biden’s deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield, was grilled on NBC’s Meet the Press about the Democrat nominee’s “light physical footprint”. To the backdrop of a graphic comparing Biden’s appearances since September in four key battleground states – North Carolina, Arizona, Florida and Pennsylvania – to Trump’s (the president leads 19-14), host Chuck Todd wanted to know why Biden was concentrating heavily on Georgia instead of more northerly swing states. The answer: Biden is “focused on maintaining as many paths to 270 electoral votes as we possibly can.” Bedingfield also pointed out that at a scheduled appearance in Warm Springs, Georgia, on Tuesday, Biden would deliver his closing arguments at a place “which obviously has historical significance in this country”. Warm Springs is the resort town where the 32nd president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, built his Little White House, a cottage he used while suffering from polio in the 1930s. “Vice-President Biden has visited all of these battleground states multiple times,” Bedingfield said. “He was in Pennsylvania yesterday, doing two events, along with Dr [Jill] Biden. So no, we have been very aggressively campaigning. “Here’s the difference between what we’re doing and what Donald Trump is doing, we’re doing it safely.” Bedingfield noted that the president’s rallies feature large, mostly maskless crowds with no social distancing. A new CBS poll, meanwhile, showed Biden tied with Trump in Georgia and holding narrow leads in other southern battlegrounds, including Florida and North Carolina. Todd also pressed Bedingfield on Biden’s comments at last week’s final debate about the oil industry. Why, he wondered, would oil workers in Texas or elsewhere support a candidate who supports a transition away from the industry at a risk to their jobs? “There is only one person in this country who Joe Biden thinks should lose his job and it’s Donald Trump,” she said. “Joe Biden … is not going to end the fossil fuel industry, he’s going to end subsidies for the oil industry. He believes your taxpayer dollars should go to education. Donald Trump believes they should go to Exxon. That’s a conversation we’re willing to have any day.” A CBS News/YouGov poll of three southern battleground states finds Joe Biden in a dead heat with Donald Trump in Georgia with slight edges in Florida (by two points) and North Carolina (by four). Some other key findings from CBS News: • Early voters in each told us they favored Joe Biden, but those who have not yet voted favor Donald Trump, setting up a key turnout test running now through Election Day for both parties. • Very different views on the coronavirus outbreak still shape the race in all these states. In all, most Biden voters are very concerned about getting it, and Trump’s voters, by comparison, are far less concerned. Biden also gets better marks overall on how he would handle the outbreak. • Biden voters are more likely to say the outbreak and a candidate’s personal character are major factors in their vote. For Trump voters, the economy and immigration are the biggest factors. • In splits among key demographic groups, Biden currently leads among White women with college degrees in Florida and North Carolina; and across all three states it’s shifts from 2016 that are helping Biden. In Georgia, White voters without college degrees – both men and women – tend to like how Trump handles himself personally and dislike Biden’s approach. Biden is cutting into Trump’s 2016 margins with seniors in Florida and Georgia, cutting Trump’s 2016 advantage in half. In North Carolina Biden has a two-point edge with seniors. Last week Trump was forced to play defense when he staged a prime-time rally in Georgia, which no Republican presidential candidate has lost since George HW Bush in 1992 – a far cry from his original designs on expanding the map into Democratic-leaning states. After Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said there were some senators he could not and did not want to help, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Joe Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. In fact senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have recently sought to put daylight between themselves and the unpopular president as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour; McSally dodged attempts to make her express support for Trump during a campaign debate; and Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on key policy issues. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election in Nebraska but McSally faces defeat in Arizona and Cornyn is in an unexpectedly tight race in Texas. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday. “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeated statements that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” McDaniel also said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Calmer seas returned to CNN’s State of the Union studio following the tempest of the Mark Meadows interview. House speaker Nancy Pelosi told host Jake Tapper she remains “hopeful” of a coronavirus relief bill perhaps this week, despite Republicans “moving the goalposts”. A week ago, Pelosi insisted only 48 hours remained for Democrats and Republicans to strike an agreement that would bring relief before election day. That didn’t happen, but Pelosi said they are still open to talking. “We’re ready. We can change some words in the bill, should they come back with some modifications,” Pelosi said, claiming her side was still waiting for answers over some of the differences. “Why would we even be talking to each other if we didn’t believe that we could reach an agreement? So again, it could happen this week, but that’s up to Mitch [McConnell, the Senate majority leader] as to whether it would happen in the Senate and go to the president’s desk.” Republicans in Congress have been trying to negotiate downwards the $2.2tn Democrats are proposing, and saw their $500bn bill blocked this week. Donald Trump, meanwhile, has said he’s open to more. “It only takes more money,” Pelosi said, referring to a key aim of the relief bill, namely the safe reopening of schools. “That is for separation, for ventilation, for technology, for more teachers and the rest. Children learning, parents earning. Education is another policy piece where we have some disagreement, otherwise we can negotiate. “We’re waiting. Every time they say we move the goalposts, that means they’re projecting what they did, but let’s just be hopeful. We’re nine days before an election. We’re trying to unify the country and one way to do it is to come together to crush the virus, so that we can open our economy, open our schools and feed 17 million children who are food insecure in our country.” The speaker said she sent questions to McConnell on Friday, and is expecting answers Monday. “In our bill, science dictates what we do,” she said. “We can lower the incidence of the virus in certain areas, open schools, open businesses and the rest. If we don’t, we’re just giving money to the president to spend any way he wants, and that has not been in furtherance of crushing the virus.” Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behavior,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. White House chief of staff Mark Meadows has just made one of the most revealing comments to emerge from Trump’s inner circle about the president’s historic mishandling of the coronavirus crisis. On a Sunday political talk show, Meadows admitted that the federal government was not focusing on trying to control the pandemic. “We’re not going to control the pandemic,” he told Jake Tapper on CNN’s State of the Union. “We are going to control the fact that we get a vaccine, therapeutics and other mitigation.” Tapper pressed Meadows to explain why the administration was not going to control Covid-19, given the massive surge that is pummeling the Midwest and mountain states. He replied: “Because it is a contagious virus.” Meadows’ statement would be astonishing at any time during the pandemic. It gives an unusually candid insight into the mindset of a White House that from the outset has played down its role in marshalling a federal effort to bring the virus under control. The remark was all the more astounding given it’s timing. Marc Short, chief of staff to vice president Mike Pence, has just tested positive for coronavirus, as have three other VP staff and an adviser. Yet Pence continues to travel the US, unmasked, holding campaign events, the White House avoiding the recommendation to quarantine set out by the administration’s own public health agency, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, by calling the vice-president an “essential worker”. Pence is in charge of the White House coronavirus task force, which a key member, Anthony Fauci, said on Friday has seen its meetings “diminish” while President Trump has not attended in “several months”. Around the country, confirmed cases are on a steep upward curve, with Friday and Saturday recording the highest levels since the pandemic began. Hospitalisations and deaths have also begun to rise. In a heated exchange with Tapper, Meadows repeatedly sidestepped the administration’s responsibility for this surge in numbers just nine days before the presidential election. He kept on stressing the role of therapeutics and a future vaccine in “mitigating” the number of deaths, while implying the federal government had no responsibility for the rampant spread of the virus. Tapper asked why the vice-president continued to travel to campaign events without wearing a mask, despite having been exposed via his closest staff. Meadows tried to redirect the blame to China as the source of the virus, but Tapper continued to challenge him. “Would you agree this is very serious, people need to take precautions?” Tapper asked. “I agree it is very serious, but we continue to test more and more so the cases will go up,” Meadows replied. In fact, the number of new confirmed cases is rising significantly faster than the quantity of testing. Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff, is currently conducting a fiery interview with Jake Tapper of CNN, voices raised about the White House’s attitude to coronavirus mitigation measures and campaigning instead of steering efforts to combat the pandemic. It’s not going well. More soon. In the meantime, here’s the White House pool report: It’s a brisk, rainy fall day at the White House. White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows spoke to reporters briefly in the driveway after a Fox News interview. He was asked about VP Pence chief of staff Marc Short’s positive coronavirus diagnosis, and was very brief in his remarks. He said only: “We wish him well – he’s been quarantining these last few days…” Another reporter shouted: “Why is Pence traveling – that seems insane?” And another asked: “Should anyone who is in close contact with the vice-president be quarantining?” Meadows ignored the questions. We’re expecting a 10.30pm Trump departure, traveling to New Hampshire and Maine. He is scheduled to be back at the White House for a Halloween event at 6.15pm. This pooler was tested for coronavirus and is awaiting results. The Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards the group put up in Times Square. The billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, showing apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president in cases involving allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing among other things their first amendment rights of free speech. In a legal response released on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson wrote: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticize freely”. Sanderson cited supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting on 20 March, as the pandemic gathered terrible speed, New York reeled and Kushner attacked Governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”, Sanderson wrote. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” Sanderson also said “This isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian, that seems unlikely. Ivanka Trump’s “father has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Barring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? More from the Associated Press: “A day after the US set a daily record for new confirmed coronavirus infections, it came very close to doing it again. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Close to 8.6m Americans have contracted the coronavirus since the pandemic began, and about 225,000 have died. Both statistics are the world’s highest. India has more than 7.8m infections but its daily numbers have been declining. US health officials have feared the surge of infections to come with colder weather and people spending more time indoors, especially as many flout guidelines to protect themselves and others such as mask-wearing and social distancing. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington currently forecasts that the country’s death toll could exceed 318,000 by 1 January.” …and welcome to another day on the campaign trail, nine days out from election day now, with Joe Biden holding his polling leads, Donald Trump campaigning hard at rallies which do not adhere to Covid-19 mitigation measures and Mike Pence… seeing multiple members of his team, including chief of staff Marc Short, test positive for the coronavirus. The VP is not altering his schedule: This while Covid case numbers are shooting to record levels nationally and in many states, and as one study predicts a death toll of 500,000 by February. As the AP reports, “Oklahoma, Illinois, New Mexico and Michigan were among states announcing new record highs in daily confirmed cases on Saturday, a day after a nationwide daily record of more than 83,000 reported infections, according to Johns Hopkins University. “Dr Joneigh Khaldun, Michigan’s chief medical executive, said it’s ‘now more important than ever that people take this seriously.’ The 3,338 new Covid-19 cases in her state topped the old record by more than 1,300. Michigan is of course a swing state, fought over by Trump and Biden – who is more than seven points up there. Kamala Harris, Biden’s running mate, will be in the state today. The same Johns Hopkins count now puts the caseload at 8.5m and the death toll at more than 224,000. Trump had a four-state campaign day on Saturday, voting in Florida before staging rallies in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin. Today he’s speaking in New Hampshire – where the fivethirtyeight.com average puts Biden more than 11 points ahead. Trump has a habit of speaking in places where it might not seem worth the bother – he is also having to campaign in states, such as Georgia, where no Republican president would usually have to tread. More to come, of course. In the meantime, here’s David Smith with hopeful news for Democrats:
1||Arsenal v Leicester City: Premier League – live!13 mins: Now Arsenal cross from the right, and Gabriel attempts an overhead that becomes a clearance, sending the ball out to the left. Arsenal cross again, and Gabriel gets up, dusts himself down and tries another overhead, which is only marginally better than the first. 11 mins: Chance for Arsenal! Bellerin is played through by David Luiz. He brings it under control and he need only square the ball to give Lacazette a tap-in, but Evans slides in to block! 9 mins: It’s a deeply rubbish free kick, hit slowly into the knee of someone in the wall. 9 mins: Lacazette is tripped, 23 yards from goal or so, and Xhaka will fancy his chances of influencing play again. 7 mins: I’m not sure anyone touched the ball after Lacazette flicked it on, so it must have been disallowed for Xhaka influencing play by standing in front of the goalkeeper. 4 mins: Goal! Bit it’s disallowed! Arsenal win a corner, flick it on at the near post, and it goes in at the far! There were three Arsenal players offside when it was flicked goalwards, and at least one of them in Schmeichel’s path, so the question was what the goal would get disallowed for rather than whether it would get disallowed at all. 3 mins: Good spot, this: 2 mins: Shot! Leono hits a limp clearance straight to Madison, who tries to lift the ball into the empty net from 40 yards or so, but it floats just wide. 1 min: Peeeeeeep! Leicester get the game started! The players come out! While we wait for kick-off, here’s Brendan Rodgers on Jamie Vardy: He’s trained the last couple of days and looked good, so that’s means he’ll be a possibility from the bench. With so many games ahead we didn’t want to take a risk, but I’m sure he’ll play a part. And here’s Mikel Arteta on Leicester: I think they are a very complete side, and tricky to deal with, because they are really good on the ball in positional play, but they are really good in transition as well. They can go high press, they can defend really deep as they did against City. I think they’ve come a long way, they’ve improved a lot as a team and it will be really tough tonight. I’m very much looking forward to this game, but while I waited for Sky’s expensive pay-per-view service to kick in I discovered that Groundhog Day is on Dave and I have a bit of a thing about it, and now I’m going to miss the end. I’m so annoyed I’m going to refuse to make the obvious joke about Leicester’s trips to Arsenal. Three changes for Arsenal, who bring in David Luiz, Alexandre Lacazette and, for a first league start since moving to the club, Thomas Partey. Two changes for Leicester, who bring in Christian Fuchs and James Maddison and leave out Ayoze Perez and Kelechi Iheanacho. The big news, though, is that Jamie Vardy is back in the squad but not in the starting line-up, restricted as he is to the bench. The team sheets have been handed in, and the key names tonight are these ones: Arsenal: Leno, Bellerin, Luiz, Gabriel, Tierney, Ceballos, Xhaka, Thomas, Saka, Lacazette, Aubameyang. Subs: Runarsson, Maitland-Niles, Pepe, Mustafi, Elneny, Willock, Nketiah. Leicester: Schmeichel, Fofana, Evans, Fuchs, Castagne, Tielemans, Mendy, Justin, Praet, Maddison, Barnes. Subs: Morgan, Vardy, Albrighton, Ward, Iheanacho, Under, Choudhury. Referee: Craig Pawson. Leicester haven’t won at Arsenal in any competition since 1973, and most recently lost to them in the Carabao Cup a month (and two days) ago. That strikes me as statistically unlikely. I mean, that is a seriously rubbish record, a history so dismal there is no sensible explanation except witchcraft. Arsenal haven’t lost a home league game in October in 32 matches since 2002, which also smells suspiciously like witchcraft. So though the teams start the game tied on nine points, the Gunners have history and some kind of magical protection charm in their favour. In addition, the Foxes have lost their last two league matches, at home to West Ham and Aston Villa, which isn’t encouraging, though they did win their last away game at Manchester City, which is. At stake today is a place in the top four, which will be enjoyed by whoever wins the game, if indeed anyone does. Welcome! Kick-off: 7.15pm GMT
2||Outsider Nuts Well brings big success to Ann Hamilton's small stableThe romance of jump racing was on full show here as the plucky, prolific but nevertheless unsung Nuts Well battled his way to victory in the Old Roan Chase for the tiny Northumberland stable of Ann Hamilton. This was the biggest success in the long career of the 73-year-old Hamilton, who still schools horses over fences at her base in the village of Capheaton, about 20 miles north-west of Newcastle. “It means the world to us,” Hamilton said, “because he’s been so good to us and we just thought he couldn’t do it, with all that weight on his back. We thought we didn’t have a chance, so to beat the top trainers is amazing. “We thought he might struggle in this ground. He’s really taken us by surprise.” That thought will have been shared by almost everyone who had a bet on the race, as Nuts Well was returned at odds of 18-1. Though he has improved since Danny McMenamin became his regular jockey, a series of wins at Wetherby, Musselburgh and Kelso cut little ice with punters when weighing up a major handicap like this, in which the opposition was trained by the likes of Paul Nicholls, Colin Tizzard and Jonjo O’Neill. After a short chat with reporters, Hamilton insisted on rushing off to attend to her horse, leaving her husband, Ian, to fill in the blanks. The pair are sheep and cattle farmers, he explained, and she has enjoyed training five or six horses on the side since about 1980. There have been some fallow spells, like the six consecutive seasons in the 1990s when their stable had not a single winner. But it was worth it for well-remembered days like the one in April 2003, when Divet Hill won the Fox Hunters over the Grand National fences, despite his jockey’s breeches splitting at the rear as they cleared The Chair. “It’s always been a lucky place for us, Aintree,” Ian reflected. “Absolutely brilliant.” But he was not tempted by the thought of trying Nuts Well over the famous green fences here, in a race like the Topham in the spring. “He’s not very big, you know. We wouldn’t put him over the big ‘uns.” Finding the right target for Nuts Well might now be the biggest problem facing the Hamiltons’ training operation, as opportunities are scarce for highly rated animals and he will be just outside the top 20 in Britain after this. It is an unusual sort of problem for a stable whose staff amounts to “two great girls” who help out in their lunch breaks. How will the couple celebrate this notable victory? “Go to bed early, I suppose. I’ve got cattle to feed when I get back, Ann’ll have six horses to see to. Then we might have a drink.” Robbie Power, who was unseated from Vision Des Flos during the Old Roan, hopes to be back in action this week, despite initial fears that he might have suffered serious injury. “I’m fine,” he reported. “I’ve just got a bit of soft-tissue damage in my knee, but it feels all right. I’ve got plenty of movement in it, just plenty of bruising. Hopefully, it will be fine in a couple of days or so.”
3||Coronavirus live: daily infections exceed 50,000 in France; global cases reach new recordFrance registered 52,010 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, following a record 45,422 on Saturday, the health ministry said in a statement on Sunday. It also said that 116 people had died from coronavirus infection over the past 24 hours, compared to from 137 on Saturday, taking the total confirmed death toll to 34,761. The new cases brought the total to 1,138,507, putting France now ahead of Argentina and Spain to become the country with the world’s fifth highest number of cases, after the US, India, Brazil and Russia. Turkish Airlines will be putting foreign national pilots on unpaid leave to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on its finances, Bloomberg reported on Sunday. Turkey’s national carrier informed some of its foreign crew staff by email that they are to go on leave from 1 November, and that the decision would be reviewed after six months. It wasn’t immediately clear how many pilots will be affected, and whether Turkish nationals would escape the cost saving measure. A spokesman for Turk Hava Yollari AO, as the airline is officially known, declined to comment. The company reported a loss of 2.23bn liras ($280m) in the second quarter, with passenger numbers down by almost two thirds this year. Israel will begin human trials for a potential Covid-19 vaccine developed by a research institute overseen by the Defence Ministry on 1 November after receiving regulatory approval. The Israel Institute for Biological Research (IIBR) began animal trials for its “BriLife” vaccine in March. The health ministry and an oversight committee have now given the green light to take it to the next stage. Eighty volunteers aged between 18 and 55 will be monitored for three weeks to see if virus antibodies develop, the ministry said in a statement. A second phase, expected to begin in December, will involve 960 people over the age of 18, Reuters reports. Should those succeed, a third, large-scale phase with 30,000 volunteers is scheduled for April or May 2021. If successful, the vaccine may then be approved for mass use. The vaccine, the ministry said, has already tested well on a number of animal models and the IIBR has produced more than 25,000 doses for the first and second phases of the clinical trials. “Our final goal is 15 million rations for the residents of the State of Israel and for our close neighbours,” said IIBR director Shmuel Shapira. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc, Johnson &amp; Johnson, AstraZeneca Plc and Moderna. Israel, with a population of 9 million, has begun easing a second nationwide coronavirus lockdown after a steady decline in the rate of daily infections. The country saw 692 new cases on Saturday - down from a peak of more than 9,000 several weeks ago. It has reported 2,372 deaths from the pandemic. The US saw its highest ever number of new coronavirus cases in the past two days, keeping the pandemic a top election issue as Vice president Mike Pence travels the country to campaign despite close aides testing positive. The US reported 79,852 new infections on Saturday, close to the previous day’s record of 84,244 new cases, as we reported earlier. Hospitalisations are also rising and have hit a two-month high and deaths are trending upwards, according to a Reuters tally. So far in October, 29 states have set records for increases in new cases, including five considered key in the 3 November presidential election: Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Hospitals are strained in several states including North Dakota, which is the hardest hit based on recent new cases per capita, according to Reuters. The city of El Paso in Texas is asking residents to stay at home for the next two weeks and the wider El Paso County closed its parks and recreational facilities for 14 days. Over the last three weeks, the number of hospitalised Covid-19 patients in the El Paso area has tripled to a record 786, according to state data. “If we continue on this trend, we risk detrimental effects to our entire healthcare system,” the city’s public health director, Angela Mora, said in a statement. “For the sake of those hospitalised and the frontline healthcare workers working tirelessly each day to care for them, we ask you to please stay home for two weeks and eliminate your interactions with those outside your household until we can flatten the curve.” The Czech government will almost certainly have to tighten its anti-coronavirus measures again as current curbs have not halted a surge in infections, prime minister Andrej Babis said on Sunday. Cases are up across Europe, but the Czech Republic has recorded the sharpest rises in infections on the continent in recent weeks, Reuters reports. The government on Wednesday ordered most shops and services to close and sought to limit movement to essential trips only. “The measures which we have taken, aren’t working yet,” Babis said in a video message on his Facebook page. “The next week will be the key one, and unless a miracle happens, we won’t have any other choice than to tighten our measures further,” he said. Babis said that he wanted Christmas to be celebrated as normal, but that he could not promise anything for now. “I don’t know what will happen with the virus. I don’t know,” he said. The total number of coronavirus-related deaths doubled to more than 2,000 over the last two weeks. The Philippines’ coronavirus tally surpassed 370,000 on Sunday with 2,223 new confirmed infections, while the death toll edged nearer to the 7,000-mark. The department of health said confirmed cases now stand at 370,028 in total, of which 35,015 or nine percent are active cases. Of these currently ill patients, 82% experience mild symptoms, 11.3% have no symptoms, 2.4% are severe cases, while 4.2% are in critical condition, the latest report detailed. The department clarified, however, that 16 laboratories were not able to submit their case reports on time and were not yet included in the latest count. The Philippines is now joining countries such as the United States, the UK, France, Saudi Arabia and Finland in starting to train specialist sniffer dogs to identify Covid-19 carriers, CNN Philippines reports. “Based on the study from other countries, the accuracy rate of Covid-19 detection dogs is 95 to 97%,” said Ryia Tabares, a representative of Universal K-9 Training and Services Inc, the company working to replicate the same efforts in the country. His colleage Gerry Tabares said the company is currently training at least 12 dogs to detect the virus by sniffing. Gerry said while such a task isn’t limited to certain kinds of dogs, their students are of the Belgian Malinois, Labrador, and German Shepherd breeds. “Those are the current breeds that we are training right now. So far, we are successful,” Gerry said. “As you can see in the demonstration, they can really detect the face masks of Covid-19 infected patients.” The UK recorded 19,790 new coronavirus infections and 151 deaths on Sunday, official data showed. New cases dipped from Saturday’s 23,012, and the number of deaths within 28 days of a positive test was also down slightly from 174 the previous day. The Welsh government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. Health minister Vaughan Gething told The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday that the restriction, which has seen aisles cordoned off and plastic sheeting placed over products, had been applied differently in stores across Wales. Guidance previously published by the Welsh government said certain sections of supermarkets selling electrical goods, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares, among others products, must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public” during the lockdown. More than 50,000 people have signed a petition submitted to the Welsh Parliament calling for the ban to be immediately reversed. Supermarkets have been told they must only sell essential items to discourage people from spending more time than necessary in shops and be fair to retailers selling non-essential items only who had to shut shop. The ban on selling non-essential items was announced in the Senedd on Thursday after Conservative MS Russell George said it was “unfair” to force independent clothing and hardware retailers to shut while similar goods were on sale in major supermarkets. Gething told the BBC the Welsh government had worked with supermarkets on the ban and discussed which items were affected by it. “It’s also about reducing the opportunity for contacts. That’s what we’re really trying to do – we’re asking people to stay at home to stay lives, that really is right back where we are,” he said. The Welsh Retail Consortium called for the ban to be “dropped quickly” and warned it could result in the “safe flow of customers” being undermined due to changes in store layouts, the PA reports. Italy reported a new daily record of 21,273 coronavirus cases with 128 deaths, health ministry figures showed on Sunday, up from the 19,644 new infections reported on Saturday. Earlier, the Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, announced a package of new restrictions to combat the pandemic. Hello everyone, I’ll be bringing you the latest key developments in all things Covid-19 for the next few hours. As ever, don’t hesitate to get in touch if you have relevant updates or comments to share, either via Twitter @JedySays or via email. I won’t always be able to respond, but I read everything. That’s it from me this Sunday - my colleague Jedidajah Otte will take over shortly. Here’s a summary of events so far today: •The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. •An official from China’s Xinjiang health commission said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. •The United States saw 83,718 new cases reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the reord 83,757 infections reported on Friday. •The prime minister of Italy Giuseppe Conte announced a raft of new restrictions and warned that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. •Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. He said: “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic.” •The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas in the United States said it was “extremely disappointed” after the Trump administration pulled out of a deal offering the Christmas legends early access to a Covid-19 vaccine in exchange for promoting it. Earlier reports from Kashgar in the Chinese province of Xinjiang described flights being cancelled in and out of the region, with 15 new cases across the country and 405 asymptomatic patients under observation. Now an official from Xinjiang health commission has said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. The parents of a 17-year-old girl who was found on Saturday to have the virus but showed no symptoms worked there, an official from Xinjiang health commission told a press briefing. Kashgar launched a testing programme on Saturday night covering the region’s 4.75 million people. As of Sunday afternoon, more than 2.84 million people had been tested and the rest would be covered by Tuesday, the city government said in a statement. Four towns in the Kashgar region were identified as “high-risk” areas, according to a statement from Kashgar city authority on Sunday night, and stringent controls such as travel restrictions are expected. 1,104 new cases of Covid-19 have been diagnosed in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 42,681. Public Health Wales said five further deaths had been reported, with the total rising to 1,777. The Welsh government has imposed a 17-day “firebreak” lockdown which started on Friday in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boiko Borisov, has become the latest political figure to test positive for the new coronavirus. “After two PCR tests from today I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page, adding that he had mild symptoms and would quarantine at home. Borisov, 61, self-isolated on Friday evening when a deputy minister of regional development he had been in contact with five days before tested positive for the virus. Bulgaria, a country of under 7 million people, weathered the first wave of the coronavirus relatively well, but the number of cases and hospitalisations surged over the past weeks, reaching a total of over 37,500 cases and 1,084 deaths on Sunday. On Thursday, the government made masks mandatory in crowded outdoor spaces, in addition to all inside public areas and transport in a bid to curb the number of infections that threaten to break the country’s severely understaffed medical system. The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard on Sunday showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. AFP reports that the WHO’s complete figures for Saturday showed that 465,319 cases were confirmed to the UN health agency during the day, topping the 449,720 recorded on Friday and the 437,247 logged on Thursday. The WHO has warned that some countries are on a “dangerous track”, with too many witnessing an exponential increase in cases. According to the WHO’s figures, there have been more than 42.3 million confirmed cases of the respiratory disease, while nearly 1.15 million people have lost their lives, including 6,570 on Saturday. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. In total, more than 9m cases have now been registered in the region. “We are at a critical juncture in this pandemic, particularly in the northern hemisphere,” WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Friday. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track.” Qatar has signed an agreement with drugmaker Moderna Inc to buy its potential Covid-19 vaccine as soon as it is approved and released for global use, state news agency QNA reported on Sunday. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc , Johnson &amp; Johnson and Moderna. “Negotiating early and securing a number of agreements enhances our chances of getting sufficient quantities of the vaccine early,” Reuters quoted Abdullatif al-Khal, chair of a national Covid-19 health group, as saying. He did not say how many doses Doha was requesting. Earlier this month, al-Khal said Qatar signed an agreement with Pfizer and BioNTech to supply Qatar with their vaccines. Moderna said last month it was on track to produce 20m doses of its vaccine by the end of the year, while maintaining its goal of readying 500 million to 1 billion doses in 2021. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in the United States: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). Hospitals in the Swiss city of Geneva on Sunday issued a call for medically trained volunteers and recently retired staff to help tackle a record number of Coronavirus patients anticipated in the coming days. AFP reported that Geneva University Hospitals (HUG) said the number of coronavirus patients was expected to be “far higher” than at the peak of the pandemic’s first wave in March. According to the latest figures released Friday by the Swiss health ministry, 5,057 new cases of the respiratory disease were registered in Geneva over the previous 14 days - an incidence of 1,012.5 per 100,000 people. Cases, hospitalisations and deaths in Switzerland have doubled from one week to the next throughout October. The government is expected to decide Wednesday on new measures to control the spread of the virus. “It is highly likely that the peak of 550 hospitalised Covid-positive patients that we recorded during the first wave will be greatly exceeded in the coming days,” said HUG director-general Bertrand Levrat. “We anticipate that the number of beds and professionals needed to treat Covid and non-Covid patients will be far higher than what we experienced this spring.” •This post was corrected at 3:25pm. A previous version said that Geneva is Switzerland’s capital. Still in the UK, NHS chiefs have denied claims that thousands of frail, elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic, Denis Campbell reports: NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts.” The newspaper claimed that the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. You can read the story in full here: In the UK, the Royal Mail has announced that around 33,000 temporary jobs will be available this year over the Christmas period - over 10,000 more than its usual seasonal average. The postal service typically employs between 15,000 and 23,000 extra staff between October and January to help sort the additional Christmas volumes of parcels, cards and letters. Royal Mail says that such a high number of workers is needed this year because of elevated parcel volumes due to an increase in online shopping caused by the coronavirus crisis. The United States came close to setting a single-day record of coronavirus cases in the latest figures, having already done so 24 hours earlier. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Read more on that story here: In Italy, Conte also said that taking strict measures now would allow for a relaxation before Christmas. “We think that we will suffer a bit this month but by gritting our teeth with these restrictions, we’ll be able to breathe again in December,” he said. Italy’s prime minister has now given his press conference (see earlier post) announcing new restrictive measures and warning that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. Giuseppe Conte’s government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums will stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been strongly advised not to leave their homes unless for work, health or education purposes. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the new decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the new measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. Still in Spain, Sánchez said that his government will use the state of emergency to impose an 11pm-6am nationwide curfew, except in the Canary Islands. The prime minister says that Spain’s 19 regional leaders will have authority to set different hours for the curfew as long as they are stricter, close regional borders to travel and limit gatherings to six people who don’t live together. “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic,” Sánchez said after meeting with his Cabinet. The leader added that he will seek the endorsement of the Parliament this week to extend the state of emergency for six months, until May. Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency (see earlier post) in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. The Socialist leader told the nation in a televised address that the extraordinary measure will go into effect on Sunday, AP reported. Sánchez had called a cabinet meeting to prepare the measure, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. The National Institute for Public Health reported 10,203 confirmed cases of Covid-19. The daily case count in the country has risen steeply since the beginning of September. This is the first time the figure has been above 10,000. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Here’s a clip of Anthony Fauci’s interview with Andrew Marr which we reported on earlier. Here’s a summary of the key developments of the last few hours. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections. •In Italy, the government was reported to have agreed a raft of new measures to combat the spread of the virus, with prime minister Giuseppe Conte due to make a statement at 1.30pm local time. •In Poland’s capital, Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus. •In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. He also said the government was reviewing the length of the 14-day isolation period for travellers coming to the UK from abroad. A second firebreak lockdown could be required in Wales by January or February next year, Wales’ deputy minister for economy and transport has said. Lee Waters said the Welsh government was trying to “flatten the curve” of the second wave of Covid-19 but could not stop the virus from spreading entirely. Waters told BBC Wales’ Sunday Supplement: “This is not the last lockdown we’re likely to see. I think the projections in the papers we’ve published on our worst-case scenarios shows it’s likely we’re going to need to have another firebreak in January or February. “It’s important that we can show that we are being rational, we’re being evidence-based and we are being transparent. We are trying our best to do that.” Earlier, Welsh health minister Vaughan Gething told the BBC’s Andrew Marr show that the Cardiff government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items. “We’re reviewing with supermarkets the understanding and the clarity and the policy because there’s been different application in different parts,” he said. Waters echoed those remarks, saying: “We’re going to sit down with the supermarkets to review how this has gone over the weekend. “We’re not reviewing the requirement for supermarkets not to sell non-essential, we’re going to review how it’s working in practice because clearly there are some bumps.” The government in Italy has now agreed on measures (see 10:01am) to limit the spread of coronavirus, reports in Italy suggested. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is due to make a statement at 1:30pm local time. Reuters said that measures agreed between Conte’s government and regional authorities ordered bars and restaurants to close by 6pm and shut public gyms, cinemas and swimming pools. The decree encourages people not to go out and to limit contacts at home with anyone outside their immediate family, but does not impose a mandatory nationwide curfew or lockdown and allows shops and most businesses to remain open. However, service in bars and restaurants will be subject to a series of controls to limit contagion, and cinemas, theatres, gaming halls and discotheques will be closed. The decree also directs that up to three-quarters of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in school buildings. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah rejected on Sunday a proposal by prime minister Muhyiddin Yassin for him to declare a state of emergency in response to the coronavirus crisis, saying that he did not see the need. Critics say Muhyiddin’s request for emergency rule, which would include suspending parliament, is an attempt by the premier to stay in power amid a leadership challenge. Malaysia is experiencing a resurgence in virus infections and on Saturday saw its biggest daily jump in cases with 1,228 new cases, Reuters reported. The palace said Muhyiddin made the request for emergency rule to deal with the coronavirus pandemic, but that the government has been handling the crisis well. “Al-Sultan Abdullah is of the opinion that there is no need at the moment for His Majesty to declare an emergency in the country or in any part of the country of Malaysia,” the palace said in a statement. “His Majesty is confident in the ability of the government under the leadership of the prime minister to continue to implement policies and enforcement efforts to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic.” The constitution gives the king the right to decide if an emergency should be declared, based on threats to security, economy or public order. Muhyiddin has been in a precarious position since he took office in March with a two-seat majority. Uncertainties deepened after opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim said last month he had the parliamentary majority to form a new government. In Poland’s capital Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus, a police spokesman said. Police said demonstrators had attacked policemen, throwing stones, glass bottles and fire crackers during the demonstrations. Police used tear gas on several occasions during the protests in Warsaw in which people demanded that new restrictions be repealed. “We have 278 detainees … We were dealing with a clear manifestation of aggression, these people came to fight us,” Warsaw police spokesman Sylwester Marczak told reporters on Sunday, according to Reuters. The demonstrations also broke a ban on gatherings of more than five people, which came into effect on Saturday as part of new measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus. Despite the ban on gatherings, Poland also separately continued to see demonstrations on Saturday against a ruling on Thursday by the Constitutional Tribunal that imposes a near-total ban on abortion in the Catholic country. Poland is seeing a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases, with new infections on Friday hitting a daily record of 13,632. New curbs imposed on Saturday include a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. Schools will remain open for children up to third grade, with older students moving to distance learning. Older people can leave their homes only in special cases. The health ministry reported 87 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, taking the total death toll from Covid-19 to 4,438. The country recorded 11,742 new cases on Sunday, with total infections approaching 253,700. France’s new Covid-19 contact-tracing app needs to be downloaded by at least 20% of the population to be effective but is far from reaching that level for now, the minister for digital affairs said on Sunday. On 22 October, France relaunched its “StopCovid” tracing app and renamed it “Tous Anti-Covid” (all against Covid), which has since seen an additional 1.2m downloads for a total number of about 4m. “For the application to be efficient, about 20% of the population, or 15 to 20 million people, need to download it,” digital affairs minister Cedric O said on FranceInfo radio, according to Reuters. He said similar apps were working well in Britain, Germany and Canada but gave no examples of successful contact tracing in France with the app. Many in France have been reluctant to download the app over privacy concerns, despite the government’s reassurances that the data will not be used for any other purpose than stopping the pandemic. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. AP reported that Sánchez’s government said on Saturday night that a majority of Spain’s regional leaders have agreed to a new state of emergency and the meeting on Sunday was to study its terms. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain’s government has already declared two state of emergencies during the pandemic. Health minister Salvador Illa has said his agency and regional health officials are studying how to apply nightly curfewssimilar to the curfews already in place in France’s major cities. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. Spain on Friday reported almost 20,000 new daily cases and a further 231 deaths, taking the country’s death toll in the pandemic to 34,752. In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. The total number of cases rose to 59,247 in the country of 10 million, with 35 new deaths taking the total to 1,425, Reuters reports. Although coronavirus cases have been rising sharply since late August, Hungary’s nationalist Prime Minister Viktor Orban is seeking to avoid a repeat of the spring lockdown that sent the economy crashing by 13.6% in the second quarter. Hungarian schools are operating as normal, and apart from closing borders to foreigners, the government has not imposed significant limitations on events. Orban’s cabinet chief Gergely Gulyas said on Thursday that the government planned no new restrictions to curb the spread of the virus. In Italy, the government has been accused of “playing with fire” ahead of the announcement of new Covid-19 restrictions that will heavily penalise the hospitality industry. Hospitality workers will protest outside parliament on Sunday as ministers debate measures that could include the closure of bars and restaurants from 6pm. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is expected to announce the restrictions, which might also include the closure of gyms and swimming pools, on Sunday afternoon. People will be “strongly advised” not to travel beyond their home towns unless strictly necessary, according to a draft of the decree. The plan to close restaurants and bars from 6pm has been hotly contested by regional administrations. “We ask that they close us down completely and give us the famous financial support that Conte keeps talking about,” said Paolo Bianchini, a restaurant owner in the Lazio town of Viterbo and spokesperson for MIO, the hospitality movement organising the protest. “It’s useless staying open at all, and being left to have an agonising death – our companies are dying. There will be civil war as people no longer have money – [the government] is playing with fire.” There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the whole Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme right group, Forza Nuova, also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew also in place since Friday. Italy registered 19,644 new coronavirus infections and 151 more fatalities on Saturday. The virus is rapidly spreading in Lombardy, Campania and Lazio. There are 1,128 people currently in intensive care with Covid-19 across the country, more than double the figure of two weeks ago. Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in the US, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behaviour,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. In Ireland, the Irish Independent reports that any move towards a third national lockdown would be heavily resisted by ministers with the government coalition. The newspaper reports that “senior Fine Gael ministers have insisted everything must be done to avoid the need to impose the highest level of Covid-19 restrictions for a third time”. It quotes one minister as saying that Taoiseach Micheál Martin “needs to be careful with this rush for a third lockdown, the people might not buy it”. You can read the full story here. Here’s the latest edition of the Guardian’s tracker of coronavirus cases and deaths around the world. The US continues to have the highest number of total cases and deaths, and cases and deaths in the last fortnight. In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. Speaking in response to an article by Tory MP Bernard Jenkin and an interview in which he said the programme should be led by “a very senior military person”, he says she has done a “very good job” and that the programme has “come on so much”. Another of Ridge’s interviewees, shadow mental health minister Rosena Allin-Khan, says that Harding’s position is “untenable”. Lewis also says that reports that the government is looking at cutting the 14-day isolation period for travellers returning to the UK from abroad are accurate. But he says that “we’re not ready to make a final decision or announcement on that yet” and the decision will be “scientifically led”. He denies an accompanying claim that business leaders will be exempt and says that any changes “will apply to everybody”. In Indonesia, the health ministry has reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths. The total number of infections now stands at 389,712, with 13,299 – on both counts, the highest totals in south-east Asia. The government of Indonesia’s capital city Jakarta said in a statement earlier on Sunday that it will extend mass social restriction measures introduced to curb the spread of the virus until 8 November. Meanwhile, the Jakarta Post reported that more than 100 inmates at a prison on the island of Bali had tested positive. There have been 11,000 cases in total in Bali, which has seen its economy devastated by the sharp decline in tourism. • This post was amended at 8.37am to correct the total infection count. Good morning from London, where I’m picking up from Helen Davidson. You can reach me on Twitter or email with any comments, tips or suggestions. If you’re looking for some Sunday morning reading, you could start with Robin McKie’s report for the Observer on fears in the scientific community that the early adoption of an only moderately effective coronavirus vaccine could hinder attempts to find a better one: Or take a look this piece, also by colleagues at the Observer, about the danger that a sense of arbitrary restrictions could contribute to ‘Covid fatigue’ in the UK: I’ll be handing over to my colleagues in London shortly. Here is a quick round up of the most recent developments: Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. US vice-president Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus. Pence and his wife tested negative, his office said. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for Covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup horse race. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as police clashed with far-right protesters in Rome. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases and 229 deaths on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired teargas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Authorities said 229 people had died in the last 24 hours, bringing the official death toll to 26,050. AP: Just weeks after India fully opened up from a harsh lockdown and began to modestly turn a corner by cutting new coronavirus infections by near half, a Hindu festival season is raising fears that a fresh surge could spoil the hard-won gains. Nearly 1 billion Indians will soon celebrate Diwali, the Hindu festival of light, and the country’s biggest. Socializing is key part of the most highly anticipated event of the year, with malls and markets buzzing with shoppers. It also traditionally brings in a massive increase in consumer spending across India. Even though the government is expecting the festival to help resuscitate the ailing economy, it is also worried about people packing together, foregoing social distancing and masks. Such concerns prompted Prime Minister Narendra Modi to address the nation in a televised speech earlier this week, warning people of “any laxity” during the festive season that “could strain India’s health system.” India is second to the United States with the largest coronavirus outbreak. Last month, the country hit a peak of nearly 100,000 cases in a single day, but since then daily infections have fallen by about half and deaths by about a third. Some experts say the decline in cases suggests the virus may have finally reached a plateau but others question the testing methods. India’s testing rate has remained constant but it is relying heavily on antigen tests, which are faster but less accurate than traditional RT-PCR tests. Even as the reasons behind the decline are not fully clear, India is still clocking more than 50,000 cases a day, making any new surge all the more important. These fears stem largely from India’s initial success story — until it wasn’t. In June, the southern coastal state of Kerala was cheered for flattening the curve, generating worldwide appreciation, even from the United Nations. But in a stunning reversal, it now fares as the second-worst state in active coronavirus cases in the country. Health Minister Harsh Vardhan blamed “gross negligence” during the 10-day Onam festival celebrations in late August for Kerala’s virus surge. Since then, reported infections there have jumped by five times, far outpacing the nationwide trend. Kerala’s story has alarmed health experts who fear similar problems in the runup to Diwali that could reverse the gains. “If we don’t avoid socializing during the upcoming festival season, I fear we will be back to where we started,” said Dr. T. Jacob John, a retired virologist. “There is a significant risk ahead of us.” More than 1,000 test results have come back from the northern suburbs of Melbourne, finding no new cases of the virus. It’s significant because the area is the site of a current outbreak which prompted premier Dan Andrews to delay announcing reopening dates for the city’s retail and hospitality sector. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 are understood to be included in the 1,135 tests returned today. 1400 tests conducted taken today are in the labs and testing will proceed throughout the evening, the health department said. “This testing enables us to get a very clear picture of how many cases there are and ensure there is a plan in place for everyone who tests positive along with the close contacts,” said Jeroen Weimar, the state’s head of testing and community engagement. “There will at times no doubt be delays as more people come forward, but we are so appreciative of everyone making the effort, particularly during these colder spring days.” Tasmania will on Monday reopen to much of mainland Australia, with the island state’s government insisting it is well prepared to handle any coronavirus cases. The state was the first Australian jurisdiction to close its borders in March and hasn’t recorded a case in more than 70 days. It will open to low-risk regions Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia, the Northern Territory and ACT, plus New Zealand. It remains closed to Victoria and is slated to open to NSW on 2 November, with a firm call on that date to be made this week. All arrivals at airports and sea ports will be health screened and anyone with virus symptoms will be tested and ordered into quarantine until their result is known. “While it’s exiting to be able to see restrictions ease and life getting to a Covid-normal, we also need to remember there is always a risk of coronavirus in our community,” health minister Sarah Courtney said. She said “extensive work” had been put into the state’s contact tracing systems and aged care preparedness. Ms Courtney said social distancing and personal hygiene were critical in the weeks ahead. “It’s important that we continue this vigilance so our healthcare workers remain safe and we have capacity in our hospitals,” she said. Tasmania has more than 200 ventilators and is planning to acquire another 100. A rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccines, scientists have said. Scientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Read more here: The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 11,176 to 429,181, data from the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases showed on Sunday. The reported death toll rose by 29 to 10,032, the tally showed. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup “in light of the ongoing situation around government restrictions”. “While we are very disappointed not to be able to welcome our members and racegoers to Cup Week, we understand the government’s commitment to keeping our community safe. We also recognise the need for certainty and clarity for our patrons, being only six days out from Derby Day,” said VRC chair Amanda Elliott. “We are still in discussions regarding the potential return to the track for a small number of owners, as is currently permitted in regional Victoria,” Mrs Elliott said. “We will play our part in supporting Victoria’s emergence from this pandemic as Melbourne moves closer to a normal environment over summer.” The VRC will run an interactive Cup website for people still wanting to enjoy the festivities of Australia’s famous race day. The testing of entire cities whenever there is a new outbreak in China is overkill, the country’s chief epidemiologist has said. About 11 million people were recently tested in just five days in Qingdao, after 12 new cases were linked to a hospital. But the testing regime found no new cases, and Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist with China Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, told China Newsweek the transmission would have been confined to the hospital. “Qingdao has the determination to [test everyone], but it’s overkill,” Wu said. Mainland China has avoided seeing more massive outbreaks since it got control of the original Wuhan epidemic, even as new clusters have emerged in cities and provinces as populous as Beijing, Qingdao, and Jilin. As well as swift lockdowns, strict contact tracing, and travel restrictions, authorities in each case also embarked on ambitious drives to test every single resident. Wu said while citywide testing may be reassuring to officials and residents, “the social cost was too big and unnecessary”. A harrowing report from CNN on the rise of child trafficking in India during the pandemic. In recent years, India has strengthened its lawson child labor, but in the past six months - with Covid-19 taking a toll on the economy - that work has started to unravel. “Children have never faced such crisis,” said 2014 Nobel Peace Prize winner Kailash Satyarthi, whose organization Bachpan Bachao Andolan (Save the Childhood Movement) works to protect vulnerable children. “This is not simply the health crisis or economic crisis. This is the crisis of justice, of humanity, of childhood, of the future of an entire generation.” When India went into a strict lockdown in March, schools and workplaces closed. Millions of children were deprived of the midday meal they used to receive at school and many people lost their jobs.Traffickers have exploited the situation by targeting desperate families, activists said. See the full report here. Still in Australia, the country’s prime minister, treasurer and health minister have again criticised the Labor government in Victoria for the continuation of lockdown measures in Victoria. In a joint statement they said the decision to keep some businesses closed was a “profound disappointment”, and called on the Victorian government to utilise mirror tracing and restriction measures used by the neighbouring state of New South Wales. At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave. Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening. This is a profound disappointment. Of course, Victorians do not want to face another lockdown and of course they don’t want all of this to have been for nothing. That is why ensuring the state government’s capability to deal with outbreaks through their public health response is so essential. This is what you need for Victoria to open up safely and stay safely open. Borders and closures are not indicators of public health success. They are the opposite. The Australian state of Western Australia has reported three new cases recorded on Saturday. The one male and two females all aged in their 20s had all returned to Perth from overseas. WA is monitoring 57 active cases remaining from its total of 760. Brazil has registered 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours and 26,979 new cases, the health ministry said on Saturday. The South American nation has now registered 156,903 total coronavirus deaths and 4,817,898 total confirmed cases. The diagnosis of Pence’s chief of staff has been confirmed by their office. “Vice-president Pence and Mrs Pence both tested negative for Covid-19 today, and remain in good health,” said Devin O’Malley, a Pence spokesman, on Saturday, adding that Donald Trump’s running mate would maintain his schedule “in accordance with the CDC guidelines for essential personnel”. Full report here. Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus, Bloomberg is reporting. The diagnosis of Marc Short, the closest advisor to the US vice president, follows that of another senior staffer Marty Obst earlier on Saturday. Pence delivered a campaign speech in Florida on Saturday evening. Bloomberg reported he was aware of Obst’s positive test result prior to departing, and that Obst was not seen on the plane with him. Despite being a close contact of Short, Pence is not quarantining and is maintaining he schedule as an “essential employee”. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. The Jakarta Post reports today on a growing cluster inside the notorious prison, detected after complaints of symptoms by some inmates prompted mass testing earlier this week. Of 106 positive test results so far, 84 are men, the Post reported. They have been moved to an isolated block of the prison, it said. “[The number of confirmed cases] might still be increasing because we are still waiting for more test results,” said I Putu Surya Dharma, spokesman for the law and human rights ministry’s Bali office. The prison is under lockdown and receiving no visitors or new prisoners. Bali has recorded more than 11,000 cases of Covid-19 during the pandemic, which has also devastated the island’s economy which depends almost entirely on tourism. Indonesia has recorded more than 380,000 cases. Here is our full report on the latest from Victoria, Australia, where the country’s largest outbreak and which sparked one of the world’s strictest lockdowns, is being brought under control. From Calla Wahlquist: Daniel Andrews has delayed an announcement about easing coronavirus restrictions in Melbourne pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs, prompting criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. In a heated press conference, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. Read more: From the wire services in Europe: Italy saw a second night of street protests against curfews as it reported another daily record on Saturday. After clashes in the southern city of Naples on Friday night, police again faced off against dozens of masked protestors in the centre of Rome after the far-right Forza Nuova group called for a protest against the curfews. Some 200 masked militants belonging to the neo-fascist group hurled projectiles at police and set rubbish bins alight in the second night of street protests. Police arrested seven protesters and reported two officers injured, according to the Repubblica daily. The government is planning further restrictions to contain a resurgence of the pandemic, and prime minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a repeat of the blanket lockdown earlier in the year. But a number of regions - including Campania, the area around Naples, Lazio around Rome, and Lombardy - have imposed overnight curfews. The northern region of Piedmont and Sicily in the south will follow next week and other regions are expected to match them. The central government is expected to announce more measures soon. Earlier, health ministry data showed 19,644 new Covid cases and 151 dead as the disease surged in areas like Lombardy, Milan, Campania and Lazio. Conte pledged to speed up help for businesses suffering in the crisis but said the weeks ahead would be very difficult. “We cannot lower our guard,” he added. According to a draft decree circulated on Saturday, public gyms and swimming pools may be closed and bars and restaurants told to shut from 6 p.m., while people will be encouraged not to travel outside their home districts. Like many authorities across Europe, the Italian government is desperate not to close down the economy completely but is facing growing public anger at renewed restrictions being imposed to limit public gatherings. With public health services coming under strain, authorities have reopened temporary intensive care facilities built during the first phase. Despite this, Italy’s top public health body warned on Friday services were approaching crisis point. Mainland China reported 15 new cases on Saturday, all imported from other countries. There are 405 asymptomatic patients currently under observation, including a teenage girl in Kashgar. The city has imposed travel restrictions while health authorities test the population. The South China Morning Post cited an unnamed official, saying residents are allowed to leave the city if they have a negative test result. Overnight there was a bit of confusion among Kashgar residents and visitors, as flights in and out of the Xinjiang region city were suddenly cancelled, and police authorities posted and then deleted a social media message reminding people to wear masks. “Everyone wear your masks properly and pay attention to personal safety. Don’t believe or spread rumours to avoid unnecessary panic. All is subject to official notification,” the Weibo post said. Videos shared online also appeared to show traffic banking up at checkpoints. Xinjiang health authorities announced on Saturday night that an asymptomatic case had been found during a routine screening in Shufu county, and the patient - a 17-year-old woman - had been transferred to hospital. The case would be the first inside Xinjiang since mid-August, when an outbreak sparked a “wartime state” of lockdown in the capital Urumqi. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Saturday 6,025 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 431 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 886,800 and the death toll to 88,743. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours, surpassing last Sunday’s record of 871 cases. The country has recorded at least 700 daily cases for eight consecutive days. The health ministry said more than 72% of the new cases were in the state of Sabah, the centre of the current spike in cases. Much of the blame for the current surge has been focused on the East Malaysian state, after people spent two weeks campaigning for an upcoming election before returning to other parts of the country, the Straits Times reported. At around the same time there were outbreaks in Sabah’s detention centres for illegal migrants. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. Citing an email from a NHS Trust chief to his staff, the report said a national vaccination program rollout was being accelerated, with healthcare workers prioritised. Writing to staff earlier this month, the head of a hospital NHS Trust in Warwickshire said they and other NHS organisations nationally had been told “to be prepared to start a Covid-19 vaccine program in early December”. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff priorities prior to Christmas,” the email said, adding that the vaccine was expected to be given in two doses 28 days apart. The Mail also reported that the UK hopes to fast track production if a vaccine is ready before the end of December. •This post was edited at 10:31am to remove an extraneous reference to European medical approvals. Hello, this is Helen Davidson here to take you through the next few hours of global updates. Thanks to Calla for everything so far. First, a quick look around the world for the latest top line developments, with more to follow: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. With that, I’ll hand over to Helen Davidson who will take you through the day. The press conference in Victoria has become a series of reporters putting agree/disagree statements to the premier, and Daniel Andrews rejecting the premise of the question and saying, on repeat: “That is not a question, that’s a statement.” I won’t repeat them here, because there isn’t a lot of information to be gleaned. The gist: reporters are attempting to get Andrews to comment on the frustration felt by business owners, and the broader community, that the roadmap is not being followed and that the end of the lockdown has not been announced on the day the announcement was promised. Andrews is getting frustrated, challenging the premise of questions, and then repeating the line of the day: we have to wait until the test results come back. However the date of opening up has shifted forward. Andrews said he will have “more to say tomorrow and Tuesday” and “we will be opening up before the weekend”. And, after 80 minutes, the press conference is over. A clarification from the premier: Just going back to a question James asked. I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt. November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening, have opening up before then, by on that day, in fact, earlier than then. We had intended to be able to make announcements today, but it’s just not appropriate while we wait for these test results, to be assuming we know what the results are. We don’t know how many positive cases, we don’t know whether they are going to be linked, but we’re still well on track to announcements and begin the process of opening up before the first. Reporter: Why didn’t you say that an hour ago, as directly as that? Andrews, with a deep sigh: Well ... James, I’m sorry if I have not been as clear as I tried to be, it was a very long night and a very early morning and I have been trying to find an opportunity to come back to the podium, as your question indicated to me I perhaps have not been as clear as I should have been. The Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, was asked if it was awkward that his advice was that Victoria could not yet announce details of a reopening, when the former Victorian health minister, the Australian health minister, the NSW premier and the WHO were suggesting it could be reopened. Sutton said: Amongst that list of individuals and organisations, none of them are in the tent. All of the data we have come up with all the understanding we have of each and every case, who the close contacts are, how they are linked, the specific complexities of each household, they are of a united view that as frustrating as this is, this is an appropriate 24-hour period to go through. Reporter: Did you mislead Victorians? Andrews: I did not. A reporter asked Andrews: “You said in your opening remarks that this is not a setback. People when they woke up this morning believed it would be at worst on November one but you are not committing to that so we have gone backwards today.” Andrews: I don’t believe we have. In any event, we have no choice but to wait for these results and they will be here well before November 1. Some results will come through later today and some will come through on Monday, well into the evening. On that basis we will be able to call it and be confident that these are linked cases, not a large number of mystery cases which would speak to the fact that it was much more widespread than we believe it is. Again, we have asked these people to come forward and be tested for a very good reason. They have done that and the lab does take time. It is not a matter of workflow, the test just takes time. We’ll get those tests done as quickly as we can and then analyse the results and update you. Is it fair to call it a “cautious pause” when thousands of [businesses] have been closed for months? But they were not to open today. They were opening Tuesday night at the earliest and we still may be able to make that deadline. It is not appropriate for me to pretend I have a test result I do not have. It is not responsible ... I cannot announce things and I cannot speak to the scope of the opening until we get these test results back and we know exactly the enemy we are facing and the challenge we are facing. Andrews said it was not his strategy that every outbreak should result in a new lockdown, but said Victoria has “an opportunity to essentially get ahead of this virus”. Asked if Melbourne was “just lucky” to already be under lockdown when this outbreak occurred, Andrews said: I don’t think that is right at all. What we would have to do for a long period of time is manage and live with this, but it will be easier, it will be much easier the lower the numbers are at the point you open up. And, as well, the more you know about those cases the more confident you are that you have a public health response around all those people. As it stands now we do not have the complete picture because the labs are processing test. Other tests will be taken through today which will come to us tomorrow. This is nothing more than simply waiting to get the results before ... Put it another way, waiting to get results instead of pretending we know what the results are. We do not and that would not be responsible nor a safe thing to do. And if we are criticised for that, so be it. A reporter said that NSW had been open for months with daily average cases hovering around 10. “If our contact tracing is as good as they are and we have as much faith in the Victorian community as the New SouthWales government has, why can’t we reopen?” Andrews: I don’t accept the conclusions you are drawing at all ... This is a pause, nothing more than that and it is appropriate that we wait to get those results. The reason we have literally hundreds of people locked in homes at the moment is because of the work that contact traces are doing, so I do not accept that criticism at all. Another reporter asked Andrews to acknowledge that “the way the public is feeling must be a rollercoaster. You have mentioned that you understand that people are frustrated, do not think it has gone past frustration today? Today is a different level for the community in terms of what they thought would happen and what has happened.” Andrews said he knew that it was frustrating. Of course people are frustrated and of course everyone would like these rules to come off as quickly as possible but we only get one chance to do this properly and we intend to wait for those results to come back from the laboratory. Once they have we will be able to make further judgment and then we will be able to update people tomorrow and hopefully make some announcements if not tomorrow then Tuesday and then push on from there. Back to Victoria, where this press conference is still going on. Premier Daniel Andrews was asked to respond to his former health minister Jenny Mikakos’ comment that not going ahead with a planned easing of restrictions today was an example of “paralysis in decision making”. Andrews said: I have nothing to say about those comments. Reporter: “She has been a respected member of your government.” Andrews: I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them. That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything. Another reporter asked if it would not have been “less unsettling for Melbournians” if Andrews had stuck to the initial roadmap dates, set out in September, rather than announcing they would be brought forward, then pushing them back again. The reporter called it a “rollercoaster effect”. Andrews: There has not been a rollercoaster. Numbers have come down steadily and we are all about making sure we get them to the lowest level before we open up safely. But what I say to every Victorian is that people have given and done too much for us to ignore the fact that there are thousands of results that have been processed in laboratories as we speak and we need to wait and see those results, we will get them today and tomorrow and hopefully we are able to make, not only announcements but to take the big steps safely around the middle of this week ... We cannot make decisions appropriate to the challenge if we do not have the results and we have not seen them. We don’t know what stories they will tell. Until we get that, which is today, tomorrow and potentially into Tuesday, it is just not safe and responsible for us to say we think we know better. We think that these will all be negative. And if there are some positives they will be linked to known cases. We cannot be certain. What does Andrews think about federal health minister Greg Hunt’s comments, that the only reason you would hold off reopening if you didn’t have faith in the contact tracing system. Andrews says that “is completely wrong”. New South Wales has recorded no new locally-acquired cases for the third consecutive day. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. Some 12,465 tests were conducted in the past 24-hours. Andrews was asked what he would do if this outbreak had occurred after pubs and retail stores were reopened. Would Melbourne be locked down again? Isn’t dealing with outbreaks just the way it’s going to be? Andrews initially didn’t respond, saying he was doing “exactly what we intend to do”. Then he said he would “not necessarily” put the state back into lockdown if an outbreak like this occurred after the state had opened up. But you only get one chance to get it to the lowest point possible and then it will be a management and containment task every day, every week, every month until we get a vaccine. Reporter: So what is the lowest point possible? Andrews: Lowest point possible is difficult to know but the lowest point possible in the northern suburbs will be waiting to see these tests and make sure that they are all linked cases and that there is not some wildfire burning out there that is not visible to us. It is the absolute key. While the Victorian government has been holding its press conference, the former health minister Jenny Mikakos, who resigned last month following the premier’s appearance before the hotel quarantine inquiry and later hit back at premier Daniel Andrews and suggested she had been made a scapegoat, has tweeted that she thinks the easing of restrictions should go ahead. Mikakos said that with the target of less than five cases per day met, and six of the seven new cases connected to known outbreaks, “the set reopening is gradual &amp; safe so any delay is unnecessary”. It’s paralysis in decision-making. The chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, said Mikakos was “entitled to that opinion”. Andrews refused to comment on it, becoming short with reporters. He said: We will not open up today, there has never been a suggestion that we would. We were to make announcements today that would come over the following days. I’d don’t quite know the point you are making. One reporter said Andrews had promised that he would announce an easing of restrictions today every day for the past week, except for yesterday. “You dangled a carrot at Victorians and today it feels like you have produced a stick,” one reporter said. Andrews said he rejected that characterisation. What I would say to you is that I think in this room and across the state there has been a perfectly legitimate request to have targets and dates, and all the way along I have tried to be as clear as I can be that nothing can be guaranteed. Nothing can be guaranteed, except the fact that we will be guided by the data and the science. We have come a long way, we all have in the last thing any of us need to do now is to ignore the fact that there are cases in the northern suburbs, there are results that are pending and we do not have those processed tests. As soon they are and as soon as we can establish that they are cases linked to each other, rather than some much bigger problem, potentially across the northern suburbs, then we will be able to not only announce the next steps, we can confidently take them and rather than that being midnight Tuesday, it may be midnight Wednesday. As soon as we can confirm that we absolutely will. Ducking to the UK for a moment, PA has this report: Officials on the UK government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. There were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” Last week Test and Trace hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. Senior Tory backbencher Sir Bernard Jenkin launched a scathing attack on the performance of the system, saying public consent and co-operation was “breaking down”. Writing in The Sunday Telegraph, he said there was a “vacuum of leadership” at the top of the organisation and called for a change that was “visible and decisive” with a senior military figure being put in charge like they did with the foot and mouth crisis. In response, the Department of Health and Social Care acknowledged there were areas where the service needed to improve, but said people should be “talking it up, not down”, and the leadership had built “the largest diagnostic industry the UK has ever seen”. Weimar rejected the suggestion, made by Australian federal health minister Greg Hunt this morning, that the decision to delay the easing of restrictions was a sign of no confidence in the testing and tracing system, which he manages. Weimar said: I refute that. If you look at the swiftness and comprehensive nature of what we are dealing with, and I think it is right that when we are about to make a momentous decision to ease restrictions, that we have to have confidence that we do not have any active unknown cases in our community. Asked if he recommended the delay to government, Weimar said: When I was asked a question, is there value in seeing more evidence and do you understand every dynamic of the outbreak, my advice was we need at least one more day to make sure we have tracked down so we have another big day ahead of us today and I want to see the results from today. They will come out through the day tomorrow and that is what I have asked for. Weimar said there were five public health teams targeting the close contacts of known cases and of the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school communities. Those teams are knocking on the doors of known contacts and encouraging them to get a test. People who refuse to get a test have been ordered to quarantine for longer. We’ll be asking to test them and the people they were with because they are most directly associated with the cases we know about. And that is how we identified three or four of the cases we saw yesterday through the close contact group. Weimar said public health teams contacted 250 close contacts yesterday to get those door-to-door tests, and have a list of 60 people to contact today. We are very interested in the close contacts because we want to establish if there are any positive cases in that group because they are the ones most likely to, if we’re going to find any more cases, that is the area where we are most likely to find them. The purpose of the wider community testing approach ... [is] we want to understand if there are any other index cases out there or any other links that have not been established. And that is why the wider test program is so important. There are now 20 households that are quarantined in alternative accomodation, the rest are quarantined at home. Weimar said he needed several thousand people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne to get a Covid-19 test today. We saw a fantastic response yesterday with 3,500 people getting tested. I need to see a similar number coming out today that we have got enough depth of understanding about any cases that might be out there. We want to be confident that we understand these chains of transmission and that it doesn’t jeopardise any other activity we want to do in the state. Victoria’s commander of testing and community engagement, Jeroen Weimar, says almost 2,500 tests were conducted in the northern suburbs of Melbourne yesterday. He said there had been a “strong community response”. Testing numbers are up 60% on last week, and he urged anyone in the northern suburbs with any symptoms, and anyone connected with the two schools even without symptoms, to get tested. We are now also really following up the close contacts. We tested, again, four close contacts yesterday who were associated, potentially, with three schools. I am pleased to say this, close contacts of all tested negative twice. And that means we are no longer regarding Dallas Brooks Primary School, Ilium College and Sirius College as part of this outbreak. They are part of no chain of transmission that we have identified between households we are focusing on these three schools, and these three schools are now disassociated ... That means many hundreds of families, many hundreds of people now associated with those three schools are now free to continue on as before. We also tested 250 close contacts, primary and secondary contacts of this cluster yesterday by visiting them at home. A lot of underground activity over the last two days to reach those people at home, to test them and their household members, all those results are coming in overnight. We have some of those results in already and more results are coming in during the course of this morning. So far we have identified one positive contact out of that come out of those close contacts. He added: We have also identified a link to the Regis MacLeod aged care facility with two staff members there testing positive. They are associated with this cluster in the northern metro area that we have been working on. We tested all staff and residents of that facility yesterday, all 108 and all of those results have come back negative. We will continue to watch that facility very closely of the coming days and we will speak about that later if necessary. This continues to be a very complex and rapidly developing case. We now have 11 households [and] chains of transmission between those households. There has been significant progress in the last 24hours as we have identified two new households as part of that 11, and some of the linkages that sit between them. We also have five children at East Preston Islamic College were tested positive. They are well and have all been a part of the initial close contact circle. So this has not spread out, the case any further. Weimar said they had set up a special testing station at Croxton Specialist school, in partnership with the Royal Children’s Hospital specialist paediatric team, to help test its 120 students. We now have 17 [testing] sites across the northern suburbs that are ready to go. They will be open for business and will be ready for you and open today. It’s very important that we establish if there are any remaining positive cases in the community so we can ensure that you are safely isolated and get the treatment you need and protect your family and friends from any further transmission. We are confident that we understand how this work but there is more work to do. Andrews did announce some changes for regional Victoria, which is already several steps ahead of Melbourne in terms of easing of restrictions. From 11.59pm on Tuesday: Gyms in regional Victoria will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with space rules applying. A maximum of 20 people, again with spacing rules, will be allowed to attend a religious service with one faith leader. Outdoor funerals will be allowed to have 50 attendees. Indoor non-contact community sport for people under the age of 18 will be allowed. Indoor swimming pools will be open for all ages, to a maximum of 20 people. Greater Shepparton, which had a coronavirus outbreak earlier this month, will be brought back in line with the rest of regional Victoria from midnight tonight. Daniel Andrews said they had found “linkages” and “chains of transmission” between new cases in the northern suburbs. He also said hundreds who were under self-isolation orders have now been allowed to leave their home after testing negative. The system is working, the processes are working, we just have to wait until we get the results. It is no good doing targeted testing if you then don’t wait to see what the results of those tests are. I do hope to make definitive announcements about opening up metropolitan Melbourne in a couple of days’ time. We will keep people updated today, tomorrow, and those test results will come back and hopefully what they will show us is not just some additional cases and there are bound to be a few in that mix, but that those cases are linked, and that we know that there is a chain of transmission and we have our arms around those people and they are not spreading it to anybody else. He added: If they are random, if they are not linked to each other, if they are mysteries, that will be a real cause for concern. We are hopeful, more than that in fact, we are confident that we have found many linkages. There may be others, there may be other cases that come forward as a result of those tests that are in the labs right now. Andrews said he was not in a position to announce an easing of restrictions today, as promised for several weeks, because they are awaiting at least 1,000 Covid-19 test results from contacts of the outbreak in northern Melbourne. He said: We had hoped today to be able to announce that metropolitan Melbourne would take significant steps, not from today but from mid-week, round retail, hospitality and a whole range of other, important next steps. We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs. We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and they will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there are, whether there is more virus there than we think. Ultimately, if we can link these cases together, if we can link different outbreaks, then we have confidence that we have contained it and we can move forward. This is not a setback. It is simply waiting and being led by the data, being led by the science, and following public health advice. That is what has seen these numbers go from thousands of active cases to now, 100 active cases. That is the approach that has seen us go from 700 plus cases per day to seven cases. He said he hoped to be in a position to make an announcement in “a couple of days” and said he knew the delay would be frustrating. Andrews says there are now 100 active cases in Victoria, that’s seven new cases since yesterday. Eight of those active cases are in healthcare workers, four are in aged care. There are seven people in hospital, none in ICU. 12,894 tests were conducted yesterday. Back on the UK’s test and trace system quickly. PA reports: Contacts of people infected with coronavirus may have to self-isolate for as little as seven days amid concerns in Whitehall about the levels of public compliance with the Test and Trace system. Officials on the Government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. The move — which would not apply to those who test positive for the disease - comes amid growing dissatisfaction with the performance of the system from ministers and MPs. Boris Johnson was said to have become “disillusioned” with statistics provided by the service after they proved to be wrong, according to The Sunday Telegraph. At the same time, there were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” It comes after Test and Trace - headed by the Conservative peer Baroness Harding - last week hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, says the only reason the Victorian government would hold off opening up would be if the state did not have confidence in its contact tracing system. He made the comments just before the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is due to announce (or not announce) a change in restrictions. Andrews is due to begin speaking in a few minutes. After months of increasing tension between the two levels of government – and with the state premier due to front the media shortly – Hunt said the case levels in Victoria were low enough to justify an easing of restrictions. At a press conference in Canberra this morning, Hunt was asked what his reaction would be if the Victorian state government did not announce a significant easing of restrictions today. He said: I think many people would be deeply disappointed given the mental health impacts, given the health impacts, given the profound consequences for people who have invested their life savings. We’ve reached the time when Victoria said that they were looking to move forwards, their own timeframe, their own timetable. We always said that there’s a commonwealth definition of 10 cases, according to the chief medical officer, a rolling average. It’s below five cases, on the rolling average, which is the Victorian government’s own definition. The only reason they wouldn’t open up is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system. We have confidence that the Victorian contact tracing system has improved significantly. It could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine depending on the type required, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews, the minister for industry and science, said CSL would be able to immediately start making a vaccine if a protein-based candidate proved to be safe and effective. However, she said “significant work” would be required if it was another type known as an mRNA vaccine. Pressed during an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program to give a timeframe to get production up and running if it was an mRNA vaccine, Andrews said: I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe. But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range. Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades. In the United Kingdom, a senior conservative MP has called for Baroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the UK government’s test and trace program, to be removed and replaced. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, he said: Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace. You can read more on this story here. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, has urged the Victorian government to ease restrictions to bring the state in line with neighbouring New South Wales. Hunt, whose electorate is in Victoria, was speaking in Canberra ahead of Victorian premier Daniel Andrews’s announcement. He urged the state: ... to take the next step to opening up safely, and we hope and commend to Victoria that the commonwealth will support them in moving to those next levels of reduced restrictions, in line with New South Wales. We have seen how a strong testing, tracing and isolation system can allow a state to manage through the challenges of this. [There have been] over 400,000 cases a day for the last four days, consecutively, globally. In Australia, seven states and territories, zero community cases, yesterday. One state, with seven. And that means we are in a strong position, and there should be no barrier to Victoria taking those steps in line with New South Wales. And they have improved their systems and we want to commend and acknowledge that improvement. Obviously there is more to go, but they have significantly improved to a level where, in our view, they are capable of managing small case numbers, because if we do not do that, then we see the risks to mental health and health which have been so sadly evident in the numbers. But all up, it is a day of great hope. Moreland City Council, which covers an area of Melbourne’s northern suburbs, this morning sent an alert to residents warning that coronavirus cases had been identified in the suburbs of Fawkner, Preston, West Heidelberg, Dallas, Roxburgh Park and Broadmeadows. Anyone who lives or works in that area is urged to gets tested if they experience even mild symptoms. The council alert also urged anyone connected to the East Preston Islamic College and the Corxton school in Northcote to get a test even if they had no symptoms. Fifteen testing sites have been set up in the area. It added that Sirius College (Meadow Fair campus), Ilim College, and Dallas Brooks primary school “have also been identified as potential risk sites. Anyone from these school communities who is a close contact or who is experiencing symptoms needs to get tested and stay home”. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and health minister Martin Foley, will give a press conference at 10.30am Melbourne time (so in 30 minutes). A reminder that according to the roadmap released back in September – which has since been significantly re-written – Melbourne was due to get the following freedoms from tomorrow if the rolling 14-day average had fallen below five and there were no more than three “mystery cases” in that period. As of today, the rolling 14-day average in metropolitan Melbourne is 4.6, and there were nine cases with an unknown source in the 14 days to 22 October. So, according to that roadmap, there would from tomorrow be no restrictions on reasons to leave your home, no travel limit (Melbournians are currently not allowed more than 25km from their home without a permit), up to five visitors from another nominated household allowed in your home, and a reopening of retail stores and hospitality for outdoor seated service. Let’s wait to see what’s actually announced. Good morning, Welcome to our ongoing live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic. France reported a record 45,422 cases in one day on Sunday and 138 new deaths. The country has now recorded 1.08 million cases. Italy has also set a new daily record, with 19,644 cases, and Luxembourg has also recorded a record rise, with 862 new cases. The United Kingdom recorded 23,012 new cases and 174 deaths, as anti-lockdown protests were held in London. In Australia, the focus is on Melbourne where the premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to make an announcement on the easing of restriction. On Friday, he said there would be “significant” changes. On Saturday, he backtracked and said “I just want to caution people from banking that tomorrow I’ll be making a whole series of detailed announcements about opening up.” The Victorian government has reportedly been briefing that changes will be delayed. The reason for the change is an outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs, including a number of cases connected to the East Preston Islamic College. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday and seven on Saturday, up from one on Friday. Almost 10,000 tests have been conducted in the area and hundreds are under self-isolation orders. Andrews has said that they will need to see those tests results, and see whether new cases can be connected to known outbreaks, before the changes are finalised. Importantly for Victorians the rolling 14-day average has now dropped below five cases per day – the milestone set back in September for easing restrictions – but that might not be enough. Andrews has said decisions will be made on where the cases are and whether they are linked, not on numbers alone. Let’s crack on. You can follow me on Twitter at @callapilla or email me at Calla.Wahlquist@theguardian.com
4||'Could do better': top Australian economists grade the 2020 budgetAustralia’s leading economists have struggled to grade this month’s budget. Challenged by the Economic Society of Australia and The Conversation to rate it on a scale of A to F when judged by its stated aims of rebuilding the economy and creating jobs, none of the 43 economists who responded gave it the lowest grades of E or F. But most who gave it a pass were unhappy. Financial markets expert Kevin Davis praised “the willingness of a conservative government to adopt needed large deficit spending at variance with its ideology”. Economic modeller and former Reserve Bank board member Warwick McKibbin said he would give it an A for scale. But Davis said tax cuts “to the better-off employed” weren’t the best way of achieving desired outcomes, and McKibbin said the composition could have been much better designed. “There was an opportunity to invest in green infrastructure as part of a fiscal response and a climate/energy policy response that would have longer-term economic and environmental payoffs,” McKibbin said. “For spending support, transfers to low-income households rather than income tax cuts would have given a bigger bang for the buck. Greater support of childcare would support incomes and labour supply.” Bob Breunig said the design of the childcare benefit created a well-documented income cliff for second earners making it difficult for them to work more hours. It was a known problem and would have been easy to fix. Hard hats instead of soft skills The Grattan Institute’s Danielle Wood said it was “absolutely the right call to change course on fiscal strategy and recognise the need for sizeable stimulus, so marks for that”. But the budget “very much bet the house on a private sector-led recovery”. Where it had spent money directly, it mostly went to “hard-hat” professions such as infrastructure, construction, manufacturing, defence, utilities and energy. “Some of these sectors haven’t even seen job losses during Covid,” Wood said, “and there is already a healthy pipeline of work for transport infrastructure projects, so why spend your stimulus dollars here?” Renee Fry McKibbin noted that the burden of Covid-19 fell on frontline workers in health, caring industries, hospitality, tourism, arts and education, yet she said the budget focused on sectors “traditionally dominated by men”. Climate change overlooked Wood said the price of those blindspots would be a weaker recovery than otherwise, unemployment higher for longer than it could have been, and women’s economic disadvantage entrenched. Labour market specialist Sue Richardson said relying on incentives such as instant asset write-offs and hiring subsidies was risky because the private sector might not respond in the way that had been hoped. What direct spending there was seemed “intended largely to recreate the economy of the past, rather than invest in the economy of the future”. “The economy of the future will, among other things, need to have much lower greenhouse gas emissions and much greater ability to cope with the unavoidable damage arising from climate change.” How we handle the recovery will either set us on a path towards net-zero emissions or lock us into a fossil fuel system from which it will be hard to escape. Saul Eslake gave the government “great credit for being willing, explicitly, to recalibrate its budget strategy” and run up what (for Australia) were large amounts of debt. On average, a bare pass But he said the measures chosen would be less effective in delivering jobs and recovery than others available including vouchers for spending in sectors hard-hit sectors and spending on social housing and childcare. All but one of the 43 economists who responded to the survey also responded to the pre-budget survey which nominated spending on social housing, education and training and permanently boosting jobseeker as the top budget priorities. Assessing the budget, 16 of the 43 (37%) awarded it either an A or a B. Almost half (49%) awarded it a C, or “bare pass”. Six (14%) gave it a D. Some of the economists who awarded a B said it was really a “B-minus”. One of them, Lata Gangadharan, said when it came to opportunities for women (those worst affected by the downturn) the budget “failed miserably” and would attract a D. James Morley said he might have been “too easy of a marker” by awarding a B, but that it was “possible to lose the forest for the trees when only evaluating the budget on its specifics”. ‘B’ reflects the big picture, not the details The big picture was that deficit-financed stimulus was needed and that the budget provided much more than might have been expected given the previous positions of the treasury and the Morrison government. He said the forward guidance that put off “budget repair” until after the unemployment rate fell below 6% was welcome, even if one could ask why the threshold of 6% number had been chosen. The more one looks at the details, the more one wants to significantly mark down the grade for budget. But I will still give it a “B” because the big picture is on the right track and I will just hope the Treasurer somehow becomes an “A” student in the future. Rana Roy said he would have to grade the budget a C rather than an A or B, “more in sorrow than in anger”. While he approved of the deficits and the tax cuts and the focus on infrastructure, he strongly suspected the measures would not be enough. “For example, in an immediate sense it is likely that the negative impact of tapering and terminating jobkeeper will overpower the positive impact of the new wage subsidies for new hires.” Two of those surveyed awarded the budget a B primarily because it had shown restraint. Tony Makin said too much spending would have pushed up the dollar and drawn resources away from the private sector. Geoffrey Kingston said it was important to avoid “maxing out the national credit card”. Chris Edmond awarded it a C primarily because its assumptions relied on hope. By simply assuming a widespread effective vaccine will be available next year and not otherwise thinking hard about how to beat the pandemic, the government is being very optimistic. Others said it had ignored the one thing recommended by most economists, which was to invest in social housing to make housing affordable and create jobs. A permanent increase to jobseeker would have given a million Australian confidence in the lead-up to Christmas. Higher education, a major export earner with a direct impact on productivity, was being left to shrink. John Quiggin said the budget pursued “cultural/ideological vendettas against perceived enemies like renewable energy and the university sector”. But he said it was still worth a C. The government was right to budget for a large deficit, and deserved continuing credit for JobSeeker and JobKeeper. This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons licence. Read the original article, including economists’ individual grades and responses. Peter Martin is a visiting fellow at the Crawford school of public policy, Australian National University
3||Australia is part of a Black region; it should recognise Kanaky ambition in New CaledoniaKicking the can down the road is a time-honoured solution to deadlocks over statehood and identity: hoping time, consultation and money can end up in agreement. But in New Caledonia, the French territory of 290,000 people in the Melanesian island chain to Australia’s north-east, the road is running out after more than two decades of can-kicking. The time is coming – perhaps has come – for Australia to take a clearer position. On 4 October, the second of three referendums on independence promised after 20 years of peace-building saw a sharpening divide in popular sentiment about staying under the French tricolour. Just over 53% of voters said “non” to independence, down from 56.7% in the first referendum in 2018. The trend suggests that a third referendum expected in 2022 would see the “oui” vote rise from this month’s 46.7% to parity or even a narrow majority. Such a prospect has some observers fearing a return to the communal violence seen in the late 1980s, when indigenous Kanaks sought to follow their Melanesian counterparts in Vanuatu, the Solomons, and Papua New Guinea into independence, and French settlers mounted armed resistance. It culminated in 1988. Kanak militants took French police as political hostages on the small island of Ouvéa; French special forces went in, with significant loss of life. The horror led to a 10-year peacemaking effort, the Matignon accords, signed by French loyalist and Kanak leaders, extended by the 1998 Nouméa accords. This month’s vote saw the territory still largely split along the indigenous-settler divide. The “oui” vote dominated in the northern part of the main island and the Loyalty Islands to the east, where Kanaks are concentrated. The “non” vote prevailed in the main island’s south around Nouméa and a smaller settler enclave. The question is, where to now? Under the accords, a third referendum must be held if requested by at least a third of the New Caledonia congress, its legislature. The earliest request can be in April, for a vote in 2022. The pro-independence Kanak parties have the required numbers and say they will demand it. Loyalists, seeing where the numbers are trending, are starting to baulk at it. Sonia Backès, a conservative loyalist who is president of the southern region, has said it even carries the risk of civil war. Some loyalist elements are now urging new negotiations on some kind of middle way, to avoid holding the third referendum. A more hard-line element wants a vote on scrapping the accord in 2022, bringing the 40,000 more recent settlers onto the local electoral roll and thus outvoting the Kanaks for good. But some compromise is stirring on the Kanak side too. This week, Roch Wamytan, a Kanak who was a signatory to the 1998 accords and is now president of the territory’s congress, floated the idea of independence in association with France. This would perhaps resemble the ties of the northern Pacific states of Palau, Micronesia and Marshall Islands with the United States, which extends defence, funding and social services, while still holding their own United Nations membership. France itself looks ready to adjust. In 2018 president Emmanuel Macron visited New Caledonia before the vote, and expressed pride in the decision to remain with France. This time he stayed away, and afterwards, as noted by Denise Fisher, a former Australian consul-general in Nouméa, just referred to the “success” of the “second democratic rendezvous” as a sign of “confidence in the Republic.” He promised to organise a third referendum if that was requested, and urged the territory’s people to think hard about all scenarios after 2022. The French territories minister, Sebastien Lecornu, appeared set on encouraging flexible thinking when he arrived in New Caledonia this month. “This binary question of a yes or no to independence is not the answer to all the questions raised in society today.” New Caledonia’s region is also stepping into the debate. Vanuatu’s opposition leader and recent foreign minister, Ralph Regenvanu, this week urged more contact with loyalists to convince them New Caledonia can be a viable state. He noted that this camp often cites Vanuatu, a former British-French condominium, as a dire example of independence. “For us, it is quite amusing because we think we have got a very good development model happening here,” Regenvanu told Radio New Zealand. In this context, Australia is looking oddly more pro-French than the French. In a statement on the referendum result, foreign minister Marise Payne said “we recognise the choice made by New Caledonians to remain a part of France”, declaring “Australia values its close relationship with France as a likeminded partner in the Indo-Pacific region. We welcome France’s ongoing commitment to the Pacific, and its significant contribution to regional security and prosperity.” Not a word about the Kanaks and their aspirations. Two things are at play here. China has Australia spooked about the Pacific, to the point where it is open to French duchessing that they are a significant counterweight, through such things as the recently proposed France-India-Australia “axis” and the appointment of a French ambassador for the Indo-Pacific. Both India and Australia are of course big customers for the French arms industry. From a narrow military power-balance perspective, it might seem attractive to keep a significant Western naval power like France watching over a vast stretch of the Pacific, where France has about 80% of its present exclusive economic zone. But it runs counter to the Morrison government’s signature initiative placing Australia in the Pacific “vuvale” (family, in Fijian). The Melanesians are this family’s most numerous people, perhaps outnumbering Australians later this century. They take decolonisation of their Kanak brothers very seriously. We should show that we do too. A more constructive approach would be to join regional leaders like Regenvanu in trying convince loyalists that a new independent state of Kanaky, with continuing French support and encouraged Australian investment in its struggling nickel industry, might not be a bad thing, certainly better than otherwise inevitable conflict. For Australia, it would pre-empt malign influence from elsewhere and show our recognition that we are, as Regenvanu told me earlier this year, “part of a Black region”.
1||'The red card was a joke': Ancelotti fumes over Digne dismissal as Everton slip upCarlo Ancelotti has denied Everton have a disciplinary problem and has accused the Premier League referee, Kevin Friend, of being swayed by the furore surrounding Jordan Pickford’s challenge on Virgil van Dijk in the Merseyside derby in his decision to send off Lucas Digne as Everton’s unbeaten start to the season came to an end at Southampton. The Everton manager suggested criticism of Pickford’s tackle, which went unpunished and left the Liverpool defender with a long-term anterior cruciate ligament injury, was an aggravating factor in Digne being given a straight red card in the 2-0 defeat. Ancelotti said the officials’ decision to send Digne off was “a joke” and confirmed Everton would appeal the red card. Asked if he was concerned his players have a discipline issue following successive sending-offs – Richarlison was absent at St Mary’s after being sent off late on against Liverpool – Ancelotti replied: “No, I don’t think so. The red card was a joke, it was not intentional, for sure it was not violent. Maybe it was a yellow [card]. Maybe all this talk all week against Pickford, against Richarlison, affected the decision and if so it’s not right, it’s not fair. “We will appeal, for sure. It was not violent conduct. It could be a yellow card. It was an unfortunate contact and a red card was not fair.” Digne’s sending off, which will result in a three-match ban unless it is overturned by the Football Association, compounded a difficult afternoon as Everton slipped to defeat. The Southampton captain James Ward-Prowse opened the scoring before Che Adams doubled Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side’s advantage after 35 minutes. Four minutes later Stuart Armstrong thought he added a third but Adams was ruled offside in the buildup. “We don’t have to be too disappointed, we are still at the top of the table, which is an unbelievable achievement for us and we have to try to stay there,” Ancelotti added. “It was not a good day, it was not a good performance, we are here to talk about the first defeat and I think we have to forward because of course we don’t like to lose games but in football it happens. It has arrived after a fantastic start. We have to move forward in this game with the belief we made here.”
2||Lewis Hamilton still ambitious after breaking Schumacher's win recordLewis Hamilton believes he can go on to even greater heights having surpassed Michael Schumacher’s record of Formula One race victories after his win at the Portuguese Grand Prix. The British driver took a commanding victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve and is also now within touching distance of Schumacher’s record of seven world championships. Hamilton won in Portimão despite having lost the lead in the opening laps but came back with a masterful display, taking the flag 25 seconds from his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas. The British driver was ultimately in a league of his own in Portugal and enjoyed an emotional celebration of his 92nd win as he finally surpassed Schumacher as the most successful F1 driver across race victories. The world champion praised his Mercedes team, and insisted he and they were eager for more. “I don’t believe in the saying ‘the sky is the limit’,” he said. “It depends how much we want it, how much we want to continue to raise the bar and going by our history together, the way we work, we don’t sit back on our results, we keep working, we keep elevating. Every race feels like the first one. I don’t know how this is possible after all these races but it does.” Hamilton now leads Bottas by 77 points in the world championship. If he is 78 points ahead after the Turkish Grand Prix, which takes place after the next round at Imola, he will secure his seventh title. The Briton has yet to sign a new contract with Mercedes but is clearly motivated to continue. He has enthusiastically embraced the anti-racism cause and has been a driving force in pushing F1 and Mercedes to push for greater diversity. Initiatives which have only left him enthused to continue in F1. “We are having to utilise our position as a business, as a leader in the business for inclusivity, for diversity, there is a lot of work to do, that keeps me inspired,” he said. “It keeps my teammates continuously growing, my fans learning through this process with us all and our sport is slowly changing. It’s a real special time. I definitely wonder, well I am 35 years old. I still feel physically strong but of course you wonder when is it going to tip over and you start losing performance but going by today it is not yet.” Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was third, believes Hamilton will go well past Schumacher’s records. “It’s an incredible achievement 92 victories and he will go to over 100,” he said. “It’s incredible, he looks like he will also get seven world titles as well which is very impressive.”
1||Jacob Murphy rescues point for Newcastle with late leveller at WolvesAfter 80 minutes that felt like a slog deep in midwinter rather than Premier League game No 6, Wolves and Newcastle awoke. Raúl Jiménez’s strike from a poorly cleared Neto free-kick seemed to have made it a third consecutive 1-0 win for Wolves, only for Jacob Murphy to rewrite this script. Steve Bruce’s side had barely moved beyond the centre circle in the second half. Yet after claiming a free-kick to the left of Wolves’s area with three minutes left, up stepped Murphy to curl the equaliser around the wall and past Rui Patrício’s fingertips. If this was a touch unfair on Wolves they have to accept some culpability for taking the match to Newcastle only sporadically. From the XI that schooled Leeds in Monday’s 1-0 win, Nuno Espírito Santo brought in Rúben Neves for João Moutinho. Bruce’s reaction to the 4-1 capitulation to Manchester United was to choose Fabian Schär, Ryan Fraser, Murphy and Miguel Almirón instead of Emil Krafth, Jonjo Shelvey, Isaac Hayden and Joelinton. When in flow Wolves are a medley of gold shirts running to and off the ball and from kick-off they had their visitors chasing them. Daniel Podence, playing off Jiménez, drifted into space at will, one of these moves having him turning for goal and unloading at Karl Darlow, who saved low down. This presaged three more attacking moments from Wolves. First, Neto hit a corner straight into Darlow’s gloves; then Jiménez twice miscued when he should have connected cleanly. It meant Nuno’s men had failed to convert from four opportunities and Newcastle quickly moved from relief to posing their own threat. Callum Wilson raced on to a long ball before Max Kilman’s challenge conceded a corner. This the first of two in quick succession, Ryan Fraser delivering each, and while their hosts were not breached Newcastle had their respect. The fluidity of Wolves’s play is complemented by tenacity, though. It was illustrated when soaking up pressure at Elland Road and was shown here again in a response that once more had Newcastle pinned back as possession was tapped in and around them. Bruce’s side were able to stymie them from moving into the final third yet there was scant sign – the Wilson foray, apart – of Rui Patrício, the Wolves No 1, being threatened. It meant that as the contest passed the half-hour mark entertainment had become as rare a commodity as any actual attempts on goal. When Fraser ran along the right and floated in a cross aimed at Wilson this pattern might have been broken but the ball was too close to Patrício, who gathered with ease. And when Almirón skated through the middle to cause a Wolves’ backpedal the pass might have been weighted perfectly for Allan Saint-Maximin but the No 10’s shot was skewered wide. Finally Podence, at the other end, twisted and turned to leave two Newcastle defenders spectators, the subsequent ball in possessing menace: Jiménez rose and only a well-timed Jamaal Lascelles intervention prevented the Mexican heading at goal. The mood caught on. Tempo was upped, quality elevated. Suddenly Saint-Maximin was doing his own swerve-and-slalom to cut in from the left before letting fly from 20 yards: the ball ricocheted off Willy Boly so Patrício was grateful to save. Still, as the second half began the sides remained in deadlock. And the fare was back to being soporific. After Jiménez again snatched at a shot and Murphy hacked away from under Newcastle’s bar Podence was back in creator mode. This time a dip of the hips took him into yards of clear grass and he teed up Rúben Neves with precision. Yet here the midfielder became the latest to lack composure, spraying the ball wildly over. Podence was undeterred. His feet danced again a little later inside Newcastle’s area and when he shot the ball appeared to hit the arm of Federico Fernández; Nuno appealed on the touchline yet VAR checked and ruled no penalty which seemed odd as numerous similar incidents have been penalised this season. Soon the Newcastle bench were themselves shouting “handball ref” when an Almirón effort at Patrício’s goal pin-balled around the area but this did not interest VAR. When Nuno took off Podence for Adama Traoré on 67 minutes this felt quaint as this removed the best performer. But now came a finish that did at least feature two goals – each of which highlighted what had previously been missing.
1||Kevin McCarra obituaryKevin McCarra, who has died aged 62 of Alzheimer’s disease, was football correspondent for the Guardian from 2002 to 2012 and prior to that a football writer for the Times, Sunday Times and Scotland on Sunday. One of Scotland’s finest sportswriting exports, he was blessed with original thinking, a deep and genuine understanding of football, and an extraordinary talent for phraseology that allowed him to turn what might otherwise have been mundane match reports into works of art. He was born in Glasgow, the youngest of three children, and grew up in Clarkston, on the outskirts of the city. His mother, Adele, was a pharmacist who later went into science teaching, and his father, Joe, was also a teacher. Having attended Holyrood secondary school in Glasgow, Kevin took a degree in Scottish literature at Glasgow University, becoming heavily involved in the Third Eye Centre, a contemporary arts venue. At that stage lecture halls looked to be his natural domain, and after graduation he enrolled for a PhD. However, an invitation from the Third Eye Centre to curate an exhibition about Scottish football was followed by a commission to write a book entitled A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, which was published in 1984. In turn that led to writing work with Scottish Field magazine. Kevin’s deft touch and sharp observations quickly caught the eye of the newly established Scotland on Sunday, which in 1988 took him on as a staff writer – and the PhD was ditched. When the entrepreneur Fergus McCann saved Celtic football club in 1994 Kevin was at the forefront of reporting on the story and shortly afterwards he accepted a move to the Times, initially as Scottish football correspondent but later covering English matches after the direct intervention of the newspaper’s editor prevented a move to the Scotsman. It was at the Times during one particularly raucous European football night at Ibrox that Kevin dictated to the copytaker down the phone that the Rangers manager Walter Smith had “returned to his previous central defensive pairing of Richard Gough and Gordan Petric” – only to find the phrase rendered into “tedious central defensive pairing” when it appeared in the paper the following morning. There was, however, never any prospect of Smith, Petric, Gough or anyone else in the football world becoming angry with Kevin. Similarly, even in such a tribal environment as Glasgow, where support for either half of the Old Firm is generally kept under wraps, he had no fear of revealing his lifelong allegiance to Celtic, as even Rangers fans knew he would not allow that to cloud the judgment in his work. His writing was of sufficiently high quality and balance to render such thoughts redundant. In 2002 he succeeded David Lacey as the main footballing writer at the Guardian, moving with his wife, Susan Stewart, an investment banker, whom he had married in 1986, to Stoke Newington in north London. During his time at the Guardian Kevin was a constant source of support to other journalists, both established and aspiring. Self-deprecating about the scale of his own talent, he felt uncomfortable at receiving so many emails from inquisitive teenagers keen on pursuing a life in the sports media. He regarded his own route as too unorthodox to be helpful and was perhaps unaware that even just a return communication from someone of his standing – which he always gave - would nonetheless be gratefully received. Support was not reserved for the young: in the late 2000s, when Hugh MacDonald, then a sportswriter with the Herald in Glasgow, arrived in London to preview a Champions League tie involving Arsenal, Kevin drove him to the club’s rural pre-match press conference and then back to his hotel. It only emerged later, and by accident, that all of this took place on Kevin’s day off. He also allowed me to stay in his home after being instrumental in arranging some work experience at the Guardian. Many years later a ticking off arrived by email for my use of “plethora” in relation to opportunities missed during a football match. True to the word’s definition, which relates to a larger amount of something than is needed, he reminded me that “teams cannot create too many chances”. If such a note had arrived from any other journalist, ego would have led to annoyance, but from Kevin it produced only a smile. In an industry where cynicism is embedded, he stood out for his kind, gracious and graceful approach. No one had a bad word to say about him, and that spoke volumes. In 2012 his book Celtic: A Biography in Nine Lives was published; he had written several others over the years, mainly about Scottish football and beginning with One Afternoon in Lisbon (co-written with Pat Woods in 1988) about Celtic’s European Cup glory in 1967. In 2012 he left the Guardian to return to Glasgow. Susan gave up her job and spent more and more of her time helping him as his health deteriorated. Season tickets at Partick Thistle and Celtic allowed for plenty of football to be watched, and there were trips, too, to Venice, their favourite city – but nothing like the time for travel that they had planned. He is survived by Susan and his brother, John. • Kevin James McCarra, journalist, born 1 February 1958; died 24 October 2020
5||The Guardian view on the social care crisis: fix a broken systemCoronavirus has yanked back the veil that had obscured the crisis in social care. The unfairness, confusion and humiliation felt by people using the system is out in plain sight. The public intuitively grasps that something needs to be done. When Boris Johnson arrived in Downing Street, he claimed to have a plan to fix a broken system. If a week is a long time in politics, then last July feels like an aeon ago. Mr Johnson’s plan has yet to appear. The worry is that it has been swallowed up by the gaping maw of the pandemic. That is why ministers should listen to the Commons health and social care committee. Last week MPs painted a picture, in England, of an underfunded system, stretched to breaking point, with a low-paid workforce who need more than clapping. The committee said, at a minimum, £7bn extra should be spent by 2023-24 on the system, with roughly 60% of the money used to cover demographic changes and lift pay in line with the national minimum wage. The rest of the cash would be used to introduce a cap on care costs to protect people against catastrophic bills, first suggested by the economist Sir Andrew Dilnot in 2011. This is an “oven-ready” plan. MPs have set aside policy differences to make the offer digestible for the Treasury. Select committees in both the Lords and the Commons had argued for introducing free personal care to help people with daily tasks such as bathing and dressing. Parliamentarians are now more muted in their support for this policy, aware the £5bn price tag would be too large for the chancellor to swallow. The state should be more generous because we are all living longer. The consequent higher demand for long-term care exposes more people to the “lottery” of the system. It is becoming harder to argue, on ethical grounds, that the NHS will treat long-term conditions such as cancer for free while dementia can cost a sufferer the family home or life savings. The system is plainly malfunctioning when the elderly occupy hospital beds because of a shortage of care places. The state is a crucial prop in the English social care system, providing private operators with a subsidy, via councils, that allows them to open their doors to rich and poor alike. Without adequate funding, local-authority-funded places in private care homes dry up. The upshot is, say experts, a growing divide: with only the very poorest and most incapacitated able to access council-funded beds in a shrinking number of care homes while affluent seniors buy spots in Florida-style retirement villages which come with private nursing care. Anger over such divisions may quickly turn into an electoral “grey-quake”. Ministers cannot say they haven’t been warned. Yet a government solution remains elusive. There is little consensus, especially in the ruling Conservative party, on how the “in year” cost of social care should be apportioned between its current and future beneficiaries. Some Tories think government intervention is unpopular and hanker for more market-led solutions. Yet there is already a social care precept on council tax and there has been no revolt in the shires. The state is best positioned to pool risks and insure people against the catastrophic costs because it is impossible to tell who will need long-term care in old age. Other modern democracies like Germany and Japan have introduced levies on older workers. A wealth duty might also be another way of meeting the cost of a national benefit. The select committee’s chair, Jeremy Hunt, was the longest-serving health secretary and the first ever health and social care secretary. In office he did win a significant increase to the NHS budget but he failed to do the same with social care. This was partly because, in the absence of a debate, social care taxes polled badly. But also because George Osborne, when chancellor, ducked the issue and Theresa May blew it up on the campaign trail. Mr Hunt, who lost the chance to lead the Tory party to Mr Johnson, has urged the government to keep its word and mend social care. No one would wish otherwise.
5||The Guardian view on plant-based food: nothing wrong with a veggie burgerThe European parliament has not always had the best press. A peripatetic assembly with a messy remit and a decidedly unenthused voter base has allowed critics to misrepresent, often lazily, its deliberations. Thus were myths such as the ban on bendy bananas born, and we all know where that led in 2016. But things are looking up in Brussels (or is it Strasbourg?) because the parliament has reached an eminently sensible decision in the great battle over whether plant-based products can be labelled as burgers, sausages, escalopes and steaks. On the surface this is a rather arcane debate, so it was remarkable how much coverage last Friday’s vote got in the British media, especially as we are no longer even part of the EU. It is odd that we are now taking a close interest in the parliament while for decades, as a member, we ignored it or mocked its portentous rulings. The parliament was addressing an attempt by the EU’s farmers to have terms such as burger and sausage banned when the contents were made of plant-based alternatives to meat. MEPs decisively rejected the move, delighting the environmental lobby, which argues that a switch away from meat is essential to make the food industry more sustainable. Green MEPs were dining out on veggie burgers on Friday evening, but this was not just a victory for environmentalism. It was really a triumph for logic. Yes, a sausage is usually made of meat, but it doesn’t have to be. The term is synonymous with shape rather than content. Glamorgan sausages, made of cheese, leeks and breadcrumbs, are a traditional Welsh delicacy, and no one challenges their appropriation of the term. Rice burgers are popular in Asia; vegan steaks are now part of the culinary landscape; and while the French would no doubt insist that an escalope should be made of veal, there is nothing inherently misleading about selling a vegan escalope made of Quorn as long as the ingredients are made clear. The terms usefully describe shape, texture and what the product is being substituted for. Farmers groups demanded that “veggie discs” and “veggie tubes” be used instead, but that would only sow confusion and needlessly reduce sales of plant-based products. MEPs seem to be inconsistent in matters of labelling. “Veggie burger” and “vegan sausage” have been allowed, but they have come down hard on dairy substitutes. The European parliament had already banned “almond milk” and “vegan cheese”, and has now extended that to “cheese-like” and “yoghurt-style”. But there is no inconsistency. Cheese, milk and yoghurt are specific products, not generic names. It is right to ban these for plant-based substitutes, just as a hard line should be taken on such oxymorons as meat-free meatballs. Consumers need protection from over-enthusiastic marketing. The two sides should call a truce. Neither the farmers nor the environmentalists have a monopoly of wisdom. Many an allegedly meaty sausage is decidedly lacking in meat, and plenty of plant-based products are heavily processed. Whether they are committed carnivores or vigorous vegans, consumers need to be encouraged to read the ingredients on packs to understand what they are eating and how their food has arrived on their plate. This is about nutrition, not politics.
6||Free school meals: the Tory MPs defending refusal to support campaignFollowing last week’s parliamentary vote against backing Marcus Rashford’s campaign to extend free school meals (FSM) over the holidays to stop children going hungry, the government has faced heavy criticism for refusing to support the footballer’s proposal. However, despite the growing backlash, some Conservatives have spoken in defence of ministers’ continuing refusal to perform a U-turn on the policy: Ben Bradley The Tory MP for Mansfield tweeted on Friday: “At one school in Mansfield 75% of kids have a social worker, 25% of parents are illiterate. Their estate is the centre of the area’s crime. One kid lives in a crack den, another in a brothel. These are the kids that most need our help, extending FSM doesn’t reach these kids.” Responding to a user who replied saying “£20 cash direct to a crack den and brothel really sounds like the way forward with this one”, Bradley tweeted: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did …” Following heavy criticism, Bradley subsequently deleted the tweets, claiming they had been taken out of context. Mark Jenkinson Defending his Conservative colleague after Bradley’s comments were seized on by Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, Workington MP Jenkinson tweeted on Friday: “I know in my constituency that, as tiny a minority as it might be, food parcels are sold or traded for drugs.” He added: “And that’s parcels, not vouchers – which have greater monetary value. As I said, a relatively minuscule number – but we can’t pretend it doesn’t happen. Pretending, to score political points, helps no one.” Paul Holmes The Tory MP for Eastleigh, in Hampshire, posted a statement on his website on Saturday in which he argued it was unfair to paint Wednesday’s vote as a choice between “feeding hungry children and not feeding hungry children”. He argued that “no child should go hungry”, highlighting the £9bn invested in the welfare system, mainly via universal credit, as well as the £63m hardship fund for local councils. But he also sought to point the finger at the opposition, adding: “The hardship that campaigners like Marcus Rashford experienced happened under a Labour government. Furthermore, the Labour party when in government in 2008 specifically rejected proposals to extend free school meals to children during holidays. “This is not a comment on the rights or wrongs of that decision. I highlight it because surely the level of need during the financial crisis was comparable to this pandemic but I didn’t see the same levels of outrage or abuse then as I do today. This includes threats to female colleagues of mine.” Danny Kruger The Tory MP for Devizes, in Wiltshire, wrote in his local paper, the Gazette &amp; Herald, on Sunday: “This is a really important and emotive topic and I understand why so many people are up in arms about it. Many families across the country are struggling to get by. Benefits provide hardly enough money to live on, and for some people they do not provide enough. “The problem is that generous, unconditional, universal benefit entitlements trap people in dependency on the state and rightly enrage people who are working hard for themselves. That’s why I believe in a more flexible, community-led approach to welfare.” Brandon Lewis The Northern Ireland secretary defended the government’s position on Sunday, telling The Andrew Marr Show that the situation had changed since the summer. He said: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed, so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.”
7||Lawyers call for apology from Johnson and Patel for endangering colleaguesThe UK prime minister and the home secretary are accused of endangering the personal safety of lawyers through their abusive attacks on the profession and should apologise, more than 800 former judges and senior legal figures have said in a letter sent to the Guardian. Boris Johnson and Priti Patel are additionally accused in the letter of displaying “hostility” towards lawyers, undermining the rule of law and effectively risking the lives of those working in the justice system. The signatories include three former justices of the UK supreme court, five retired appeal court judges, three former high court judges, the lawyer heads of four Oxford University colleges, more than 80 QCs, 69 law professors from leading English universities, the directors of Liberty and Justice, as well as hundreds of law firm partners, barristers and solicitors. The letter is the largest coordinated response so far to increasingly vehement rhetorical attacks on the legal profession by the two Conservative politicians. In August, the Home Office published a video on Twitter blaming “activist lawyers” for frustrating the department’s efforts to deport people with no right to remain in the UK. The video was later withdrawn. Earlier this month, at the Conservative party conference, Patel broadened her targets, claiming that among those defending the “indefensible” and “broken” immigration appeals system were “do-gooders, lefty lawyers, the Labour party”. In his conference speech, Johnson went further, declaring he would prevent “the whole criminal justice system from being hamstrung by what the home secretary would doubtless – and rightly – call the lefty human rights lawyers, and other do-gooders”. Last week, a man appeared in court charged with carrying out a racist attack on a firm of immigration lawyers in London. Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow, faces six charges including preparing an act of terrorism. He has not yet entered a plea. The roll call of signatures protesting against the vilification of lawyers represents an extraordinary host of prominent legal experts united in a common purpose. Among the former judges are Lords Collins, Dyson and Walker, who recently left the supreme court, as well as onetime appeal court judges Sir Richard Buxton, Sir Anthony Hooper, Sir David Keene, Sir Alan Moses and Sir Stephen Sedley. The letter states: “We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. “Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law, which ministers and lawyers alike are duty-bound to uphold. “We invite both the home secretary and the Prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future.” In support of the letter, former director of public prosecutions Lord Macdonald QC said: “The home secretary may not grasp the indecency of her language, but the prime minister should know better. “Lawyers who represent demonised people are always attacked by populist politicians, but it is demeaning to our country and its institutions that the government itself is now dipping into this disreputable playbook. “It is precisely this sort of ugly authoritarianism that the rule of law is called upon to counter. The entire legal profession is proud of those lawyers who are being so crudely and dangerously vilified.” The former supreme court justice Lord Dyson told the Guardian: “What’s worrying is the inflammatory language used by the home secretary and supported by the prime minister. It was irresponsible and dangerous and quite unjustified to use inflammatory language of the sort. The language is almost the language of a demagogue. “We all now what happens when people in high places and in power resort to language of that kind … They are whipping up emotions without justification. It’s dangerous.” Dinah Rose QC, the president of Magdalen College, University of Oxford, said: “The people at the heart of government whose role it is to ensure that the legal system and the rule of law are respected have either decided to remain silent or their voices are not being listened to. “Where lawyers are abusing the system, they deserve to be criticised, but the problem is that the government’s attack is on any lawyer who is using the system to represent their clients. There’s an attempt to whip up hatred against lawyers for simply doing their job.” In a judgment last week upholding the right for migrants to have access to lawyers, the lord chief justice, Lord Burnett of Maldon, also stated: “It is a matter of regret that a minority of lawyers have lent their professional weight and support to vexatious representations and abusive late [immigration] legal challenges.” A government spokesperson said: “The government rejects the underlying insinuation in this letter and is clear any form of violence is unacceptable. Lawyers play an important role in upholding the law and ensuring people have access to justice. They are however not immune from criticism.”
8||On the US campaign trail: 'We are watching democracy unfold'Lauren Gambino, political correspondent, Washington DC The political year really began for us in Des Moines, Iowa. What felt like every aspiring Democrat in the party was running for the party’s nomination – and then there was Joe Biden, the frontrunner right up until the games actually began. The Iowa caucuses are always a quirky affair: Iowans gather in gyms and churches to support and persuade others to join their candidate – but this year a disastrous and unprecedented reporting meltdown delayed the results for weeks, effectively nullifying the relevance of the whole byzantine affair. And just like that, the wildest campaign season in modern history was under way. Weeks later, Biden staged an incredible comeback to overtake Bernie Sanders, disappointing Republicans who hoped Democrats would nominate a democratic socialist. The primary was cut short by the arrival of the pandemic. Campaign events ground to a halt. Biden’s headquarters moved from Philadelphia to his basement, where his campaign set up a TV studio. The Trump show began, with the president leading extraordinary briefings on coronavirus, during which he famously suggested disinfectants as a potential cure. (He insists it was a joke.) I was one of just a handful of reporters in Wilmington, Delaware, to see Biden deliver his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention. There was no audience, just us. The fireworks display afterwards was a brief reminder of what it used to feel like to be on the campaign trail – but those moments were few and far between. Now I cover the presidential debates from my living room and only travel with Biden when it’s our turn as part of a pool of reporters who follows the candidate. Protests against racial injustice, the death of supreme court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Trump’s coronavirus diagnosis have all threatened to upend the presidential race and yet they haven’t. With days left before the election, Biden continues to hold an advantage over Trump, despite all that has happened over the last 10 months. Whether Trump can again pull off a stunning upset remains to be seen. Four years ago, I waited for Hillary Clinton at the glass-ceilinged Javits Center in New York, surrounded by women and girls in pant suits. (She ultimately never came.) This year, I may be covering the end of this wild election from a hotel room in Wilmington – or, very possibly, my couch. Oliver Laughland, southern bureau chief, New Orleans Covering this election has been one of the most challenging assignments of my career. And it’s not just because I am driving thousands of miles during the pandemic to visit swing states around the country. Presenting our Anywhere But Washington series, with film-maker Tom Silverstone, has been an eye-opening experience taking me to some of the most fascinating but deeply fractured communities in America. From the bitter fight to win the suburbs of Dallas to the retirement communities of central Florida, where political golf-cart rallies often turn nasty, the divisiveness of the Trump era has been plain to see. Pervasive disinformation has also been a disturbing factor in most of our video dispatches. In Georgia I watched first-hand as voting rights activists battled against QAnon conspiracy theories taking root among some voters, and I interviewed a Republican congressional candidate who stormed out as I asked her about the misinformation she was pushing as part of her campaign. But the consequences of Donald Trump’s war on facts were most poignant when I visited the old offices of the Vindicator newspaper in Youngstown, Ohio, which closed in 2019, making the city the largest in America now without a daily paper. It’s a region that Trump promised to deliver for, and there is now almost no one holding him accountable for his failures there. But in every community I’ve gone to, the enthusiasm and passion for politics has been just as evident. Take Ebony Carter, a 25-year-old first-time candidate running in a rural Georgia seat that Democrats have not contested in six years. She’s out canvassing with her de facto campaign manager – her mum – knocking on every door in her area in a bid to flip the district. “Why am I doing this?” she said during a day of campaigning. “Because somebody has to.” Kenya Evelyn, breaking news reporter The presidential race underscores that “Representation Matters” isn’t some meaningless mantra. Rather, it reflects the urgency to authentically capture the pulse of the people most affected by policy. Black Americans are disproportionately affected by three national crises – a coronavirus pandemic, recession, and racial uprising – yet are still most often the people left out of policy, the communities excluded from news coverage, and the perspectives that are most easily stereotyped and overgeneralised. But Black and brown voters are stepping forward to hold parties and politicians – and anyone else who conflates proximity to a community with being for and of that community – more accountable to their vote. As a member of America’s most reliable voting bloc – Black women – I hope to have captured that demand for African American agency with our Black Voting Power series, highlighting the Black men and women at the forefront of the fight for voting rights and calls for institutional change. We’ve reached the point in the 2020 race when everyone from reporters and pundits to politicos now parachutes in to these same neglected communities. But if this election cycle shows us anything, it’s that proximity to a community doesn’t guarantee a commitment to it, and that call for change will ring out well past election day. Ankita Rao, voting rights editor When we launched our voting rights project, The Fight to Vote, last year, the obstacles facing voters already seemed menacing. A supreme court ruling in 2013 had opened the door for states with deeply entrenched racism to enact new policies around elections without checks and balances. Thousands of polling stations closed, often in majority-Black areas, new voter ID laws introduced confusing restrictions, and voter intimidation was rampant. In 2016, when Donald Trump was elected, the impact of these voter suppression tactics were clear. Then 2020 happened, and with it the pandemic and economic devastation. Suddenly the question was not just will all voters have equal access to voting, but will the country be able to pull off an election at all? Congress fought over money for local officials , leaving the presidential election thoroughly underfunded. Trump railed at mail-in voting, one of the few safe ways to vote as Covid-19 cases continued to rise across the country. Voters scrambled to register in states such as Texas where online registration still isn’t allowed. When the election officially started a few weeks ago, with mail-in voting and early voting starting across the country, we were ready for anything. We mapped out scenarios where Trump refused to concede, and where Democrats unleashed an army of lawyers to make sure each vote was counted. We launched a tracker to count mail-in ballots in battleground states, in an attempt to locate and analyse how ballots were being sent, accepted, rejected and counted. We enumerated the active court cases that will decide when and how votes are counted – cases still going on with just days until 3 November. And we prepared ourselves, and our readers, for a reality in which we would not know who the new president was on election day. We are watching democracy unfold in front of our eyes, despite every effort to stop it. A record number of Americans have voted early, most of them Democrats, in an effort to safeguard their choice and their health. States such as Texas, where politicians have tried to make it as difficult to vote as possible, are seeing record turnout, with new voters casting ballots for the first time. Does this mean the people’s will has succeeded over voter suppression? Definitely not. But after months of scrutinising an election process that’s often taken for granted, it’s a sign that our country values the right to vote above all, and will fight to protect it.
0||A political populism far removed from Donald TrumpAndy Beckett presents an entirely negative picture of populism (This is a moment of truth for rightwing populists – but don’t celebrate yet, 23 October). There are many unfortunate examples in our present age of how destructive populist movements can be. However, he appears unaware of earlier and more positive episodes of populism, in particular the founding of the People’s party in 1891 in the US. This became a significant political party, gaining 8% of the popular vote when it fielded a candidate in the 1892 presidential election. The origins of the People’s party, also known as the Populist party, lay in the exploitation of sharecroppers and tenant farmers by business monopolies and the banking elite. These agrarian workers had been plunged into debt, after taking on loans to fund investments in new farming equipment, when they were hit by droughts and falling crop prices, together with extortionate loan terms and interest rates. The Populist party agitated for massive political reforms, which included the recognition of unions, regulation of the railway industry, the direct election of senators, progressive income tax, and women’s suffrage. These ideas were considered radical at the time, and still are! The current problem with populism is that most of it is not genuine, but is either generated by cynical groups with a hidden interest, or is hijacked by unscrupulous politicians for ulterior purposes. However, there still are populist movements that serve a higher purpose. Be careful not to diss populism per se, as it has a distinguished pedigree. It is the pseudo-populists who need to be challenged and brought to heel. Dr Stephen Blomfield Sheffield • Andy Beckett’s piece on populism was a brilliant discussion of one of the most pressing questions of our time. I only have one small quibble. He says we should remember that populists do sometimes “get re-elected”. But that’s not the point. Populism is democracy’s ugly sister. It flourishes when the primordial democratic promise of political equality is negated by a dysfunctional political system. The answer is the maximum possible diffusion of power. It’s not an accident that federal systems are less likely to be infected by the populist virus than centralised ones. A radical overhaul of our dysfunctional political system is the only way out of the populist trap. David Marquand Penarth, South Glamorgan • I disagree that the “predictable and cautious politics” of the 1990s and 2000s provoked an outburst of populism. It was because these political periods were unstable that there was a backlash. The administrations of John Major and Tony Blair produced boom and bust, two massive recessions with widespread unemployment and widening inequality. The Blair government was still essentially Thatcherite even though it tried to fiddle around the edges to make things a bit better for the least affluent. The inevitable crunch came in 2007 precisely because banking and housing remained unreformed. Then came David Cameron, George Osborne and austerity. Populism is the muddled reaction against 40 years of Thatcherism. David Redshaw Gravesend, Kent • David Runciman highlights the need for politicians with experience and judgment when faced with a crisis like the Covid-19 pandemic (Boris Johnson is learning that in politics you cannot simply ‘follow the science’, 24 October). The problem is that our pluralist democratic system is not designed to produce politicians with the wisdom and practical experience to use facts in a relevant way, but only ones that can gain resonance at the ballot box. Both Boris Johnson and Donald Trump exemplify the deficiency. Derek Heptinstall Westgate-on-Sea, Kent
3||Feeling the heat over Arctic sea iceThe delayed freeze in the Laptev Sea is consistent with the entire Arctic Ocean, which is set for the slowest recovery in the extent of sea ice this autumn, if the current daily trend continues (Alarm as Arctic sea ice not yet freezing at latest date on record, 22 October). This follows on from this summer having the second lowest minimum since 1979, with the early decades significantly above the annual trends during the last few years. Other feedback mechanisms are now starting to take hold of global heating, as current atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations are well beyond the normal Quaternary levels over the last 800,000 years – usually 170 to 280 parts per million, between ice age maximums and interglacial stages, compared with a still accelerating anthropogenic 410 ppm, coupled with the impact from a significant rise in methane and other warming gases. This is why mitigation policies are all we have left. Extinction Rebellion would be better off insulating homes, running public transport cooperatives and campaigning for major economic reforms to pay for this. Starting with taxing carbon intensity, abolishing non-dom tax status and establishing an overseas tax liability for British citizens like the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) does for US citizens wherever they are living. Even in Monaco where too many of our honoured tax exiles live. David Nowell Fellow of the Geological Society, New Barnet, Hertfordshire • Late Arctic ice formation should surprise nobody. Rising temperatures melt ice so less solar energy is reflected and darker surfaces absorb more heat. Trapped greenhouse gases escape, causing more warming and more ice to melt while fires and dying vegetation worsen matters further. Even if net emissions from human activities somehow became negligible, this positive feedback will accelerate heating. Many ideas essential to combat expected heating would make sense even if temperatures were static, fell or if a major food crop failed. Examples include restoring fish stocks, less waste, alternatives to fossil fuels, silviculture, regenerative agriculture and combining conservation with careful use. Instead if adopting such win-win policies, decades have been wasted bickering about who was right. Future generations will find this very difficult to forgive. Iain Climie Whitchurch, Hampshire
9||Ministers must end their attacks on lawyersThe undersigned are practising barristers (some working for central and local government), solicitors, legal academics and retired judges. We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law which ministers and lawyers alike are duty bound to uphold. We invite both the home secretary and the prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future. Lawrence Collins Retired justice of the supreme court, John Dyson Retired justice of the supreme court and former master of the rolls, Robert Walker Retired justice of the supreme court, Richard Buxton Retired lord justice of appeal, Anthony Hooper Retired lord justice of appeal, David Keene Retired lord justice of appeal, Alan Moses Retired lord justice of appeal, Stephen Sedley Retired lord justice of appeal, Theodore Huckle Former counsel general for Wales, Ken Macdonald Former director of public prosecutions, and warden of Wadham College, University of Oxford, Helen Mountfield Principal of Mansfield College, University of Oxford and 791 others
7||Is Rishi Sunak just Osborne in disguise?Reviewing Exit Management by Naomi Booth, Nina Allan writes: “In a genre … traditionally … dominated by men, it is particularly gratifying to read a London novel written by a woman” (Review, 23 October). Has she never heard of Maureen Duffy’s London novels, or, in this century, Zadie Smith and the late Andrea Levy? John Wilson London • I was delighted to read that “guising” is still practised in Scotland (Be ready for digital Christmas, says Scotland’s public health adviser, 22 October), but it is not entirely synonymous with trick or treat. Guising traditionally involved some effort by the participants, eg singing a song or telling jokes, rather than just turning up – an approach that would doubtless win the approval of many government ministers today. Elaine Rowland Chester • It’s a bit rich for Bernard Jenkin, a member of the party that frequently accuses its opponents of political opportunism, to say they have “misunderstood the mood of the country” re free school meals (Report, 25 October). Where is Charles Dickens when we need him? David Marcer Gloucester • Is it just me? If I close my eyes when Rishi Sunak is speaking, I hear the voice of ex-chancellor George Osborne. Derek Beaumont Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire • Re Durham student experiences (Letters, 21 October), when I was there in the 70s at a formal dinner, I cut off the nose of the cheese. The way they all started harrumphing, you’d have thought I’d said: “Bollocks to the Queen.” Ian Garner Keighley, West Yorkshire
6||Scores of councils in England activate half-term food schemesMore councils in England are offering food support for struggling families over the half-term holiday amid public discomfort over the government’s refusal to offer help and growing support for the footballer Marcus Rashford’s campaign At least 78 councils had announced by Sunday evening that they would be activating half-term food schemes, either by offering food vouchers or providing extra financial and logistical support to local food banks and charities. The majority of councils offering help were Labour-run, including Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham, Newcastle, Bristol, Leeds and a number of London boroughs, with a small but growing number of Conservative-run councils breaking ranks over the issue. Tory-run Staffordshire county council, which covers the education secretary Gavin Williamson’s South Staffordshire constituency, said it would provide half-term help to up to 18,000 children, joining Hillingdon – in Boris Johnson’s constituency – Medway, and Kensington &amp; Chelsea, all Conservative-run. Staffordshire’s cabinet member for children and young people, Mark Sutton, said: “We know that times are hard for many families at the moment, with increased pressures on household budgets, so we wanted to help those in greater need to ensure that children can get a decent meal through the holiday.” However, a handful of Conservative-run councils said they would not be offering any help over half-term beyond any existing local safety net schemes either because they did not have the money or because it was not their role to provide food support. Walsall council’s Tory leader, Mike Bird, said: “Unfortunately, I have to be the gatekeeper for Walsall council because we have not got the money … When you keep going to a well and taking water it will run dry.” Jonathan Nunn, Tory leader of Northampton council, said: “We’ve considered it as a council but the costs would be prohibitive for the council to fund it… We don’t currently have a plan to lobby the government so that will probably stay as it is. We’re happy for others to step in and help those who need that help.” Others appeared ideologically opposed to the council stepping in. Responding on Friday on Twitter to a resident who said it was shameful for the government to pay consultants £7,000 a day but not feed poor children, the Tory leader of Rushmoor council, David Clifford, replied: “The shame is the day government rather than parents feed their children – if I were in need I would go to our food bank – it works extremely well and not run by government.” The issue appeared to be dividing municipal Conservatives: opposition councillors in Sutton urged the Liberal Democrat-controlled council to provide meals over half-term for children who received them at school, and the Conservative party branch in North Tyneside praising its local Labour-run council for taking similar action. Conservative-run Hampshire county council said that although it oversaw schools and children’s services, responsibility for helping families in hardship over half-term was the responsibility of district councils in its area. Tory-run Kent also said it would not offer extra support. Wandsworth, which is Conservative-controlled, was questioned by a local charity for restricting its half-term help package to children receiving social work support. Wandsworth food bank tweeted: “So far this scheme only helps children with a social worker. It doesn’t help all the 5,700+ Wandsworth children who receive free school meals.”
3||Belarus 'people’s ultimatum' protest met with violent crackdownBelarusian riot police launched another violent crackdown in Minsk on Sunday evening, throwing stun grenades into crowds of peaceful protesters, chasing people through courtyards and making arrests as they attempted to curtail the 11th consecutive Sunday of protest in the country. At least 100,000 people marched through the centre of the Belarusian capital earlier in the day to give what they called a “people’s ultimatum” to Alexander Lukashenko: step down, or face a nationwide strike that could cripple the economy. Long columns of protesters, wrapped in the red-white traditional Belarusian flag that has become the symbol of the protests, streamed through the city centre, shouting “resign!” and “strike!” As usual, authorities cut off mobile internet across central Minsk, closed metro stations and placed cordons of riot police at key sites. Military and riot control vehicles were positioned throughout the centre and officers in balaclavas and wielding shields stood at almost every intersection, but they did not attack the crowds until the evening. The current wave of discontent was prompted by Lukashenko declaring an overwhelming victory in August presidential elections that were widely believed to be rigged, and then cracking down ruthlessly on those who came out to protest. In the first big rallies in August in response to the crackdown, euphoria and disbelief combined to create a heady excitement that Lukashenko’s days were surely numbered. The authoritarian leader, who has been in charge for 26 years, has since made it clear he does not intend to give up power without a fight. A number of opposition leaders have been forced out of the country or arrested over the past two months, and authorities have threatened to use live ammunition on protesters.The crowds on Sunday were still largely buoyant though, with several bands of drummers providing a thudding musical accompaniment and many people flashing victory signs. Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, who stood against Lukashenko after her husband was imprisoned, was able to act as a lightning rod for protest voters but was forced to flee to neighbouring Lithuania the day after the vote, having been given just 10% in the official tally. Tikhanovskaya has declared herself the legitimately elected leader from Vilnius, and has said she wants to oversee a transition period before arranging a new, free election. “Today at 23:59 the term of the people’s ultimatum will expire, and if the demands are not met, Belarusians will start a national strike,” she said in statement on Sunday. Few in Minsk expect the strike to be successful, however. Strikes in August and September drew some support from workers at big factories but were soon crushed. “I support the strike, but of course I’ll still go to work,” said Sergei, a 29-year-old sales assistant who was draped in a red-and-white flag at the protest on Sunday. “We need to get rid of Lukashenko, but I also need to keep my income.” Whether or not the strike is a success, it is clear that Lukashenko has lost legitimacy among huge swaths of the population, and he appears to have little chance of regaining it. A counter-rally in central Minsk in his support was planned for Sunday but called off late in the week, ostensibly to avoid the risk of clashes with the opposition protesters. Most people felt the real reason was a fear that embarrassingly few people would show up. Lukashenko does retain the loyalty of his security forces, however, and if the strike does not work, the question will be whether the protest movement, which has so far remained almost entirely peaceful, will radicalise or whether it will die down as a result of fatigue and the onset of winter. The renewed violence from authorities on Sunday evening may serve to galvanise the weary protest movement again. The incumbent president has promised, alongside the threats, to launch a constitutional reform process. He even paid a visit to the KGB prison in Minsk this month for so-called negotiations with political prisoners in an attempt to win over part of the opposition. Many have dismissed the initiative as too little too late, but how events will play out remains uncertain. “It’s impossible to predict what will happen in a few months. We don’t know what will happen with the economy, we don’t know where Russia will stand, and we don’t know how far Lukashenko will go with concessions,” said the Minsk-based political analyst Artyom Shraibman. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, called Lukashenko on Saturday, one of the only conversations the Belarusian leader has had with a western politician since his controversial re-election. According to a description of the call published by Lukashenko’s team, the two men discussed “the internal political situations in both Belarus and the US”. The EU has placed sanctions on many in the Belarusian regime since the protests began, and Lukashenko has turned to Vladimir Putin for support. The Russian president is known to dislike Lukashenko but appears to have decided that propping him up is better than allowing a change of power to come from the street. The head of Russia’s spy agency, Sergei Naryshkin, flew to Minsk last week in one of many high-profile Russian visits.
10||Norman Thrower obituaryMy father-in-law, Norman Thrower, who has died aged 100, was professor emeritus in the department of geography at the University of California, Los Angeles. From relatively humble beginnings, Norman became one of the world’s most famous cartographers. In 1957, Norman joined the geography department at UCLA, where he authored, co-authored and edited 11 books, and more than 150 other contributions on cartography and associated geographical discoveries. He served his profession, UCLA and the state of California in many capacities, including as president of the Sir Francis Drake Commission (1975-81), which organised celebrations for the quadricentennial of Drake’s landing in California in 1579. Born in Crowthorne, Berkshire, to Daisy (nee Bayley) and Gordon Thrower, a chef at Broadmoor psychiatric hospital, Norman failed his 11-plus and did not go to secondary school. After winning drawing competitions and attending art school at the University of Reading, he joined the British army aged 21. His artillery division was redeployed to India, where he trained as a cartographer at the Survey of India to draw topographic maps in support of the war effort in Europe. The maps were based on aerial photographs taken over Europe then flown to India, with the return flights bringing back the completed maps. This covered the period of Operation Crossbow, one of the goals of which was to identify V-1 launch ramps using binocular imaging, including in northern France before D-day. The experience played a crucial part in Norman’s post-military career and the development of new mapping techniques introduced in his PhD for illustrating the three-dimensionality of the surface. Norman first met Betty Martin, an officer in the US Army Nurse Corps, in 1945 when her boat docked in London, though they had been pen pals for a number of years. Norman and Betty married in 1947 and, later that year, arrived in Charlottesville, Virginia, living in veterans’ housing while Norman did a BSc and an MSc in geography at the University of Virginia, where he was influenced by Erwin Raisz, an internationally renowned cartographer. With their first two daughters, they then moved to the University of Wisconsin, Madison, where Norman gained his PhD. A final move, to California in 1957, saw the birth of their third daughter. His best known book is Maps and Man (1972), now Maps and Civilization: Cartography in Culture and Society (1999). Later works focused on advances in 17th- and 18th-century cartography by Edmund Halley and Samuel Pepys. And, finally, an editing of A Buccaneer’s Atlas: Basil Ringrose’s South Seas Waggoner, with Derek Howse (1992), a compilation of captured maps of Spain’s Pacific ports whose value to the British crown saved many buccaneers from hanging. Betty died in 1997. Norman is survived by his daughters, Page, Anne and Mary, and five grandchildren.
3||Hopes rise for approval of coronavirus vaccine by end of this yearHopes are rising that a coronavirus vaccine will be approved by the end of the year, with healthcare workers receiving their first dose in early 2021. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US’s leading expert in infectious diseases, said on Sunday it should be known by the end of November or early December if a vaccine was safe and effective. The Irish government added to the growing optimism that a vaccine would soon be available. “I’m increasingly optimistic, as is government, that we will see a vaccine approved in the next couple of months and that in the first half or first quarter of next year it’ll be possible to start vaccinating those most at risk,” Leo Varadkar, Ireland’s deputy prime minister, who is also a doctor, told RTE radio on Sunday. Fauci’s remarks came after a report that the NHS in the UK is preparing to start immunising frontline staff with a vaccine within weeks. The Mail on Sunday published a memo by Glen Burley, the chief executive of a group of hospitals in the Midlands, in which he said NHS care providers had been told to be prepared to start a Covid-19 staff vaccine programme in early December. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff prioritised prior to Christmas,” according to Burley’s message, which was sent earlier this month, the paper reported. However, well-placed NHS sources said that, while hospitals were preparing plans to help roll out any vaccine that is approved, the timescale Burley set out is premature and overly ambitious. “There is no progress at all [on when a vaccine will arrive], no date, no national steer [from NHS England bosses] and only frustration,” said a senior official at one of the major NHS trusts that has been handed a key role in the drive to distribute whichever vaccine is the first to be approved. Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, told MPs and peers that a vaccine would not be available in the UK until the spring. Fauci was asked on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show if Donald Trump’s claims that a Covid-19 vaccine, while not a guarantee, would be coming by the end of the year were true. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” he replied. “The question is, once you have a safe and effective vaccine, or more than one, how can you get it to the people who need it as quickly as possible? “The amount of doses that will be available in December will not certainly be enough to vaccinate everybody. You’ll have to wait several months into 2021.” Healthcare workers are likely to be given priority access to any vaccine, as well as people whose underlying health means they are considered at increased risk of complications if they get Covid-19. “That could start by the end of this year, the beginning of January, February, March of next year. When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be in to the second or third quarter”, Fauci added. A vaccine being developed between scientists and doctors at Oxford University and the drug company AztraZeneca, which is in phase 3 trials, is considered the likeliest candidate to be used first. On Friday, Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, set out a similar timetable to that of Fauci and Varadkar. A vaccine could be available in early 2021, with enough supplies being produced to let many Germans be immunised within six or seven months, he said. Germany’s health ministry plans to create 60 special vaccination centres to ensure the vaccines can be stored at the proper temperature and has asked the country’s 16 federal states to provide addresses for the storage premises by 10 November, the newspaper Bild reported.
11||Ewart Hood obituaryMy father, Ewart Hood, who has died aged 71, was an NHS psychologist and a kind and quietly brilliant man. The son of the Rev John Hood, a Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Peggy (nee Ewart), he was born in Edinburgh and brought up in Perthshire with his brother, Allan. He attended Morrison’s academy in Crieff before studying psychology at Edinburgh University, graduating in 1971. He qualified as a clinical psychologist at the University of Birmingham in 1973. He went on to practise first at Stanley Royd hospital, in Wakefield, where he met his future wife, Denise Robinson, another psychologist. They married in 1979. Ewart was an early advocate of supporting people with mental health problems to live in the community, rather than in institutions. He was never afraid to speak up against injustice - including blowing the whistle about poor practice he witnessed early in his career. In 1978 he moved to Llanederyn health centre, Cardiff, to be senior clinical psychologist in a new practice and one of the first of its kind, based within the general practice department of Cardiff University Medical School. In the 1980s Ewart and Denise, now with two children, moved to Newcastle where Ewart worked part time while caring for us, and my mother went back to work full-time. He worked at St Nicholas (psychiatric) hospital, then as a senior clinical psychologist at the Newcastle district psychology department, working with outpatients from and within GP practices in the west end of Newcastle. Later he became a consultant clinical psychologist at Freeman hospital, Newcastle. He disliked formal teaching but was a popular supervisor on the Newcastle doctorate course for clinical psychology from 1990 to 2004. He was never too busy to take on a trainee. His clients in Newcastle included refugees from conflict in Rwanda and the Congo. When they were too afraid to use an interpreter, he would switch into French. Ewart loved music. As a young child, he learned to play the church organ, sometimes standing in for the organist at Sunday services. As an adult, he played the piano and guitar and sang in the university choir, the Newcastle Anti-Apartheid choir and later the North East Socialist Singers. Ewart retired in 2004. He learned to upholster and to bake bread, as well as taking long-distance cycling trips, tending an allotment and supporting his family. He is survived by Denise and by his children, Peter and me, and by three grandchildren, Elsa, Naomi and Bill, and Allan.
12||Letter: Deirdre Le Faye obituaryIt might encourage some readers to know that Deirdre Le Faye’s great achievement in the field of Jane Austen studies was achieved despite the fact that she had to leave school at 16, her family not being able to afford any higher education, and that she had to earn a living with a full-time job as a British Museum administrator. More daunting is the fact that she had a photographic memory and powers of total recall. She once told me she had reviewed a book by an American scholar and noted more than 200 factual errors. Before she turned to Jane Austen, Deirdre Le Faye did major research work on early child-rearing practices for Hugh Jolly, the paediatrician. Sadly he died before he was able to write it up, as did his doctor wife. So there is a valuable cache of clearly annotated and referenced material ready for a medical historian to write a valuable book on the subject. I can direct them to the material.
12||Forward poetry prize goes to ‘audacious, erotically charged’ The Air YearBritish poets have won all of this year’s Forward prizes for poetry, with Caroline Bird’s “audacious and erotically charged” The Air Year taking best collection, Will Harris’s RENDANG winning best debut, and Malika Booker winning for best single poem. Bird’s sixth collection The Air Year, named for the first 12 months of a relationship before the “paper” anniversary, was announced as the winner of the £10,000 prize in an online ceremony Sunday afternoon. A playwright, and published poet since the age of 15, Bird saw off competition from the acclaimed Native American-Latinx Natalie Diaz and the award-winning Pascale Petit. “It hasn’t sunk in yet, it is very weird,” Bird said of her win. “Obviously, it feels amazing. But it is also unsettling, as I write poetry imagining no one will ever read it. I read it now and I find it quite upsetting, even though some of the poems are funny and lively. You wouldn’t want to watch a video of yourself in distress, and it feels like that. But I guess that is a good sign in some ways, that I don’t want to ever read it again.” Chair of judges, the critic and cultural historian Alexandra Harris described Bird’s poems as “trapeze ropes made with words, swinging us up and out into the unknown”. “A lot of contemporary writing demands sympathy in a rather worthy fashion. She won’t do that,” she added. “The Air Year is the opposite of sentimental, it is brimming with humour.” Written in “a time of complete uncertainty” in her life, Bird set herself the challenge of writing poems starting from a single opening line that she would not change, leading to humorous and often melancholic poems that begin “Nancy found an entire torpedo in the forest”, in Nancy and the Torpedo, or “The 18th-century bawd who sells her daughter’s / virginity / to an Earl. The tired CIA operative who says ‘just do / it’ / and half a village dies”, in her poem about endings, The Final Episode. “At that time in my life, I felt like a cartoon character running in mid-air, only not falling because I hadn’t looked down. Romantically, emotionally, mentally, I did not know what I was doing or where I was going, in all areas of my life. And the poems, as they came out, seemed to want me to land safely,” Bird said. One of the most acclaimed debuts in recent years, Will Harris won the £5,000 Felix Dennis prize for best first collection with RENDANG, which explores his Chinese-Indonesian and British heritage, family ties, language and borders. RENDANG was praised by judges as containing “acute intelligence and mobile grace”. Previous nominee Booker, co-founder of the influencial collective Malika’s Poetry Kitchen, won the £1,000 prize for best single poem with The Little Miracles, documenting her experience of caring for her mother in the aftermath of a stroke: “Since I found mother collapsed on the kitchen / floor, we siblings have become blindfolded mules / harnessed to carts filled with strain, lumbering / through a relentless storm.” Booker had previously refused to write about her mother’s illness but was moved by medical research to “be more present during [visits] with my mother, scrutinising our time together by tuning in as a daughter, which has led to more meaningful and precious interactions, culminating in this poem of witness capturing the reality of my family’s emotional upheaval.” Judges praised The Little Miracles for its “warmth, frustration and humour”. The three poets were selected from 205 collections and 208 single poems submitted. “What we were looking for in the end were collections that could keep growing as the world changed,” said Alexandra Harris. “The best poetry we were reading found ways to connect the unknowable with the ordinary.” Past winners of the Forward prizes include three of the UK’s poet laureates – Carol Ann Duffy, Simon Armitage and Ted Hughes – as well as Seamus Heaney and Claudia Rankine.
2||Tao Geoghegan Hart's shock Giro d'Italia win 'the stuff of comic books'Tao Geoghegan Hart has spoken of the “bizarre” feeling of becoming the fifth Briton to win a Grand Tour with victory in the Giro d’Italia for Team Ineos Grenadiers, whose general manager hailed the win “the stuff of comic books”. The 25-year-old pulled on the pink jersey for the first time on the final podium in Milan after a dramatic closing weekend of the race, which saw he and Team Sunweb’s Jai Hindley – two riders not considered contenders at the outset – starting the last stage level on time, an unprecedented situation in a Grand Tour. Speaking to Eurosport after his victory, Geoghegan Hart said: “It’s bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. “I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is something completely different to that and I think it’s going to take a long time to sink in. “My DS [directeur sportif] told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point.” Hindley, who finished 39 seconds back in second, said: “Of course it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super-proud of the team and how I rode. “It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three weeks I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race to be honest. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies.” Ineos general manager Sir Dave Brailsford spoke of the way Geoghegan Hart’s situation in the team changed following Geraint Thomas’s enforced withdrawal after stage three following a heavy crash: “He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being: ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said: ‘I can do this.’ “The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really. Geoghegan Hart was ahead of Hindley at every time check throughout the final 15.7km time trial, clocking a time of 18 min 19.40secs to confirm his remarkable win. Asked about his future following such a high-profile victory, he said: “I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. “I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated, wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races.” Geoghegan Hart follows Sir Bradley Wiggins, Chris Froome, Thomas and Simon Yates in winning one of the big three stage races on the calendar, delivering Britain’s 11th Grand Tour victory since Wiggins won the Tour de France in 2012, and second in the Giro after Froome won in 2018. Hindley’s Sunweb teammate Wilco Kelderman rounded off the podium, finishing 1min 29sec behind the victor.
2||GB's Tao Geoghegan Hart sensationally claims Giro d'Italia glory after time trialIn the end, Tao Geoghegan Hart’s 39-second victory in the Giro d’Italia ahead of the overnight leader, Australian Jai Hindley, was not the tightest the race has ever seen. That honour remains with the Canadian Ryder Hesjedal’s win by 16sec in 2012. But none of the three Grand Tours has ever gone into its final day so tightly poised, with less than a second dividing Hindley and Geoghegan Hart as they prepared to start Sunday’s brief closing time trial into Milan, after more than 85 hours and over 2,000 miles of racing. On paper, Geoghegan Hart was expected to have the upper hand, and so it proved over the pancake flat course through the Milanese suburbs to the majestic Piazzo Duomo. The 25-year-old Londoner gained time gradually but inexorably on the diminutive Australian, visibly churning a far larger gear as Hindley opted to pedal a smaller ratio with a higher cadence but less power. At the only time check with five kilometres remaining the Londoner had a 22sec lead, meaning the race would be won if he avoided a crash or a puncture. After he negotiated the final corner on slippery wet cobblestones with the utmost care, he became the first rider ever to win the Giro without having worn the pink jersey until the end of the final stage. “My directeur sportif said I was 10sec up and he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew that we were in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the final kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down in a 15km time trial.” Hindley had started 3min after Geoghegan Hart, rode the final kilometre with the look of a man who knew he had lost but when the race had left Palermo 22 days earlier, neither he nor his nemesis had expected to end the race with overall victory in their sights. Geoghegan Hart made his own luck in the final few days, but a curious combination of circumstances set him up for his final assault on the pink jersey. Ineos’s original Giro leader, the defending champion, Richard Carapaz, was drafted into the Tour de France at the last minute due to Geraint Thomas being short of form. Thomas was sent to the Giro as leader instead, but when he crashed on the stage to Mount Etna and broke his pelvis, that left Ineos leaderless. Initially the team focused on stage wins, with Filippo Ganna adding a road race stage to his initial time trial win, and then Jhonatan Narváez of Ecuador, before Geoghegan Hart opened his account on the mountain stage to Piancavallo at the end of the second week. That set up a final few days in which the race boiled down to a duel between Ineos and Sunweb, with Hindley emerging as the German team’s strongest climber ahead of his nominal leader Wilco Kelderman of the Netherlands. Geoghegan Hart’s searing sprint win at Piancavallo, after Sunweb had looked to have taken control, pointed to the young Briton as the rider in form as the race’s biggest climbs hove into view. With the support of his Australian teammate Rohan Dennis he took the fight to Kelderman and Hindley on the majestic climb of the Stelvio Pass last Thursday, before dislodging the Dutchman and moving level with Hindley after winning Saturday’s stage to the Alpine ski resort of Sestriere. That set up Sunday’s pulsating final. Like the Tour de France, won by the 21-year-old Slovenian Tadej Pogacar, this race marked a passing of the generations. The main Italian hopeful, Vincenzo Nibali, never truly made an impression and finished seventh, while another near veteran, the Dane Jakob Fuglsang, also showed little. In contrast, the 22-year-old Portuguese João Almeida led for 15 of the 21 stages before fading in the final few days to finish fourth, while at 24 and 25 respectively Hindley and Geoghegan Hart now have the future ahead of them. The Giro will also be remembered for the resurgence of the Frenchman Arnaud Démare, winner of four sprint stages, and for the effect that coronavirus had on the race. Positive tests for Covid deprived the Giro of two big favourites, Simon Yates of Great Britain and Steven Kruijswijk of the Netherlands, resulting in a more open race that gave space to the young hopefuls. On Sunday, the early pace was set by Ganna; the world time trial champion was viewed as the inevitable winner beforehand, and his blisteringly fast time of 17min 16sec gave him four stage wins in the race, and landed Ineos their seventh stage win, making this the British team’s most successful Grand Tour ever, as well as their 11th Grand Tour title. For a team which had been deprived of its leader as day four, it was quite a turnaround.
13||Ervine Glenny obituaryMy former colleague Ervine Glenny, who has died aged 97, was a materials engineer who, through his research and subsequent management of engineers at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), helped to pioneer the advent of jet engines and the use of carbon fibre composites to lighten aircraft and other structures. He was born in Belfast, the son of Elizabeth (nee Ervine), a housewife, and Robert Glenny, a police constable. He was named Robert, but was always known by his middle name, Ervine. He was educated at Methodist college, Belfast, and won a bursary to study chemical engineering at Queen’s University in the city, where he met his wife to be, Joan Reid, who was taking the same course. He began his research in 1947 with the National Gas Turbine Establishment (NGTE), which had just been formed from Power Jets, the company created by Frank Whittle, who invented the concept of gas turbines which form the basis of jet engines. By exploring the high temperature properties of materials suitable for gas turbines, Robert was able to contribute to their commercialisation and moved with NGTE to Farnborough, Hampshire, in 1955 to be close to the RAE, which specialised in all aspects of aircraft design. In 1970, Ervine moved to the NPL in Teddington, south-west London, to become superintendent of the materials application division and in 1973 he moved back to Farnborough to become head of the materials department at RAE. Ervine’s advice was always sound and well balanced and his encouragement and support of all his engineers enabled innovations to be pursued and commercialised. These included high strength, lightweight carbon fibres and he encouraged Bill Watt and other colleagues to continue developing their invention and its application initially to aircraft but then to other forms of transport. Upon his retirement from RAE, Ervine acted as a project monitor and assessor for the Department of Trade and Industry. One Sunday in 2003, Ervine and I travelled to Stansted airport to attend a project meeting in Prague. When Ervine showed his passport at the airline counter, the official said: “I am very sorry, Dr Glenny, but you have insufficient validity left on your passport so we cannot fly you to Prague.” In reply, Ervine uttered, without hesitation: “I am going to home to rejoin my 80th birthday party.” This quiet, unassuming person helped, in his own way, to make transport lighter and more energy efficient, a legacy from which we are all benefiting. Joan died in 2017. Ervine is survived by his children, Helen and Michael, and grandson, Jon.
2||Giro d'Italia: Geoghegan Hart seals shock win after time-trial – as it happenedAll the latest reaction to Geoghegan Hart’s victory: And with that, I’ll be off. Bye! Ladies and gentlemen, I give you Tao Geoghegan Hart. If you haven’t already read William Fotheringham’s piece on the man who became our champion, now’s your chance: Jai Hindley, who started the day in pink and ended it in second place, has a chat: Of course it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super proud of the team and how I rode. It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three week’s I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race to be honest. We can be super proud of what we accomplished. I’d just like to thank the guys on the team, the whole team, everyone involved. It’s a massive operation to get here and to be on the podium in Milan. A lot of effort and time has gone into it and I really appreciate what the team has done to get me here. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies. All of today’s key numbers: Stage 21 1. Filippo Ganna (IT) Ineos Grenadiers 17:16 2. Victor Campenaerts (BEL) NTT Pro Cycling Team +32 3. Rohan Dennis (AUS) Ineos Grenadiers “ 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +41 5 Miles Scotson (AUS) Groupama - FDJ “ 6. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team +44 7. Chad Haga (USA) Team Sunweb “ 8. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +46 9. Kamil Gradek (POL) CCC Team +47 10. Jan Tratnik (SLO) Bahrain - McLaren “ 11. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +55 12. Martijn Tusveld (NED) Team Sunweb +58 13. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) Ineos Grenadiers “ 14. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal +1:03 15. Maciej Bodnar (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +1:04 Overall leaders 1. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers 85:40:21 2. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb +39 3. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +1:29 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck-Quick-Step +2:57 5. Pello Bilbao (ESP) Bahrain-McLaren +3:09 6. Jakob Fuglsang (DEN) Astana Pro Team +7:02 7. Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Trek - Segafredo +8:15 8. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe +8:42 9. Fausto Masnada (ITA) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +9:57 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (AUT) Bahrain - McLaren +11:05 11. Domenico Pozzovivo (ITA) NTT Pro Cycling Team +11:52 12. Rafal Majka (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +20:31 13. Sergio Samitier (ESP) Movistar Team +35:29 14. James Knox (GBR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +37:41 15. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +38:10 16. Aurélien Paret-Peintre AG2R La Mondiale +45:04 (FRA) 17. Larry Warbasse (USA) AG2R La Mondiale +53:25 18. Ben Swift (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers +57:36 19. Antonio Pedrero (ESP) Movistar Team +59:36 20. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team +1:02:57 King of the Mountains 1. Ruben Guerreiro (POR) EF Pro Cycling 234 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 157 3. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal 122 4. Rohan Dennis (AUS) INEOS Grenadiers 119 5. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team 71 6. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb “ 7. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb 55 8. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 48 9. Jonathan Castroviejo (ESP) INEOS Grenadiers 45 10. Einer Rubio (COL) Movistar Team 44 Points leaders 1. Arnaud Démare (FRA) Groupama - FDJ 233 2. Peter Sagan (SVK) BORA - hansgrohe 184 3. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step 108 4. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 87 5. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team 78 6. Andrea Vendrame (ITA) AG2R La Mondiale “ 7. Diego Ulissi (ITA) UAE Team Emirates 77 8. Simon Pellaud (SUI) Androni Giocattoli - 70 Sidermec 9. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 66 10. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe 61 11. Here are the final standings in the overall classification: One thing has gone flat today: the Prosecco that is being given to the winners. Two bottles have so far been presented, and neither really did any spraying at all despite some enthusiastic shaking. Dave Brailsford has a chat about his team’s latest success: When we started out Geraint was the leader. What happened here was Filippo [Ganna] set the scene. Coming here with a rainbow band, first day, got the TT sorted, got the pink jersey. Then a massive disappointment with Geraint going home. Then when Filippo won that road stage in the hills, everyone was like, ‘Wow, that is incredible.’ It inspired everybody. It opened the race up. Everybody race the stages, give everybody an opportunity, and I think Tao liked that. He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said, ‘I can do this.’ The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really. What I like about it is, we’ve done the training, we’ve done the defensive style of riding, and we’ve won a lot doing that, but it’s not much fun, really, compared to this, is it? What the guys have done here, all the team here has raced, and at the end of the day it’s all about racing. We’re the Grenadiers now. A lot of people have contributed to this victory. I can’t think about this without thinking about Nico [Portal]. Everybody in this team has supported him along the way and they deserve a lot of credit for that. Here’s a report on today’s action: Our champion gives his first interview, and is asked how he feels to have won this thing: Bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is someting completely different to that and I think ti’s going to take a long time to sink in. My DS told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point. Is this the start of a long and great career? I don’t know and I don’t really care. I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated. Wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races. Everyone’s always nice about people who have just won stuff, but there is such genuine warmth being expressed for Tao Geoghegan Hart both by people at the race and others at home. “Shades of Lemond and Fignon here,” writes Guy Hornsby. “I feel for Jai Hindley, who’s been incredible all race, but Tao has been relentless this last week. A Tour won by a wafer-thin margin, but they don’t call it the Race of Truth for nothing when the clock is on. What a story.” Let’s not forget about Filippo Ganna, who has completed a clean sweep of the time trials on this year’s Giro by an astonishing 32sec margin. He and Tao Geoghegan Hart pose for photographs in front of the duomo, quite the one-two for Ineos Grenadiers. Jai Hindley’s race is over, and he has finished second! His has been a phenomenal race, but not quite enough for glory. What a moment for Tao Geoghegan Hart, Grand Tour champion! Tao Geoghegan Hart crosses the finish line in 18min 14sec, the 13th best time of the day, but he will surely now win the 2020 Giro d’Italia! Up to 24sec now, with Geoghegan Hart just 1.5km from the finish line. Neither of the overall top two are threatening to win the stage, but the Londoner is doing exactly what was required of him today. Into the last 3km for Tao Geoghegan Hart, and his overall lead is still expanding. Up to about 20sec now. Geoghegan Hart has a 17sec lead now, with just 4km to go, very nearly a conclusive lead. Hindley crosses the line at the 10.3km mark, and he’s well down on our leader, Filippo Ganna, who is not going to be shifted off that bar stool any time soon. Tao Geoghegan Hart is 10sec ahead! With 6.3km to go, he seems to be on his way here! Joao Almeida crosses the line in 17min 57sec, enough for fourth place (for now) on the day, and I think in overall classification as well. We won’t really know who is in the box seat here until both riders have passed the 10.3km marker. Tao Geoghegan Hart is about 1km away from it as I type. And so, to the race leader (just). Jai Hindley, clad almost entirely in rosa, never mind the maglia, is the last on the road! Tao Geoghegan Hart is on his bike and on the road! We are 20 minutes away from the end of this year’s Giro. What’s it to be? Wilco Kelderman, Friday’s maglia rosa holder, is on his way. Just two to go now! Nobody for some time has made any dent in the top three either at the 10.3km marker (Ganna, Haga and Campenaerts the top three there) or at the finish (Ganna, Campenaerts and Dennis). When riders launch themselves down the ramp organisers are playing some genuinely godawful Europop, which I suppose is one way of encouraging them to go as fast as they can. “I‘m sure its more comfortable that the saddle on his bike!” says Andrew Benton of Ganna’s bar stool, and this I’m sure is true. “Best saddle for me was the one on my Raleigh roadster sit-up-and-beg bike, wide and comfy and with a big curly spring at the front to ensure it soaked up the bumps.” Vincenzo Nibali is on his way, along with Jakob Fuglsang and Joao Almeida. There are only four riders still waiting. The crunch is coming. “Though an urban contre la montre is hardly likely to win over new fans, this Giro has been spectacular,” says Gary Naylor. “The riders may not be the very best, but competition has been fierce and fair. And Italy? Just wow.” There’s been great drama and great scenery, to be sure. Perhaps a bit more to come (drama, at least). I’m not sure I’ve seen this bettered. Filippo Ganna certainly deserves better than a bar stool. They really could have given the leader a more comfortable place to sit. Into the top 10 we go! Fausto Masnada of Deceuninck-Quick Step is the first second (sorry, counting error) of them on this bike, a man whose name it is impossible to read, think or say without having to fight the urge to insert a Que in the middle. Domenico Pozzovivo, the 37-year-old Italian, has just got under way. He’s 11th in the overall standings, so we now move from one to three minutes between riders as we head into the top 10. Rohan Dennis crosses the line in 17min 48sec, 32sec slower than the leader but good enough, for now, for third. If Ganna wins this stage, it would be the seventh stage win for Ineos Grenadiers on this year’s Giro. They have never previously won more than six on any Grand Tour. They also have a very good chance to win the whole thing in the shape of Tao Geoghegan Hart, which would make this a very good day indeed for them. We should know precisely how the chips have fallen within the hour. Rohan Dennis, the Australian who came second in the time trial on stage 14, is on his way, and has just been timed 20 seconds behind Ganna at the split. Ganna also won the individual time trial on the first stage of the Giro, and the individual time trial that formed Stage 14, and the individual time trial title at the world championships last month. To say he has been dominant in this particular discipline of late would be to understate what’s been going on. He also won stage five on this year’s Giro, a hilly 225km, just to prove he’s not a one-trick pony. Filippo Ganna crosses the line in a time faster than anyone else to have tried the course by a margin of over half a minute! He was clocked at 17min 16sec, 32sec faster than Campenaerts. It is very cloudy in Lombardy this afternoon, and the downside of having a finish line outside the cathedral is that most of the stage is spent on a variety of unexciting A-roads on the approach to central Milan. There is, in short, a lot of grey about. Filippo Gana mashes the rest at the split! His time after 10.3km is 20sec faster than Haga’s, and Campenaerts’ spell in the leader’s seat is surely about to end. We get an official time at 10.3km, to judge how well a rider’s doing while they’re still a while from the finish line. Chad Haga was the fastest so far over 10km, crossing that line a second before Campanaerts, but by the end he was 12 seconds behind and sits fourth. Victor Campanaerts is the clubhouse leader, but Filippo Ganna is on his way and will have him in his sights. Ganna is not only Italian but local, raised on the shores of Lake Maggiore, and you can tell people are excited about him because he is being followed by two motorbikes, three cars and a helicopter. Well then. The last day of the Giro d’Italia, and it’s more poised than Grace Kelly at a tea party. Or something. Tao Geoghegan Hart, the Londoner with a name that’s not as exotic as it looks, is level at the top of the standings with Jai Hindley but is reckoned to be a better time triallist. Both have completed the first 20 stages in an official time of 85 hours, 22 minutes and seven seconds. So who will end up as champion? Time will tell, what little of it is taken by the 15.7km route into Milan, ending at the Piazza del Duomo. Firstly, then, welcome! Secondly, here’s some information that may come in useful, starting with the route profile: Here’s the top 10 in the general classification as it stood this morning: 1. Jai Hindley (Aus) Sunweb 85” 22’ 07s 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers = 3. Wilco Kelderman (Ned) Sunweb +1m32s 4. Bilbao Pello (Es) Bahrain-McLaren +2m51s 5. Joao Almeida (Por) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +3m14s 6. Jakob Fuglsang (Den) Astana +6m 32s 7. Vincenzo Nibali (It) Trek-Segafredo +7m46s 8. Patrick Konrad (Aut) Bora-Hansgrohe +8m05s 9. Fausto Masnada (It) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +9m24s 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (Aut) Bahrain McLaren +10m08s The first rider got going at 1.40pm (12.40pm GMT), but it’ll take a while to get to the leaders. Here then are the start times for those last 10 riders (in local time, so subtract one for BMT): 3.45pm Hermann Pernsteiner 3.48pm Fausto Masnada 3.51pm Patrick Konrad 3.54pm Vincenzo Nibali 3.57pm Jakob Fuglsang 4.00pm Joao Almeida 4.03pm Pello Bilbao 4.06pm Wilco Kelderman 4.09pm Tao Geoghegan Hart 4.12pm Jai Hindley And here’s William Fotheringham’s report on yesterday’s action, which also tees up today’s: Tao Geoghegan Hart is on the threshold of Giro d’Italia victory going into Sunday’s time trial stage into Milan. After winning Saturday’s mountain stage at the Sestriere ski resort, the 25-year-old, London-born Scot is level on time with the new race leader, Jai Hindley of Australia, an unprecedentedly tight and tense situation after more than 85 hours of racing. No Grand Tour has been this close going into the final day, but Geoghegan Hart is a stronger time triallist; a single second’s advantage would suffice, meaning that he will be expected to give Great Britain its second Giro d’Italia win in three years after Chris Froome’s last-ditch victory in 2018. For a rider who had expected to support either Richard Carapaz or Geraint Thomas in an attempt for overall victory, it is an astonishing twist of fortune. Much more here:
13||Bill Fearns obituaryMy father, Bill Fearns, who has died aged 99, was a marine engineer whose long career encompassed designing vessels that were used in the second world war, including the D-day landings. Born in Dundee into a family of eight, to James Fearns, a foundry labourer, and his wife, Jessie (nee Farquharson), a jute spinner, Bill was raised in a tenement. He attended Stobswell school, but left aged 14 to train as a draughtsman in the Robb-Caledon shipyard, gaining qualifications at Dundee Technical Institute at night. At the age of 15 with his brother, Alex, he played bagpipes in the massed bands at the 1936 Hampden Cup final, something he was always proud of. During the war, now a qualified naval architect and therefore in a reserved occupation, in 1941 Bill was seconded to Clydeside, designing U-Boat-hunting corvettes and working on the D-day Mulberry harbours. After the war, he worked on Martin-Baker ejection seats at RAE Farnborough, but in 1948, after marrying Margaret Shand, Bill returned to a booming John Brown’s on Clydeside, working on the Cunard ships Saxonia, Carmania and Franconia. In 1956, he became a surveyor with Lloyd’s Register in Greenock and was transferred in 1960 to Hamburg, West Germany. Bill worked on reparation ships for Israel and was surveyor on the rebuilding of the SS Uganda and SS Nevasa to become educational cruise ships, as well as on the first custom-designed container ships. In 1973 Bill went to Singapore to head its operation replacing expat specialists with native Singaporeans. He enjoyed the occasional round of golf with Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s prime minister. When he returned to Lloyd’s Register in London at the end of the 1970s, shipbuilding was changing dramatically. London’s docklands were closing down and computers were now being used to assist with surveying. After retiring in 1984, he played golf at his home in South Woodham Ferrers, Essex, sang in the local choir and played in several pipe bands, including the Rayleigh British Legion Band. Margaret died in 2015. Bill is survived by his children, Jane and me, and by two grandchildren and a great grandchild.
0||Nearly 60 million Americans cast early vote as record-shattering turnout expectedTheir enthusiasm reflected in post boxes stuffed with mail-in ballots and by hours-long queues at voting sites across the country, by early Sunday almost 60 million Americans had cast a vote in the presidential election, even as the candidates scrambled to deliver their closing message more than a week before election day, 3 November. The vast numbers of early voters in the most consequential election in generations is fuelling what promises to be record-shattering turnout. Not since 1908 have more than 65% of eligible US voters actually exercised that right. Behind the eye-popping headline figures lie clues to why voters are so engaged, so early. Democrats hold a sizeable advantage in the early returns. The reason, analysts believe, is simply Donald Trump, and by extension his handling of the coronavirus pandemic that has infected 8.5 million people and killed 224,000. “The pandemic is part of it, particularly for older voters,” said Dr Larry Sabato, founder and director of the University of Virginia’s Center for Politics. “I’m pushing 70 myself, and it has to be a part of your calculations, we’re kind of vulnerable. “But to me, that doesn’t explain the lines. People really have bought into the understanding that if this isn’t the most important election we’ve ever had, it’s one of several. People are determined to express themselves and we all know why: Donald Trump. That includes his base: the cult is going to support the cult leader. But there are more, maybe quite a bit more, who want to end this nightmare. And that’s the way people put it. If you don’t like the word I’m sorry – that’s just the way it is.” More than one third of the votes already returned come from the three most populous states, California, Texas and Florida, according to the US Elections project, an independent data analysis by the University of Florida. California is staunchly Democrat, and its 55 electoral college votes are all but a lock for former vice-president Joe Biden. The race for the 38 votes in Texas is closer, but leaning strongly Republican. That leaves the swing state of Florida and its 29 electoral college votes as a glittering prize. So far, from 5.3m mail-in and in-person votes recorded, representing almost 40% of 14 million registered voters, Democrats hold an advantage of more than 7%, or around 400,000 votes. “It is our most mega, mega state,” Sabato said. “I like to put it that way, and there’s no way practically for Trump to get elected without Florida.” The president voted in Florida on Saturday. “If he loses there it will be obvious he’s going to lose,” Sabato said. “If Biden loses Florida, though, it is not the end for him. He has quite a number of other paths. [But] the problem with losing Florida is it is an indication that you’re likely not to do well in other states – we’re talking about Georgia, North Carolina, even parts of the midwest.” The Democrats’ lead in Florida appears to be amplified nationally, at least in the 19 states that release party affiliations with their statistics. In those states, registered Democrats have sent in more than 13m votes to Republicans’ 7.4m, with 6m votes from minor or no party affiliates making up the remainder. Across all states, the University of Florida reports, votes cast early amount to more than 42% of those from the entire 2016 election. In some places the figure is even higher, such as Hays county, Texas, where 73,277 early votes are several hundred more than the total four years ago. Sabato cautioned Republicans not to rely on the tradition of Democrats’ early voting advantages being wiped out when their own supporters turn out on election day. Trump “sure can win in the swing states”, he said, “Trump people who weren’t registered or didn’t vote the last time, they have spent four years identifying them. That’s been the hidden campaign that people haven’t talked about. “But you’re taking a tremendous chance when you put all your chips on the election day vote. Suppose there’s a hurricane barreling toward Florida. Almost certainly there will be really bad weather in at least a couple of swing states, you know, lots of things happen in life, and maybe the spike up in coronavirus will keep a lot of those older Republicans away on the day.” Michael McDonald, a professor of political science who maintains the University of Florida database, told the Guardian’s Fight to Vote project extraordinarily brisk early voting had handed Democrats a clear advantage, noting that the party’s supporters had not only submitted significantly larger numbers of ballot requests, but were also returning them at a higher rate than Republicans. Like Sabato, however, McDonald also urged caution. “The irony here is Democrats are actually doing Republicans a favour,” he said. “It should benefit Republicans who are trying to vote on election day that the Democrats have done them this favour of not standing in line in front of them.”
4||John Kerr's letters to the Queen's private secretary: 'A raw display of devastation'In the cryptic taxonomy of archives, the relationship between Sir John Kerr and the Queen stretches beyond the palace letters and into obscure files scattered throughout the National Archives of Australia and elsewhere. The most surprising of these is a new set of letters between Kerr and Sir Martin Charteris in the National Archives of Australia. From all these archives – in personal letters, Kerr’s rambling handwritten notes, and his unguarded personal reflections – a common theme emerges: the involvement of the palace in every step Kerr took, and every decision he made, regarding the dismissal of Gough Whitlam and its gathering aftermath, including even his own resignation. It is impossible to separate Kerr’s decisions from his intractable view of his “duty” to the monarch and the monarchy, presented to him so clearly in the months before the dismissal by Queen’s private secretary, the unctuous Charteris. Charteris had worked that sense of duty perfectly, most notably in his reassurance to Kerr that whatever decision he was to make, it could only do the monarchy good. Kerr’s decisions were in this sense entirely bounded by considerations of his view of the interests of the Queen and what was best for the monarchy. There was, quite simply, no decision that Kerr would make without what he saw as the imprimatur of the palace. How could it have been otherwise? For Kerr, his duty defined his decisions. Soon after the release of the palace letters, several previously unpublished letters from one of those obscure files were unexpectedly and quietly released by the archives, nine years after I first requested it. This file, carrying the incongruous title “Correspondence between the prime minister and the governor-general on the governor-general’s resignation”, contained several letters between Kerr and Charteris that were not included with the palace letters released by the archives with such fanfare following the high court decision. Apart from anything else, this raises the significant question of how many more of these historic letters lie elsewhere in the archives, imperfectly labelled and unseen, which ought to form part of the broader palace letters collection. The newly released documents consist of several anguished letters, drafted and redrafted by Kerr to Charteris in 1977 in the months before his reluctant resignation, and a single letter from Charteris in reply. They tell a poignant story of personal decline. These letters provide a snapshot of the distressed end of Kerr’s term as governor general, of his deteriorating relationship with the palace, and of his dramatic turn against Malcolm Fraser, as those who had encouraged and cajoled him in the months before the dismissal began to move against him. In the early months after the dismissal, in the afterglow of the successful revival of the reserve powers of the Crown, Kerr describes the view from the government, and “encouraged” by the palace, that he “should, indeed, must stay”. It is essential that he “avoid appearing to concede error” in any way about his dismissal of Whitlam. As Kerr navigates the shifting fortunes in his position, a detailed handwritten note prepared by him in April 1976 reveals the role of “the palace”, Charteris, and Prince Charles, as part of a select group of informal advisers with whom he discussed his future as governor general. Kerr sought advice from Prince Charles, the palace, Sir Robert Menzies, Sir Anthony Mason, prime minister Fraser, and Sir Garfield Barwick. They had all urged him to remain as governor general because, “(1) what I did was the right thing to do and (2) resignation … would leave the impression that I regretted what I did”. Despite the private professions of support and encouragement, as the months pass and the protests against him continue, Kerr perceives a change. Privately, he writes of his growing fear that “the Government, or some of its members, may get tired of defending me … and encourage me to go”. And if they did, Kerr would not go easily. He would not even consider resigning without a new position to go to. In a sign of his faltering judgment as his concern for his position grows, Kerr imagines that Fraser might consider appointing him as Australia’s high commissioner to the United Kingdom. “London might be the best place to spend a few years,” he muses. It is hard to understand how Kerr could have entertained the idea that after such intense political controversy, he could be appointed to a plum diplomatic role by the government he had installed in office just months earlier. In an extraordinary letter to Charteris in late 1976, when his relationship with Fraser is already splintering, Kerr raises the possible use of the reserve powers against the government. Kerr writes that Fraser faces several options for the next election, including a half-Senate election, or an early election for the House of Representatives. He sets out the possibility, raised by some commentators, that “because of my view that the Governor-General has a real discretion”, he ought to consider whether there is a case for invoking the reserve powers to deny Fraser such an early election. Kerr reminds Charteris, with the air of one with a shared understanding, that these powers exist and are available to him. Charteris’s response is emphatic, and quite unlike his benign insistence on the existence of the reserve powers, and even of their possible beneficial use, just the previous year. “I hope that this possibility will not arise, both for your own sake and also I think for the sake of the Crown,” he writes, firmly closing off that discussion. By 1977, Kerr’s behaviour at public events was also becoming a liability. That was the year he landed face-down in the mud at the Tamworth Show as he attempted to place the winning medallion around the prized cow “Lovedale Posh”, all of it captured by a waiting photographer. The front-page images of the governor general pinioned under the cow’s hoof won a Walkley award. There was a memorable repeat performance at the Melbourne Cup later that year when Kerr, in an ill-fitting top hat and tails, struggled to remain upright as he awarded the cup to the owners of the winning horse. It was a sad sight of a public decline (now a much-watched YouTube clip called, “the Governor-General drunk at the Melbourne Cup”). Kerr’s inadvertent burning of the carpet at Victoria’s Government House during a short visit, when he tripped over the heater in the middle of the night and woke to find the carpet smouldering, no doubt also caused ripples of anxiety in vice-regal circles. And so, it is hardly surprising that by 1977 the Queen had joined the list of those who wished the governor general to make an early retirement. In little more than a year he had gone from saving the Queen from embarrassment to being the embodiment of that embarrassment. Kerr’s greatest fear under Whitlam, his removal from office, would now ensue under Malcolm Fraser. Kerr’s forced resignation was, to him, the ultimate betrayal by Fraser, whose political fortunes during the 1975 crisis his unprecedented actions had assured. The newly released cache of letters and drafts to Charteris is a raw display of devastation. In an extraordinarily indiscreet draft letter, Kerr writes that Fraser had never given him the support that “I have been entitled to have”, and that now, “victory achieved”, Fraser is “happy for me to go”. The well-honed vituperation that Kerr once deployed against Whitlam he turns towards Fraser, “a stern, distant, arrogant man determined to rule completely and not able to relax in conversation with me as Mr Whitlam was able to do”. Whitlam is now, apparently, not so bad after all. This is an edited extract from The Palace Letters: The Queen, the governor-general, and the plot to dismiss Gough Whitlam by Jenny Hocking, out 27 October (Scribe, $32.99)
14||'Getting burgers delivered generally sucks': Adam Liaw rates the best and worst food to order inThe unique conditions of 2020 have seen eating habits change across the globe. Alongside the sourdough preppers and physically distanced diners, perhaps the biggest difference of all can be seen in the world of home delivery. For some cities in lockdown the only life on the streets has been thousands of scooters, cyclists and drivers zipping from restaurant to house, feeding families and keeping businesses running. But most food wasn’t made to be sealed in plastic and bounced on the back of a scooter for 20 minutes before it gets to you. Let me take you through a few delivery favourites and their pros and cons in search of the answer to which food reigns supreme in the world of home delivery. Pizza: 6/10 Pizza is the O.G. delivery food, which is why it’s so surprising that it’s not a particularly good one. Steaming a baked product in an insulated bag after it’s cooked is not exactly keeping it in prime condition. The heavily processed chain-store varieties get away with it because you’re not expecting perfection, but the problem is I’m a snob and like my fancy Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana-approved pizza to arrive as it would fresh from its wood-fired oven. The saving grace is that pizza reheats exceptionally well. After I’ve placed my order I turn my oven on as hot as it goes. When the pizza arrives, it goes straight on to a tray and into the oven for a couple of minutes to bring it back to its original glory. This method works for chain-store pizzas, too (though their original glory isn’t quite as glorious). Lasagne: 8/10 Why there hasn’t been a family-sized lasagne delivery service that has taken the world by storm and become some kind of billion-dollar tech unicorn through this Covid period is quite beyond me. Pasta is *OK* for delivery but it really is better freshly prepared. The exceptions, however, are the “al forno” baked varieties of which lasagne is the undisputed king. It might be a little time-consuming to make at home, but it can be prepared relatively easily and in bulk in restaurants. Combine this with its excellent deliverability and it’s a wonder why Italian restaurants haven’t pivoted to this sooner. Fine dining: 🤷🏻♂️/10 With restaurants severely restricted in what they can serve, many fine-dining establishments have pivoted to home delivery. Some do it well, others not so well, so it’s hard to give this one a score. While it’s good to see many restaurants giving it a go, I can’t help but feel that fine dining is more about the experience than the food alone. A bit like watching Hamilton on the telly, it might be OK as a novelty but it really isn’t the same as being there. Burgers: 3/10 The major burger chains have all jumped on the home-delivery wagon as a source of revenue, but getting burgers delivered generally sucks. The fries are irredeemable, any semblance of freshness has wilted to mush, and the sauces and meat juices have soaked into the bun, destroying any integrity it may once have had. If you must send for burgers, try to keep them as simple as possible. A simple cheeseburger – the smaller the better – will roughly approximate a White Castle-style steam-grilled slider after the trauma of delivery. Load up on these and leave the fancy burgers and fried sides for dining in. Sushi: 8/10 Sushi began life as delivery food. It was originally a product of packing fish in rice for weeks long road transport by horse and cart. The fermentation of the rice preserved the fish, and that souring is mimicked by the vinegared rice used in modern sushi. Even the nigiri sushi that we see whizzing around on conveyor belts these days was originally sold door-to-door by a man named Hanaya Yohei who in the 1800s wandered the streets of what is today Tokyo’s Ginza district selling rice balls he moulded by hand and topped with pieces of raw fish. Sushi’s delivery credentials are well established, but its main benefit is that it’s served at room temperature, meaning that the insulation and transportation process doesn’t generate excess heat or steam. Rolls are likely to fare better than nigiri, as balancing fish on top of rice is not a process designed to survive transport across these mean streets. Chinese/Thai: 3/10 – 7/10 You might think it’s strange that I’m lumping these together, but there’s such a variety of Chinese cuisines that even keeping those into one category is weird enough, so you may as well throw the stir-fried Thai takeaways in there as well. My issue with these is twofold. I’m no fan of the “pick your meat and sauce” Thai-ish takeaways at the best of times, so how they’re delivered doesn’t matter much to me. But one thing the various Chinese and Thai cuisines have in common is that they thrive on variety and the juxtaposition between the different characteristics and textures of dishes, and that’s something that delivery doesn’t do justice. A braised dish might arrive in good condition, but a crisp-fried fish or chicken won’t. Soup will need to be reheated, and stir-fried dishes will lose much of their wok hei. It won’t stop me ordering good Chinese or Thai food for delivery, but having it in a restaurant will be so much better. Curry: 9/10 Getting slow-braised dishes from the subcontinent delivered is perhaps even better than cooking them yourself. There’s little difference between the delivery version and fresh in the restaurant for most of the wet dishes, but anything from the tandoor will suffer from the journey. I reheat breads like naan and paratha on a hot, dry grill pan after they arrive, and can confirm it’s a step worth doing. Dumplings: 10/10 If I had to pick a favourite food to order in it would be dumplings. Dumplings are the *chef’s kiss* of home delivery foods, and they’ve been hiding in plain sight the whole time. While many of us have missed the joys of circulating yum cha trolleys over the past few months, if you think about it getting delivery is kind of the same thing except the trolley is a scooter and it travels a greater distance. Re-steam them if you want them piping hot, or even just give them a zap in the microwave. Steamed foods thrive in the steamy environment of packaging and home delivery, so break out the lazy susan and teapot and gird your loins for yum cha at home.
15||Bush and koalas found to be threatened by 'gratuitous' NSW land-clearing planTens of thousands of hectares of bush could be at risk under a New South Wales government proposal to allow rural landholders to clear up to 25 metres of land from their property’s fence line, analysis by WWF-Australia shows. The NSW government announced this month it planned to amend its Rural Fires Act to allow clearing without an approval on rural property boundaries to reduce bushfire risk. The proposal, which was not one of the 76 recommendations from the NSW bushfire inquiry, prompted alarm it could lead to broad-scale clearing of endangered forest and habitat and was called “anti-science” by the independent MLC Justin Field. WWF-Australia used spatial data to examine how much forest could be exposed under the proposed changes in four local government areas: Clarence Valley, Port Stephens, Shoalhaven and Wollondilly. It found if all rural property holders cleared to the maximum extent, 44,293ha of forest could be at risk in those four council areas, 32,609ha of that in Clarence Valley. The analysis found 12,000ha of at-risk forest in those regions was high quality koala habitat unless the state government imposed conditions to protect it. Martin Taylor, a conservation scientist at WWF-Australia, said there would be landholders who would not clear their land if the proposal passed the state parliament. “But this is what is at risk of being cleared if they go ahead and do it,” he said. “It’s gratuitous. You’re fragmenting forests even more than they are already. Particularly for koalas, it makes it harder for them to get around.” NSW laws already allow property owners to clear trees within 10 metres of a house or other building, and shrubs within 50 metres, to mitigate bushfire risk. The proposed rules would allow an additional 25 metres of clearing at the boundary. Property owners are also permitted to clear distances of 15 metres in coastal NSW, 30 metres in central NSW and 40 metres in western NSW to construct or maintain rural infrastructure, such as a fence. The greatest impact of the proposed changes is expected to be in coastal zones that have been most exposed to bushfires. Field expressed concern the government still had not presented any advice it had received from the NSW RFS before announcing the proposed amendments earlier this month. He said the emergency services minister, David Elliott, “has not been willing to explain” how the proposal would reduce bushfire risk, nor why it had been prioritised over the 76 recommendations from the bushfire inquiry report. “My concern is it will be developers that use this,” Field said. “I also worry that it sends the message that this is a constructive way to manage bushfire risk. It sets us up for failure.” The government is likely to introduce the legislation to parliament in November. It has said it would develop a code to take account of endangered species and habitat but it is unclear what this would entail and whether it would be introduced at the same time. Elliott did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia. Field said the government needed to ensure protections were in place for riparian zones, such as creek lines, critically endangered habitats, and threatened species, including the koala. He feared the laws could end up being used for purposes unrelated to bushfire risk. “I’m particularly concerned by coastal rural land that’s held by developers who may have an intention for future rezoning,” he said. “They would be allowed to clear their boundaries whether or not they had a fence, effectively degrading the environmental values of their land – not for bushfire protection but to assist with future rezoning applications.” There are also questions about how the proposed changes would interact with existing land-clearing laws that have caused turmoil inside the government in recent months. The lower house has passed amendments to local land services laws to exempt private rural landholders from having to recognise the expanded definition of koala habitat under the koala state environmental planning policy (Sepp) that nearly split the Coalition. If the changes pass the upper house, they would grandfather the arrangements under the koala Sepp for the five councils that already have approved koala plans of management. But the Environmental Defenders Office said if additional councils completed their own plans in future, the changes would allow private landholders to continue to do code-based land-clearing without an approval. Rachel Walmsley, the EDO’s policy and law reform director, said the deal reached between the Liberal and National parties was “not about clarifying the laws. It’s about weakening. “It is actually preventing koala habitat from being mapped and applicable.” NSW has already recorded huge increases in land-clearing rates as a result of changes to native vegetation laws in 2017.
4||Queensland election: seats to watch as parties play a game of electoral chessLabor’s holds a two-seat majority in Queensland and the most recent polls suggest a close contest on 31 October, with little swing in either direction since the 2017 election. But experts say the statewide polls are of little value in understanding how the larger election night story will play out on Saturday. Queensland is a deeply complex state – where messages in regional areas often run contrary to those used to woo city voters. Rather than a statewide pitch, Labor and the Liberal National party have been engaged in a game of electoral chess, attempting to plot a path to 47 seats. There are 93 electorates in Queensland. The LNP needs to win nine to gain a majority. The state has a large crossbench: three Katter’s Australia party MPs, one Green, one One Nation MP and an independent. The influence of minor parties will shape marginal contests, as well as the makeup of the next parliament. There are more than 20 seats that could flip on Saturday. Here are the ones to watch, and what they mean in the context of a tight election. All roads lead to Townsville Thuringowa (Labor 4.1% v One Nation) Townsville has three marginal seats and both campaigns have spent considerable time in the northern city, where crime and employment have dominated discussion. On face value, the seats of Townsville (Labor’s most marginal seat) and Mundingburra (where MP Coralee O’Rourke is retiring) are closer contests than the western suburbs electorate of Thuringowa. But both parties believe that if Townsville does swing to the LNP, Thuringowa would be the first of the three to fall. One Nation has previously polled well in Thuringowa and the contest has also been targeted by Katter’s Australia Party as a potential gain. Others to watch: Townsville (Labor 0.4%), Mundingburra (Labor 1.1%) LNP attempts to thread the needle Aspley (Labor 1.2%) The seat of Aspley, a suburban electorate in northern Brisbane, fell to Labor in 2017. LNP sources say if they cannot win it back, the party does not have a realistic path to a majority. Aspley has changed hands regularly in the past 20 years and is strategically important to both parties. The area is an LNP stronghold at local government level and the party has chosen a long-term councillor, Amanda Cooper, to run. Similar to Aspley, Gaven on the Gold Coast, won narrowly by Labor last election, is considered a key test of whether the LNP can win back its increasingly dwindling urban support in state politics. Maiwar, the Brisbane western suburbs seat held by the Greens, was identified by the LNP as part of its path to victory, however it is understood the party now considers a gain there unlikely. Others to watch: Gaven (Labor 0.7%), Mansfield (Labor 1.6%), Maiwar (Greens 1.6% v LNP) Will One Nation continue to be a factor? Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation) To win the LNP needs to shift the electoral dynamic in three ways: it needs to win Townsville; it needs to regain a footing in the south-east; it needs to win back low primary support in the regions, particularly those voters who abandoned it for more conservative options. Similarly, Labor cannot maintain a majority if it holds firm in the city but loses too much support in regional areas. In 2017 the expected “One Nation effect” didn’t quite eventuate. The party won only one seat (Mirani) though it did have some impact on the outcome of the election, particularly in central Queensland where the LNP’s primary vote tanked. In Maryborough (a seat the LNP won in the Campbell Newman 2012 landslide), the LNP primary vote was 18% at the last election. Word from the major party camps is the One Nation vote has tempered statewide, but it has always maintained a fervent following in pockets like Maryborough. Similarly in Keppel, in 2017 there was a 15% swing away from the LNP, which was beaten into third by One Nation. Others to watch: Keppel (Labor 3.1% v One Nation), Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation), Mirani (One Nation 4.8% v Labor) Labor could offset regional losses on the city fringe Pumicestone (LNP 0.8%) The former Labor MP John Mikel – now an adjunct professor at the University of Queensland – says that in lieu of reliable public polling on specific seats, one way of taking the temperature of the electorate was to “follow the leaders”. Having spent time in the regions, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk pivoted her campaign to areas of LNP heartland on the Gold and Sunshine coasts where Labor hopes to win seats. Pumicestone – which covers Caboolture and Bribie Island – is the LNP’s most marginal seat and its one-term MP, Simone Wilson, is not recontesting this election. It is the most likely Labor gain, but there are a handful of others on small margins. If the LNP threads the needle elsewhere, it still needs to hold these vulnerable seats. If Labor loses ground in the regions, the city fringe could offset losses and keep the Palaszczuk government in power. Or a mixed bag might deliver a hung parliament. Others to watch: Caloundra (LNP 3.4%), Glass House (LNP 3.4%), Currumbin (LNP 3.3%), Bonney (LNP 1.7%), Theodore (LNP 3.7%) The nightmare scenario for LNP Oodgeroo (LNP 7.2%) The seat of Oodgeroo, based in the city of Redlands south-east of Brisbane, would be a surprise loss for the LNP’s Mark Robinson, a Pentecostal pastor who employs the former Australian Christian Lobby head, Lyle Shelton, in his electorate office. But this week LNP leader Deb Frecklington made the surprise decision to include a whistle-stop in the electorate, rather than visit seats like Mansfield and Aspley the LNP needs to win from Labor. Robinson is being challenged by a high-profile local independent, Claire Richardson, who opposes the controversial Toondah harbour development plan. There are a handful of other seats the LNP need to be foregone conclusions to prevent Labor forming government. If Burdekin and Whitsunday (both on very tight margins) in the north fall to Labor, the LNP could be wiped out above the Tropic of Capricorn. Similarly, Clayfield and Chatsworth in Brisbane, and Burleigh on the Gold Coast, are on relatively small margins. Losing those seats would trigger a Labor landslide. Others to watch: Burdekin (LNP 0.8%), Whitsunday (Ind 0.7%), Burleigh (LNP 4.9%), Chatsworth (LNP 2.9%), Clayfield (LNP 2.4%) Minor parties will shape the next parliament South Brisbane (Labor 3.6% v Greens) And finally, the most keenly anticipated contest of all is in South Brisbane, the most progressive electorate in Queensland and possibly the country. Labor’s former deputy premier Jackie Trad has been written off in this seat, where the Greens vote has surged consistently in recent years. Last time around, Trad benefited from LNP preferences. The LNP’s “Labor last strategy” will make her task of holding the seat more difficult. Increasingly in Brisbane electorates will be three-cornered contests between the LNP, Labor and the Greens. Preference arrangements have made the Greens serious contenders in at least four seats – possibly more – if they can run second on primary votes. These include the CBD seat of McConnell and the inner-north seat of Cooper, vacated by popular minister Kate Jones. The same situation will occur in the north, where Katter’s Australia Party holds three seats. Some of the regional contests involving One Nation, KAP and the majors could be even more complex. In 2017, Nick Dametto won Hinchinbrook with 20.9% of the primary vote. Others to watch: McConnell (Labor 7.9%), Cooper (Labor 10.6%), Hinchinbrook (KAP 7.6% v LNP)
16||Australia's theatres are slowly reopening, but will subscribers return?Judith Hughes, a Melbourne Theatre Company subscriber, sees seven shows a year, organising tickets for a group of 11 women with an average age of 65. She is eager for the company to reopen its doors. “The general feeling among our group is that we’ll do what we can to support the arts and we want to get back in the theatre as long as we can do it safely,” she says. Anecdotally, the sentiment seems shared by theatre audiences across the country. Mitchell Butel, artistic director of the State Theatre Company of South Australia, says demand for its first post-Covid shows, Gaslight and Ripcord, have been “through the roof. We were the first main stage back in the country and we had no seat to sell.” Box office statistics supplied by the Sydney Theatre Company show that 54% of ticket buyers for Wonnangatta, its first post-lockdown show for 2020, were previous ticket-buyers, and 70% of the company’s subscribers surveyed say they expect to renew. But the enthusiasm isn’t necessarily reflected in other data. An Australia Council for the Arts sponsored survey tapped more than 12,000 arts lovers nationwide and 150 arts organisations. It included galleries and museums as well as performing arts groups and was taken three times, in May, July and September. Its September figures for attending cultural events as a whole were more confident than the previous two surveys, but show an understandable short-term caution. Despite a theoretical willingness to engage, only 29% of audience members surveyed were ready to attend an event as soon as permitted, with 29% of those who are residents in states where venues are open having attended a cultural event in the past fortnight. Only 14% were actually buying tickets for live shows and performances. But the production costs of putting on a show remain the same, whether you’re playing to 50 people or 500. This is a crucial factor influencing theatre companies’ programming and projection of box office revenue for 2021. How many tickets can they reasonably expect to sell in a limited audience return? Covid has also disrupted the subscription funding model that a majority of companies rely on. In a normal year, the theatre companies would be in the middle of launch season, with tickets for much of 2021 going on sale for subscribers to buy in packages of several shows at once. The funds brought in during the subscription period would then go into the budget for the following year. STCSA will launch its full 2021 season on 29 October but other companies are holding fire, with plans for limited season launches selling in stages, and with smaller subscription packages for those reluctant to commit long-term in an environment of uncertainty. This isn’t great for the bottom line, and it hasn’t helped that the only money spent from a $250m rescue package for the arts promised by the federal government back in June has gone to the screen industry. Of all the companies, those in Melbourne have dealt with the longest lockdowns and the harshest restrictions. Melbourne Theatre Company’s largest proportion of subscribers – 34% – are between the ages of 50 and 64, an age bracket more at risk from Covid complications. “It’s awfully challenging,” says MTC executive director Virginia Lovett. “At the beginning we went in hard and fast [with cancellations]. People re-booked for September, when we hoped to reopen, but we’ve had to cancel the rest of the year.” In pre-pandemic days, Australia’s not-for-profit performance companies were expected by funding bodies to be as commercially profitable as possible, to build up philanthropy and sponsorship income, and reduce their reliance on subsidies. Federal and state government subsidy more generally varies from theatre to theatre and this funding depends on the legal status of the company. Both STCSA and Queensland Theatre Company are statutory bodies, set up by acts of state legislation, and have greater state support; Melbourne Theatre Company is technically a department of the University of Melbourne, although both it and STC, a public company, receive similar levels of government funding: between 6% and 7%. Many companies emphasise their box office revenue as a sign of this model working. MTC’s 2019 annual report touts box office receipts of $18.1m out of total revenue of $28.3m. For some state theatres, subscriptions represent an average of 50% of box office revenue. For the MTC, it’s 70%. The figures are the result of a campaign over the past few years that saw subscriber numbers grow 40% in 2018 to a high of 22,300, before dropping off last year to 20,315. Lovett is pessimistic about the ability of theatre companies to sustain revenue in a downward-turning market. “The recession will also mean a drop in sponsorship, philanthropy and corporate entertainment,” she says. This, she argues, means that the current government subsidy isn’t sufficient for what the company is expected to deliver during and in the aftermath of a pandemic. “It has to be between 15% and 18%,” she says. “If the governments are serious about us continuing to be a thriving part of the culture and want us to develop new work, be involved in education and touring, the subsidy has to increase.” Lovett says that MTC’s own research shows strong support and loyalty from existing subscribers, many of whom donated the cost of their cancelled tickets to the company. “They want to see good social distancing and we’re looking closely at what other theatres are doing,” says Lovett. “There will be a certain percentage who are very hesitant, but optimistically there is a very high number willing to return.”
4||Decades of neglect: Victoria has built less than 10% of its public housing pledge as waiting list swellsThe Victorian government has built only 57 of the 1,000 new public housing units it pledged by 2022, amid a push to bind the state to a housing target. As the pandemic puts the spotlight on the state’s ailing public housing system, the Greens will this week call for a legislated benchmark to guarantee a much-needed boost to housing stock. It comes as analysis obtained by Guardian Australia suggests there are nearly 30,000 children among the 100,000 people on the state’s ballooning housing waiting list. The waiting list has blown out every quarter since a new registry was created in 2016, yet the state government’s signature 1,000 homes commitment is yet to gather steam. Though the government insists the pledge is on track, figures provided to a parliamentary committee show only 57 of the homes Labor promised to build by late 2022 have been finished. Halfway into Daniel Andrews’s second term, a further 87 homes are under construction and 122 are said to be “about to start construction”. Housing advocates warned in 2018 that the $209m promise – which focuses on the most needy applicants – was already insufficient given Victoria spends less per capita on social housing than any other jurisdiction. Since then, the public housing waiting list has only gotten longer. In the three months to June 2020, an extra 2,161 Victorians were added to rolls, according to estimates by researcher Dr Duncan Rouch. That takes the total number of people waiting for a home to 99,264, includes 29,618 children. The Greens’ housing spokesman, Sam Hibbins, blamed the situation on decades of “neglect by successive state governments”. “The state government hasn’t even built 10% of the public homes it said it would during this term, which means the waiting list will continues to blow out,” he said. “The only way we can solve homelessness is to build more homes, it’s really that simple.” Under a bill the Greens will introduce to parliament this week, the government would be bound to a public housing target, which the party says would work similar to a renewable energy target. It would require the government to construct or purchase an additional 100,000 new public homes by 2030, or 10,000 a year. The benchmark is more ambitious than a proposal from the state’s peak homelessness body, which in May called for the construction of 6,000 units a year. According to government figures, the average waiting time for a “priority access” housing applicant is currently 11.6 months. This fast-tracked list includes people who are homeless, escaping family violence or living with a disability. The Department of Health and Human Services has previously partly blamed the wait figure on the “lack of growth in social housing”. Until very recently, Michael Miletic, 63, was among those on the priority list. The Geelong man had been staying in cheap accommodation during the pandemic. When that came to an end, he was homeless for a month. It was not a new experience. “I’ve been house surfing for years,” Miletic said. “I’ve never had a place to call my own.” While waiting on the public housing list, Miletic slept in his car and would shower at the Geelong Olympic pool. Luckily, he said, his vehicle had a canopy on the back that fits a bed. “I thought, ‘At least I’m not doing it hard on the streets,’” he said. After eight months on the waiting list, Miletic was given a home this month. He knows his wait was shorter than most, and credits the outcome to the assistance he received from the Housing for the Aged Action Group. Across Victoria, there has been a 125% increase in priority applications like Miletic’s since September 2016, according to Rouch’s research. Geelong is the worst-hit regional area, while demand in metropolitan Melbourne was highest in a housing region described as “Western Melbourne”. That area includes the suburbs in and around the nine high-rise towers in Flemington and North Melbourne that were controversially locked down in July at the start of Melbourne’s second wave. Since September 2016, demand has increased by 82% in that region, while applications also surged in north-eastern Melbourne, including Preston (200% increase), the Dandenong area (166%) and the Hume and Moreland area, including Broadmeadows (149%). Since the tower lockdown, the government has allocated $30m to voluntarily relocate families living in Melbourne’s public housing high-rises. And in July, it also committed to build 168 new social housing units as part of a Covid stimulus package. However, controversially, it is also selling off eight public housing estates to developers as part of a “renewal” project that will lead a 10% increase in social housing, which also includes affordable homes leased by non-profits. With the state budget due before the end of the year, Hibbins said forthcoming stimulus should include a massive housing boost. “There hasn’t been the will from governments in the past, but the Covid crisis has now presented us with a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to build back a better future, and access to secure housing for everyone should be the first step,” he said. A state government spokeswoman said Labor was responsible for record investment to support those sleeping rough, or at risk of homelessness, and family violence survivors who need a home. She said the 1,000 homes program “remains on track to be completed by 2022”. Contracts have been signed with builders for nearly all of the 1,000 homes. “We’ve also been invested almost $500m to build, repair and upgrade over 23,000 community and public housing homes across the state,” the spokeswoman said.
4||Australia's biggest companies are being run by a 'directors' club', study findsA major new study of who runs Australia’s biggest companies has confirmed the existence of a “directors’ club” and proves boards are not punished for poor performance, investors say. More than a third of vacancies on the boards of the top 300 listed companies in Australia are filled by directors of other companies in the same group, according to data compiled by proxy advice firm Ownership Matters. The study, which compiled information on every director of an ASX300 company since 2005, also found that the directors of poorly performing groups last almost as long as the directors of top companies. It comes as corporate Australia readies for an annual shareholder meeting season that got off to a torrid start last week when Crown Resorts directors survived a protest vote only due to the intervention of the company’s biggest shareholder, the billionaire James Packer. To combat the lack of consequences faced by directors, they should be forced to run for re-election every year, as happens in the UK, the Ownership Matters co-founder Dean Paatsch said. Currently, most Australian directors only face a shareholder vote once every three years. Non-executive directors are supposed to perform a key role in making capitalism work, by supervising the efforts of company management to grow businesses. Directors of companies in the ASX300 oversee $1.7tn in capital at a cost of around $400m in fees. Ownership Matters analysed the pool of 1,777 executives and 4,143 non-executive directors who have sat on ASX300 boards since 2005. Over that period, 38.5% of director positions among the group were filled by someone who already had a seat on a top 300 board. This ratio peaked at 43.4% in 2006 and currently sits at 36%, Ownership Matters said. The study found representation of women on boards has improved dramatically, rising from just 9.6% in 2005 to a third this year. It also found that once inside the “club”, the professional lifespan of directors soars. Three-quarters of non-executive directors served only once and served for an average of 71 months. However, the 14% who were lucky enough to pick up a second board seat saw their tenure extended to an average of 116 months. “Each additional seat extends a director’s service by at least two years,” and being made chair was worth an average of an extra four years, Ownership Matters said. But the data also shows that the directors of poorly performing companies were only a little more likely to be removed than those of good performers. “The effect is you would lose one more board member every three years,” Paatsch said. He said this was also often due to directors resigning before a company hit the wall, rather than remaining on the board of a struggling business. “Turnover often increases as a result of people managing their careers – jumping ship when they’re most needed,” he said. Nathan Parkin, the co-founder of fund manager Ethical Partners, said the study proved that a relatively small group of directors controlled many of Australia’s top companies. “It really is an invitation-only club,” he told Guardian Australia. It “mostly invites people who are a known quantity, or who are on other boards and known, and that’s a big part of the recruitment process,” he said. “There should be a wider pool of candidates – and there is a wider pool of candidates who are qualified and available.” He said the small pool of directors had positives, including making it easier for them to share information on good governance practices with each other. But it could also result in a culture where boards did not properly interrogate claims made to them by management, he said. Electing all directors annually was “probably a good practice”, he said. “It doesn’t need to lead to director turnover, necessarily, if everyone’s doing a good job.” However, Simon Mawhinney, the managing director of contrarian investor Allan Gray, said he feared there could be “some perverse outcomes” to annual director elections. “One of the big problems we have is this focus on short-termism,” he said. He said this could be a problem if directors endorsed a necessary investment program that took years to pay off. “You run the risk of coming up for re-election in a year and it looks awful,” he said. He said Ownership Matters’ use of share price to measure underperformance was “a little bit blunt” because it did not take account of factors outside the control of boards and management. “If you’re the CEO of an oil or gas company, then for the past five years you’ve presided over awfulness and there’s nothing you can do about that,” he said. “But if you were to sharpen the pen I don’t think the results would change a lot, and that’s concerning. “If people like me held these directors more accountable for capital allocation errors and sought blood when errors were made, that would increase rigour. But instead none of that happens, there’s no accountability.” Louise Davidson, the CEO of the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, which advises super funds on governance issues, said the research showed progress on gender diversity – but “also suggests that there is a real risk of it plateauing unless the director pool continues to grow and becomes more diverse”. “Introducing new voices to the director pool will only strengthen good governance in Australian companies and in turn deliver stronger shareholder returns,” she said. She said ACSI supported annual director elections because they improved accountability. Nicola Wakefield Evans, a non-executive director of Lendlease and Macquarie Group who is the Australian lead for the 30% Club, a group that campaigns for more women on boards, said the increase in representation revealed by the report was “really pleasing”. “Obviously one thing people are interested in is, are we starting to see the clubbiness for women? And I don’t think we are.” She said women were still missing out on board positions because they lacked executive experience companies often look for. “So we do need to focus on that area.” Wakefield Evans said she was “agnostic” on whether boards should face re-election every year. “My own view is that they will come.” She said it meant angry shareholders would be better able to target the directors they blamed for a company’s predicament. Currently “shareholders want to send a message but they ping the wrong directors”, she said. “The only downside is that you then run the risk of losing the whole board, which is a huge amount of corporate memory.”
4||Independent MP to bring bill for federal anti-corruption body as pressure mounts on CoalitionThe Morrison government is expected to come under pressure over its delay in progressing a national anti-corruption commission this week, with an independent MP introducing her own bill and Labor likely to intensify its question time attack. Declaring the government’s pandemic-related excuse “does not cut the mustard at all”, the prominent independent MP Helen Haines told Guardian Australia: “There’s nothing so delicious as a scandal and boy, we’ve had a feast haven’t we?” Haines, the member for the Victorian seat of Indi, will introduce her bill to parliament on Monday morning and is urging the government to allocate time for debate in the near future. Her proposed body, called the Australian federal integrity commission, would allow public hearings when in the public interest and allow any member of the public to make referrals. She said the public understood there were “obvious and serious issues” for an integrity commission to confront, and Covid-19 had not stood in the way of other issues being pushed through parliament. “We have debated and passed numerous bills throughout the pandemic, some rather light bills which are changing the names of departments, right through to more complicated and tricky issues like mobile phones in detention centres, for example – I’m not sure why that had to get rushed into the parliament,” Haines said. “We’ve had the EPBC bill which is highly contentious and was not properly debated at all. That excuse – and I think it is an excuse – it doesn’t hold water at all.” Work on the Coalition’s proposal began in 2018, and officials from the attorney general’s department confirmed last week that the attorney general, Christian Porter, received a draft bill to establish the body in December 2019 – before the pandemic began. The fact the 300-page draft legislation was ready last summer was first revealed by Guardian Australia in January, when Porter said he was waiting “rather than starting the consultation process during the holiday period, which is not an ideal time to start a process of public scrutiny”. Confronted about the further delays during question time last week, Scott Morrison said the government’s watchdog proposal required complex consultation, and the prime minister did not want “one public servant diverted” from managing the public health crisis. But in a clear warning to the government about the public appetite for strong action, Haines said she had even heard feedback from community members sheltered in bushfire evacuation centres last summer – “so incredible is the public’s desire to fix this canker, essentially”. “We’d be talking primarily about the bushfires and about their circumstances, once we’d talked about that and I just sat quietly with people, they would raise it even then. They would say, ‘Helen, you know, it’s important work that needs to be done, we need a federal integrity commission’.” Haines’ bill is expected to be seconded by the independent member for Warringah, Zali Steggall. Haines will also introduce a bill to bring in a code of conduct for parliamentarians. Private members’ bills are rarely debated or voted on in the lower house, given the government has a majority. But Haines has used social media to try to drum up support for a full parliamentary debate on her bill on 3 December. Using the hashtag, #BringOnDebate, Haines has urged members of the public to contact their local MPs “to ensure the government doesn’t shut down debate on this bill”. She has not ruled out seeking to suspend standing orders to bring it on for debate if the government does not accommodate her request – although the numbers may not be there for such a move. Labor’s position is to support a powerful and independent integrity commission. While it does not yet have a formal position on the model advanced by Haines, it is likely to strongly support bringing on debate. Labor is also expected to target the government over the matter during parliamentary question time throughout the course of this week. Signalling his interest in pursuing the issue, the manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, said the government’s failure to produce its own bill reflected “a deliberate decision from Mr Morrison to try to go on a go-slow when it comes to dealing with corruption”. Burke said he did not think anyone could accept government’s claim about the pandemic being a reason for the delay, given that it was already drafted before the Covid-19 crisis began. “All they have to do is print it off on their own computer, walk into the parliament, and table it and the public conversation can start,” he told Sky News on Sunday. Last week in parliament Labor pursued the government over the $30m acquisition of land at Leppington Triangle that was worth $3m – something that is being investigated by the Australian federal police and the infrastructure department. It also chased the government over any lobbying from the former NSW MP Daryl Maguire. On Thursday revelations of Australia Post’s spending on four luxury Cartier watches as reward for senior managers in late 2018 led Morrison to demand the chief executive, Christine Holgate, stand aside pending an investigation. The following day, the chair of the corporate regulator, James Shipton, stood aside pending an investigation into high spending on tax advice. Morrison has left the door open to a broader review of spending by commonwealth entities but has argued his swift action in relation to Australia Post would have sent a clear message to all executives and board members of government agencies. “I think they got it with a rocket,” Morrison said on Friday.
5||As South Australia now knows, local jobs must be a priority in the clean energy transitionFuture historians will no doubt remember 2020 as the year of Covid-19. But according to veteran climate campaigner Bill McKibben, they may also view it as a turning point, the year the world moved decisively towards “the transition everyone knew we needed to make”. McKibben told the recent Global Smart Energy Summit 2020 has been a year of “extraordinary convergence”, from the images of Australia’s bushfires, seen around the world on New Year’s Day – “like something out of Hieronymus Bosch” – to unprecedented developments such as China’s commitment to achieve net zero emissions by 2060, the EU’s pledge to make its Green Deal and Є100bn Just Transition Fund the centrepiece of post-Covid recovery, and the US $15tn divested from fossil fuels. Closer to home, there’s extraordinary convergence between business and state governments on the need to speed up Australia’s energy transition. Tim Reed, president of the Business Council of Australia, wants a “national, bipartisan commitment to net zero emissions by 2050”. Most states have already made this commitment, and South Australia is leading the pack. The state’s energy and mining minister, Dan van Holst Pellekaan, says SA will aim for 100% net renewable generation by 2030. Rapidly expanding wind, solar and battery storage capacity in SA’s Upper Spencer Gulf region will play a key role in achieving that aim. But energy transitions are not just about panels, turbines and targets. They’re processes of social as well as technological change. The people of Port Augusta, Whyalla and Port Pirie know all about this. The Upper Spencer Gulf has become a social laboratory for Australia’s energy transition. The gulf once known as the Iron Triangle was a manufacturing powerhouse. Whyalla had the steelworks, Port Pirie the lead smelter and Port Augusta the coal-fired power plants which drove them. But in 2015, Alinta Energy announced it was closing the power plants and the Leigh Creek coalmine. Less than 12 months later, all three had shut. The closure wasn’t completely unexpected. Local Liz Zyler says she knew the end was coming when her husband, Kym, an electrician who worked at the mine, told her they weren’t buying any more dynamite. “I just realised: coal was finished. They were going to close”. Like many local people, Liz was angry that Alinta promised the plants wouldn’t close before 2030, and then pulled the plug without warning. “They pulled that Band-Aid off real quick” says Liz. For a while, she became severely depressed, and recalls fighting with Kym nearly every day. “Our kids were still at school, and I’d just turned 50”, says Kym. “That’s not a very employable age”. Many of Kym’s older colleagues took a payout. But he and Liz decided the money wasn’t enough. In the end, he got a government job in Adelaide. He still works as an electrician, but only returns to Port Augusta on weekends. Liz had seen the writing on the wall years before. “I started to realise gas, oil and coal were on the way out, and we were going to be stuck with a stranded asset”. In 2012, she joined Repower Port Augusta, a grassroots initiative set up by local people to plan for a future after coal. The push for renewables came from the community. “We had a vote on whether we wanted a gas-fired power station or solar thermal. 4,000 people voted for solar, a quarter of the population of Port Augusta, and that was huge.” Repower Port Augusta won the backing of then Labor premier, Jay Weatherill, and electricians union the CEPU. According to Ben Jewell, CEPU SA branch organiser, renewables were seen as “the next big thing that was going to return the jobs that Leigh Creek and the power station had lost”. But Repower Port Augusta’s bold vision was dealt a body blow in 2019. The planned 150 MW solar thermal plant was scrapped. Despite a $110m federal government loan, Solar Reserve, the company behind the project, announced it could not raise enough bank finance. Other projects have gone ahead – such as the Bungala Solar Farm, on land owned by the Bungala Aboriginal Corporation. The project promised to create 350 jobs during construction but, according to Ben Jewell, few of those went to locals. “We went out there and there were 150 guys employed and 140 of them were backpackers” says Jewell. “This should have been an opportunity for Port Augusta to build their skill base, give the locals transferable skills because it was going to be a renewable energy hub. But that just didn’t happen”. Bungala is just one example of a broad trend our research has identified across renewable energy projects in regional Victoria and NSW: most jobs come in the construction phase, and don’t always go to local workers. Liz says regions and state governments “need to think smarter about the next generation”. With more pre-planning, she and Kim believe Port Augusta’s transition could have been better handled, with more good quality jobs for locals. But despite the problems, there’s no doubt a major transformation is happening in the Upper Spencer Gulf. The 35 turbines of stage 1 of the 126 MW Lincoln Gap windfarm are already operating just outside Port Augusta. Stage 2 (94MW, 24 turbines + 10MW battery storage) is under construction, while the even larger stage 3 is awaiting approval. Other projects, such as the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park, and Energy Connect, an interconnector that will link the gulf to NSW, should begin construction in 2021. These developments foster a sense of pride and purpose, a feeling the gulf is leading a much larger transformation which the whole country will undergo over the coming decades. But the gulf also has valuable lessons for other regions facing transition, such as the Hunter Valley: unless local people see jobs and other benefits for their communities, there’s a danger support will falter, and the legitimacy of Australia’s energy transition will be undermined. • Tom Morton, Climate Justice Research Centre, UTS; research Lisa Lumsden
2||Born for the big stage: how Dustin Martin turned the tide in the AFL grand finalWe always suspected it, but now we know there has never been anyone like him. One Norm Smith medal guarantees a player’s place in the history of the game. Win two of them, and you’re set for life as one of the greats. Win three, and your name is Dustin Martin. If it is true that grand finals do not build character but instead reveal it, then Dusty is the quintessential man for the moment. The Richmond star was born for the big stage. The Tigers have now won three premierships in four seasons, and in each decider Martin was the best player on the park. It is a mind-boggling individual achievement, harder in its essence than winning three Brownlow medals or three Colemans. There is a reason it had never happened before: the perfect storm of aptitude, opportunity and sense of occasion seldom descends on the game. Only three others had previously won two Norm Smith medals – Gary Ayres, Luke Hodge and Andrew McLeod – but now one man stands alone. Parents rarely admit to having a favourite child, but if Martin were to nominate the pick of his three Norm Smiths the smart money would be on the 2020 edition. Against Adelaide in 2017 and Greater Western Sydney last year he was the chief punisher in two spankings; against Geelong on Saturday night he was the difference. Twenty-one possessions (10 contested), four clearances, three tackles and four goals were the sum of his numerical return, but it was his ability to influence the course of the game in key moments that set him apart. Per se, it has been setting him apart for some time now. The highlights reel of the grand final will forever favour Martin’s fourth goal, an astonishing snap late in the fourth term when the game had already been iced. Mere mortals wouldn’t even attempt it; for Martin it is all in a day’s work. “One of the most individually brilliant goals that I’ve ever seen,” teammate Shane Edwards told AFL Media afterwards. “You become a spectator. For about 10 seconds there you’re just thinking, ‘He couldn’t, could he?’, and he does. The occasion, he’s just got a feel for it.” The goal was a wondrous illustration of Martin’s supernatural talents but it was his industry precisely two quarters prior that marked the game’s most pivotal moment. Twenty-one points down deep in the first half, and with Geelong dominating play, Richmond needed something from somewhere. Step forward Martin, who shrugged off Jake Kolodjashnij as if he were an Auskicker before snapping truly for a desperately needed goal. Not only did it cut the margin to 15 points at the long break, but it planted a seed of doubt from which the Cats would never recover. “It was an important goal,” coach Damien Hardwick said. “That’s what great players do. They take their opportunities and they get the job done. That’s why he sits here with his third Norm Smith. The significance of his goals were really important. We looked at the quality of work he’d put in throughout the course of the game, we probably knew his third Norm Smith wasn’t too far away.” And with that third Norm Smith comes the unofficial accolade as the greatest finals footballer in AFL/VFL history. Of course, not all great players get the chance to do what Martin has done. Being exceedingly good is one thing, being in an exceedingly good team is sometimes another. Many a fine footballer has never played in a grand final, let alone three and been the star turn each of them. And that is the lot of the professional. There are no guarantees. If Martin has anything resembling a peer in the modern game, it is Patrick Dangerfield. A Brownlow medalist like Martin, Dangerfield endured 13 seasons and 269 senior games before he got to play in a grand final. The Gabba decider could well be his last. But the reality is nobody really comes close to Martin. Not now. Not as a three-time premiership winner and triple Norm Smith medalist to go with his countless other baubles. Turning 30 in 2021, it is hard to know what else he will achieve. It is debateable he will win another Brownlow but one could argue he is a better player now than in his younger days when his output was measured by disposals. Importantly, his body and mind look to be operating in peak condition. Age, however, does weary them eventually. It was fitting that Martin should be in opposition when the curtains were drawn on Gary Ablett’s career. The comparisons – and the parallels – between the two are stark. Ablett departs the game as one of its finest products, alongside Martin the best of a generation. But one can only wonder – and wonder if Ablett wonders – what might have been had he stayed at Geelong instead of followed the money trail to Gold Coast in his prime. As a one-club man at the fulcrum of his team’s ascent from middling to magnificent, Martin will never have cause to wonder what might have been, whether his God-given talents could have better contributed to individual and team success. To the man himself, the latter is the one that counts. “There’s no way I would have been able to do it without my teammates,” Martin said of his third Norm Smith. “We’re an unbelievable team. It’s not a one-man team, we all do our part. We’re humble and we’re hungry. Success is awesome.” No, Dusty, you are awesome. The pleasure is all ours.
1||Southampton v Everton: Premier League – as it happenedSo there we go. Thanks all for your company and comments – sorry I couldn’t use them all – and enjoy the rest of the weekend. Ta-ra. And here’s our match report. Sad news: Kevin McCarra has died. Here’s our tribute to a football-writing pioneer. Back to the red, here’s Gary Naylor: “I’m an Everton fan and it’s textbook. “Any player who lunges at an opponent in challenging for the ball from the front, from the side or from behind using one or both legs, with excessive force or endangers the safety of an opponent is guilty of serious foul play.” I’m not sure we can call it a lunge; it looked to me like he trod on him in the course of running in the usual manner. Elsewhere, Newcastle seem to have picked six wingers for their trip to Wolves. I’m buzzing to see how they make that boring. “How many times does Digne try to bring someone down without trying to play the ball before it becomes deliberate?” asks Stephen Henderson. Yes, a fair question. But the first attempt is a booking, so maybe two yellows and a one-match ban is the correct outcome here. Fun and games from elsewhere... OK, we’ve just see it again, and I’m actually leaning towards the two Robbies in terms of intent – he probably didn’t do it on purpose – but the law doesn’t require it to be. If it’s strict liability, then it’s a red I guess, but it shouldn’t be. “Robbie is on NBC giving the ‘his hands were in the air’ defence, it’s a yellow card. Rubbish. I am a Everton fan but you are responsible for your studs.” Hands in the air is as close as football gets to a smoking gun. I guess we’ll see it again in a minute. Ward-Prowse says his team didn’t like the idea of a team coming to play them unbeaten, and said that if they can get to the ball first, they’re well organised and have the firepower to score goals. He’s also pleased with his goal – and knows he needs to score more, as the manager is demanding of him – but thinks they should’ve won by more. “Sashes - hope I’m not too late,” says James Bolle. “I’m biased but it’s not been bettered.” Imagine telling Malcolm Shotton he had to go to work in that! “Digne red,” says Arran Ridley. “Digne means worthy in French.” Affaire classée, Lieutenant Columbo. Big picture: Southampton vault up to fifth, three points off the lead; Everton stay top. “Fitting, perhaps, that Everton are decked out in seafoam as they wave goodbye to their unbeaten run,” emails Grant Tennille. Also, since when was foam green? Southampton were excellent, Everton abject. 90+5 min “Six points separate the top fifteen teams,” says Bill Hargreaves, “some of which have a game in hand. The bottom five have had it, in terms of title aspirations. Probably.” It’s great, isn’t it? Before the season, I’d have backed Man City, but having watched them a few times I’m beginning to wonder if this side is finished, and whether Guardiola has the ability or desire to rebuild. So I’d back Liverpool. 90+4 min Alan Smith gives Redmond the man of the match award, which is fair enough, but I’d probably have gone for Ings. 90+2 min Calvert-Lewin leaves a boot in on Vestergaard and is booked. He’s had better days. 90+1 min “Not quite a sash,” says Justin Kavanagh, “but let’s mention the finest Manchester United second strip of all, this three-striped wonder from the 1977 Charity Shield. That game was shown last night on Irish TV and, fool that I am, I watched it through, not remembering that it was a 0-0 draw. Better than their 0-0 draw earlier in the day, mind. There’s a full lockdown in Ireland, in my defence.” Oh my days, that is inspired scheduling! 90 min There’ll be five additional minutes. 90 min “I watched the replay five times,” returns Mike MacKenzie. “It was a deserved red as Digne’s studs raked Water-Peters achilles area (and it was of course from behind). NBC commentators are useless.” That was certainly my reading of it. 89 min Another change for Southamton, Dan N’Lundulu making his Premier League debut by replacing Che Adams. 87 min “I’d certainly agree that the Saints have been good overall last season and this one so far,” says Mike MacKenzie. “But I think it shows the main problem with the PL which is unequal distribution of revenue among teams. A team like Southampton (or Wolves in recent years) can become quite decent but it reaches a plateau. Getting better means buying more expensive players which they can’t afford and then the rich teams come calling for their top players. Better revenue sharing is essential to make the league competitive in the long run.” Yes, I agree with all of that, bar the use of Wolves as an example. It’s tricky, as I don’t believe in making players play anywhere they dom’t want to because their labour belongs to them. The single aspect that’d make the most difference, though, probably isn’t even a financial one, but just reducing the number of subs allowed. 86 min Southampton replace Armstrong, who’s put in a monstrous shift considering, with Diallo. Why we need a stadium announcer to tell us this, I’m not entirely certain. 85 min In fairness to Everton, assuming they lose this, they’ll still be top of the league at full-time. 84 min Lovely from Romeu, lifting insouciantly over the Everton defence, Schuster-style, for the scurrying Ward-Prowse, but he can’t quite catch up with it. 83 min This has been an absolutely comprehensive doing. 81 min “NBC commentator insists Digne red not called for,” tweets Ron Stack, “says a ‘more football-trained eye’ would see it differently.” I don’t know – I’d need to see it again, because doing MBMs, you spend as much time watching fingers and console as the actual game, but it looked bang to rights on first half-glance. I’m not sure who gave that opinion, but I’ve been watching football for 38 years; how many are necessary to be deemed “football-trained”? I daresay the officials have a few years in them too. 80 min Everton finally get Calvert-Lewin on the ball in the box, but he’s double-teamed ad easily unloaded. 78 min Southampton fancy more here and win a corner down the right which Betrand swings in towards the far post, where Vestergaard, 9”4 tall, has somehow got himself in a battle with Gordon, 3”5 tall. But he can only head over the bar. 77 min “Sashed kits,” emails Ed Thorpe. “Can we have a shout-out for this lovely effort from Dulwich Hamlet Women, which is so nice the men sometimes borrow it as a third kit?” A bit Party Rings, but very smart nevertheless. 76 min Calvert-Lewin has barely had a kick, and tearing down the left, he’s easily thwarted by Bednarek. 75 min Digne will miss the away games with Newcastle and Fulham, which sandwich the home game with Manchester United. With Richarlison also absent for the first two of those and Coleman out injured, they’ve got a problem. 73 min Digne insists he didn’t mean it and hoofs something on his way down the tunnel; if only there was some course of dealing to give us an insight into his intention. Dearie me, what a misplacing of noggin that is! Walker-Peters runs away from Digne, who has a hack, misses, raises arms which makes all the difference, then administers a stamp to the achilles. See you in three games mate; absolute later. 71 min “It would be helpful for the neutral if Southampton could decide if they’re going to be woeful or decent,” says Stephen Carr, “as I’m struggling to keep up.” They’ve been good for quite sometime, I’d say, and they’ve been very good tonight. 70 min Bern “bites yer legs” Ard accidentally clatters Walker-Peters, who comes through on his blind side. He’s down briefly, but we’re quickly on with the game. 69 min Everton are pressing now, but still struggling to create. A clincher looks more likely than a livener. 67 min This is it. 65 min I’ve just discovered the Clive Allen played for seven London clubs, if we count his not playing for Arsenal. Can anyone beat that? I also recall the absolutely lush kit he wore for Bordeaux, complete with long shorts. This isn’t quite it, but is also nice. 64 min In a game almost entirely devoid of reducers, it takes the smallest man on the pitch to administer one, Bernard clattering Romeu. He’s booked, and would be well advised to watch his step from here on in. 63 min Looking again, Ings might’ve been marginally ahead of play. He must’ve left it for the man coming in. 62 min What?! Redmond collects a loose ball after useful foraging by Adams, slipping outside him to Armstrong; his cross is a doozy, but somehow Ings manages to avoid tapping it home! Not a clue. 61 min I saw Gordon play for Everton in the League Cup game against Salford. He looked a serious talent, and my guess is he’ll play in behind Calvert-Lewin. 59 min “No discussion on sash kits would be complete without mentioning Crystal Palace. Here’s a mid-80s beauty.” The one I found was earlier than that, but it’s the same idea. I assume the photo was taken after Allen signed for Palace from Arsenal, who he’d joined for £1.25m only to leave without playing a game, in a swap deal for Kenny Sansom. 58 min Ancelotti goes again, bringing on the extremely exciting Anthony Gordon for Doucoure, and also sending on Delph for Sigurdsson. 57 min Digne crosses and Walker-Peters has both hands above his head, giving Everton a free-kick just outside the box, left-hand side. Sigurdsson decides to swing it out, but can’t avoid the first man. 56 min Whatever Ancelotti said at half-time, it hasn’t worked. Problem being, he’s not replete with options that might solve it. Two strikers would at least change things though. 54 min But look at this work of art from Southampton, as referenced earlier. 52 min Godfrey chases Bertrnad into the box and Bertrand falls, but there’s not enough contact for either ref or VAR to award a penalty. 51 min “I HATE it when team turn out in totally unnecessary alternative strips,” emails Simon Gill. “Example 1: Everton today. Seafoam green and charcoal indeed. What would the likes of Shanks or Cloughie have had to say about that? Example 2: Wolves at Leeds the other day. The old gold and black is iconic; turning out in something like the castoffs from a Portugal training strip is not. Even if that is meant to be somehow referential, it still sucks.” Tangentially, I used to like my team playing away to Southampton because we got to see the blue third kit RIP, of which I’m struggling to find a snap. 50 min On which point, Ralph Hasenhuttl very clearly knows some things. If I was a rich club contemplating a change of manager, he’d be near the top of my list, with Marco Rose and Julian Nagelsmann. 49 min So far, the second half looks a lot like the first. This match-is not suiting Everton. 47 min “I’m not against sashes on kits,” says Chris Fowler, “and I like Rayo Vallecano’s model. But, although I know that in the early days Saints kit had a sash, I always prefer their kit, at least, to be red and white stripes. Like the good old days (the 1970s, when I first went to the Dell, for example), when the same strip was used season after season, The stripes didn’t have to be necessarily all the same, mind you, and I really liked the kit when Keegan played for us at the beginning of the 1980s, with its wide 2 red and 1 white stripes with a black pinstripe between them. The two shades of blue away kit was a cracker, too.” Yes, agreed on all counts. I remember a blue away kit a little later too, George Lawrence era, maybe worn in the 1986 cup semi against Liverpool. Ah, here we go. 46 min Immediately, Southampton get the ball into Adams, who holds up then swivels and shoots straight at Pickford. 46 min We go again. Everton send Bernard on for Iwobi, but I’m not certain what that’s going to achieve – the problem seemed to be one of shape rather than personnel. “Being at the top of the table this far into the season has been a dream,” says Mary Waltz. “Well it is quite obvious from this first half that it is still 2020, Trump is still President, and I am no longer dreaming and I am wide awake. My boys look like they have been reading their clippings and have been played off the field.” Half-time entertainment: Southampton have been excellent, while Everton have been poor. I doubt things’ll proceed quite like that, so the second half should be decent. 45+1 min Godfrey, who’s had a stressful baptism, finds himself in space down the right and considers a cross, which ends up flying behind. Whoops. 45 min There’ll be one additional minute. 44 min There’s not much rhythm to Everton’s play. I’m sure being without Richarlison is bothering them, but they’re also missing the width they get from Coleman down the right, and I wonder if changing to a diamond or a 4-4-2 would help them get into the game. Or maybe they might just play better. 43 min James finds Doucoure, and the ball ends up with Iwobi, but Ings is back by his own box to tackle. What a very very good player he is – you could tell when he was at Burnley in that first season they came back up, a one-man forward line and doing brilliantly in the bigger games. It didn’t work out at Liverpool, but right now he’d be a really good alternative to Firmino. 40 min Here come Southampton again, and Adams looks offside, but the flag stays down because this is now the procedure. Armstrong then drills home what looks like number three, but the flag is then raised. Southampton look dangerous every time they go forward, and though Everton look good for at least one, they’re struggling to create and still look likelier to concede. 37 min “It’s one of the better kits of the 2020 PL lot,” says Mike Hollitscher. “You take the River Plate/Rayo Vallecano sash and reverse the colours. I don’t get why some don’t seem to like it. Is it too Johnny Foreigner?” I doubt it – the whole culture is influenced by fashion from elsewhere. I can only speak for myself, and say that on its own, it’s not bad even if it looks like they’re in a beauty pageant, but it’s not what I’d expect from a Southampton kit. And this Everton one, modelled by the HILARIOUS John Bailey, what a CHARACTER is also a jazzer. Danny Ings, the creator supreme! This time, he turns up on the left, bustling away from poor Godfrey and slapping over a low cross that falls nicely for Adams. He takes a touch, ponders the ultimate futility of existence, as the 35 defenders inside the box run about in circles, then cracks a low one past Pickford with the help of a slight deflection. I’m not sure that was in the corner. 33 min “Jumping in on the kit chat,” says Barry Brian, “there are some disastrous kits this year (Chelsea’s blue and pink, Man United’s black and white, Inter home), but this Everton number certainly isn’t one of them. As for Southampton, I love a sash but fear we are in danger of overuse in recent years.” I quite like the United one, though it reeks of people with attention-seeking facial hair and glasses – yes, I realise that these days, that narrows things down to about 42 percent of the world’s population – doing themselves mischiefs trying to design something “iconic”. As for this Everton one, it’s a nice colour, but very toothpaste. 31 min “It looks like whoever designed the kit has been watching the Canadian Premier League, says Kevin Smith, attaching a picture of Calgary’s Cavalry FC. 29 min Both sides are playing well, but Southampton have looked the incisive to this point, and ought really to have scored sooner. Everton need to get James on the ball and give Calvert-Lewin some decent service, or failing that, some service. Twenty-four seconds later, poor Pickford is picking a pot of pickled peppers the ball out of his net, and what lovely reason he was given. Ward-Prowse finds Ings, who feeds him back in with a megs pass, and a deft first touch puts him in prime position to absolutely shmice a fine finish into the far bottom corner! 26 min Nice from Southampton, Redmond again on the ball and sliding back and across for Romeu, tanking onto it ... and he absolutely lamps it, a little flick off Keane forcing Pickford into a plunging save! 25 min “Everton’s kit is officially ‘seafoam green and charcoal’, by the way,” emails Andrew Goudie. That reminds me of the salmon and pink classic. 23 min Ings sticks one out wide to Bertrand, and another low cross finds Armstrong, but he’s kind of side-on to it so that when the ball arrives at speed he can’t quite resolve the conundrum of his feet, tentatively poking at a backheel that gets nowhere. 21 min How do we feel about this Southampton rig? Do they look like contestants in a beauty pageant? 19 min How! Again, Everton switch the ball left, this time to Sigurdsson, and he has a look the larrups a shot which looks to be flying over and plenty ... until it dips mid-swerve and crack the crossbar! 17 min Redmond gets himself at Godfrey again, but this time opts to go inside. The attack continues, the ball comes back to him, and this time he sticks Betrand in behind yerman – he needs help from Doucoure, who I think is the midfielder on that side. This time, though, he escapes when Bertrand’s low cross goes into the side-netting. 16 min ...James gets a decent connection and goes around the wall, but McCarthy waits for him, collecting the ball without needing to move. This is a good game so far. 15 min A foul on Calvert-Lewin gives Everton a free-kick 25 yards out, marginally right of centre. Sigurdsson fancies it, but not a chance James is stepping aside, armband or not... 13 min Everton are finding Iwobi constantly, and this time he comes in off the left and drags a shot towards the near post which is deflected just wide. The corner comes to nowt. 12 min Lovely from Southampton, Ings finding Redmond, who runs away from Godfrey – there it is! – then cuts back for Adams, arriving onto it just as you’d like. But he doesn’t make the connection he’s after, bumbling a shot that skips just wide. 11 min Godfrey misplaces a pass and Adams snaffles the loose ball, running away from Allan, but though Ings is moving for him he’s forced backwards and Southampton must build again. 10 min Everton are pushing. 8 min “I was there!” says Richard Adams of the Plymouth-Watford game. “And yes I can confirm that Reilly is hated in Plymouth for scoring against us. Pic: Umbrella Vi. Stood on the halfway line of the Lyndhurst End every home game for decades.” Can an end have a halfway line? But yes, I love this stuff – my mate’s nan is Man City’s longest-serving season-ticket holder. Here she is. 6 min “The Lomana Lua Lua incident actually led to the introduction of the exclusion rule barring on-loanees from playing against the parent club, as this Guardian article so eloquently explains,” emails Clive Naylor. It’s one of those that seems counter-intuitive. Of course they should play, but not allowing it guards against skulduggery. 5 min Nice from Everton, Allan spinning and laying back to Keane, who unleashes a gorgeous, er, “diag” to Iwobi. It’s about a yard too long. 4 min “A year to the day since this,” says Andrew Goudie, although that’s nothing compared to Ajax’s tonking yesterday of VVV Venlo (surely the only team with four consecutive Vs in their name).” Just when I thought we’d managed not to raise it. That will haunt all involved forever. 3 min It comes to nowt. 2 min Southampton win a free-kick out on the left, ideal for Ward-Prowse to swing in, and Calvert-Lewin is up first, but a shout from Keane allows him to escape at cost of a corner. 1 min I feel like Allan is the new Belgium, a player everyone knows and accepts is good, but is discussed like some sort of secret whose contributions are noticeable only to the highly enlightened. 1 min Off we go! The players take a knee. Let’s support them by donating, educating others and educating ourselves. The players are out! “I was on the North Bank when Inchy Heath scored that goal,” says Gary Naylor. “It’s hard to put into words how much the FA Cup meant back then, and the feeling of going to Wembley after being at Elland Road in 1980 watching Frank Lampard run round the corner flag. Happiest of days.” Yup, I remember. My parents went to the 1983 reply without me (I was deemed too young, aged four) and I’ve never quite forgiven them. And my team winning it the following year remains an extremely special memory. “Manchester United, playing with great pluck and intelligence, this player Hughes coming into it more and more...” On which point, did we have way better commentators then, whose lines we recall like that, or are we just old with too much football on to allow us to remember any of it? Oh yes! This from the game in question. Goodness me! Here’s Mac Millings with further details: “In the other semi-final of the ‘84 FA Cup, the mighty Watford FC defeated Plymouth Argyle by the odd goal. Perhaps the most notable footnote to that game was the reaction of one Plymouth fan to Watford’s goalscorer, George Reilly. Key line: ‘The attacker chewed off one of Reilly’s ears and whispered ‘Plymouth’ into the other one.’” I remember the game, but I did not know that. Ralph tells Sky that it’s been a “very intense time with lots of ups and downs,” and recently, performances have stabilised. The team, aren’t as far in development as they think they can be and still have things to improve, but they like to learn and have a good chance to win every game. Today, he thinks, is a good test against a strong side, and though the table doesn’t tell you everything after five games, it’s not a coincidence that they’re top. “Not sure about the Pennant one,” says Adam Griffiths, “but Lomana Lua Lua scored a last kick of the game equaliser for Portsmouth against Newcastle in 2004, while on loan from Newcastle. For reasons that are unclear, Newcastle hadn’t insisted on a ‘you can’t play against us’ clause. And yes, he did the full celebration.” Lovely stuff. Email! “As a neutral Mancunian (who only got Sky recently after hearing Murdoch had left) I’m really looking forward to this. Everton turned a corner this season and Southampton did last season. Both seem to want to control the game rather than sitting back defending.” Yes, I really like both of these too, and think we’ll see a decent game. One of the reasons the league table is as it is is because of corona, one way and another, but another reason is that almost every club has serious players who can hurt you. Which I guess brings us back to Sky. What Southampton need to beware is Everton’s attackers darting between the lines of what can be quite a rigid formation, and losing the numbers game in midfield. My guess is that they’ll have made specific plans for dealing with James. So what’s going to happen in this game? If I was Ralph Hasenhuttl (for avoidance of doubt, I’m not), I’d be looking to get Redmond running at Godfrey wherever possible, but as early as possible too – as in-form him is not something to face at the best of times, never mind out of position, on debut. Everton, meanwhile, need to beware the press that might stop the playing out, and in Romeu, Allan will find someone who delights in all the same things as him. Yet somehow I don’t think they’ll be friends. Kieron Dyer then spoke really movingly about those men as his pioneers, leading into a discussion about the dearth of black managers. The lack of Rooney rule, and the lack of desire on the part of the Premier League to institute such a thing, tells us how much we still have to do. On Sky at the moment, we’re watching a mini-doc on black players in the Premier League years, with Andy Cole, Paul Ince, John Barnes and Troy Townsend. Check it out, it’s really good. All black lives matter, people. These teams met in the 1984 FA Cup semi-final, at Highbury. Which ended in the traditional style. Ancelotti tells Sky that James didn’t train much in the week, but has recovered from his knock. He also says that replacing Gomes with Sigurdsson - who captains the side – was a difficult decision, but he’s been training well and is rewarded for his attitude. Meanwhile, Ancelotti is confident in Jordan Pickford, and hopes his team play with ambition; though they’ve started well, they need to keep at it. Everton, meanwhile, make three changes: Ben Godfrey makes his first Premier League start for the club, in for the injured Seamus Coleman; Gylfi Sigurdsson is in for Andre Gomes; and Alex Iwobi deputises for the suspended Richarlison. All of which tells us that James Rodriguez is good to go; good. On which point, I might be misremembering – YouTube is silent on the matter – but didn’t Jermaine Pennant once score the winner for Leeds, when on loan to them from Arsenal? Stuart Armstrong comes straight back for Southampton, following time out with corona; goodness me, if my experience is anything to go by he’ll find that an extremely taxing endeavour. He replaces Theo Walcott, not allowed to play according to the terms of his loan. Southampton (a throwback futuristic 4-4-2): McCarthy; Walker-Peters, Vestergaard, Bednarek, Bertrand; Armstrong, Romeu, Ward-Prowse, Redmond; Adams, Ings. Subs: Forster, Stephens, Long, Tella, Diallo, Vokins, N’Lundulu. Everton (a simple complex 4-3-3): Pickford; Godfrey, Mina, Keane, Digne; Doucoure, Allan, Sigurdsson; Rodriguez, Calvert-Lewin, Iwobi. Subs: Olsen, Delph, Nkounkou, Bernard, Gomes, Gordon, Davies. VAR’s straight man: Kevin Friend The Premier League is absolute state – and for once, in the best possible way. Everton top, and with this game in hand, is one thing. But if Southampton win today, they move from 13 to fifth, which is to say that this is a whole new ball game. I’m sure there’s a cheap gag to be made here, about Goodison and the world’s most perpetually indignant crowd, but anyway: Everton have very quickly become very good, and the way they’ve gone about it is telling. Carlo Ancelotti is a very particular kind of manager, who tends to inherit very good but very unhappy players, fortifying them with very good vibes and very minimalist tactics. And that lookslike what he’s done at Everton, finding the right few words for Dominic Calvert-Lewin – “one-touch finishes like Inzaghi” – then giving him, and Richarlison, all the scope that they need to show all that they have. First, he provided them with a happy working environment, then he contracted Abdoulaye Doucouré and Allan to build them a platform, and finally he asked James Rodríguez to decorate it. It’s extremely simple, but it’s also extremely difficult, because if it wasn’t, everyone would do it. Southampton are slightly different. Like playing for Ancelotti, playing for Ralph Hasenhüttl looks a lot of fun, but with a lot more drilling - pressing triggers, half-spaces, and all that jazz. In the end, though, it works partly because his team run their arses off for him and partly because they have a pair of big, burly, classy centre-forwards, marking whom sounds like the absolute worst way to spend a Sunday lunch. This should be really good. Kick-off: 2pm GMT, 3pm BST
1||Southampton's bright start ensures first defeat for lacklustre 10-man EvertonA year on from the infamous 9-0 home shellacking by Leicester, this was stirring evidence of Southampton’s impressive transformation under Ralph Hasenhüttl, whose side ended Everton’s unbeaten start to the season as fine goals by James Ward‑Prowse and Che Adams brought Carlo Ancelotti’s side back down to earth with a bump. Everton were insipid from the moment they fell behind and Lucas Digne’s red card for appearing to rake his studs down Kyle Walker-Peters’ achilles with around 20 minutes to play compounded a frustrating trip south. For the Saints, this was the closest thing to a complete performance. With 39 minutes played, Stuart Armstrong, the beneficiary of Adams’s endeavour and awareness, thought he had added a third. At that point Ancelotti removed his hands from the pockets of his royal blue trench coat and made his feelings known, berating Jordan Pickford for failing to hoover up the initial pass downfield to Adams, always a willing runner. Pickford argued there was no such problem and, as it happened, the assistant referee flagged for offside and the goal was disallowed, but it was an episode symbolic of the kind of chaos that ensued as Southampton carved Everton open. Ancelotti revealed James Rodríguez had barely trained this week after sustaining a knock against Liverpool last weekend and, while he conceded the Colombian was undercooked, that was the least of the manager’s concerns. Everton were two goals down inside 35 minutes, with Ward-Prowse arrowing in across Pickford after a neat give-and-go with Danny Ings. Ward‑Prowse hooked the ball over Allan before Ings slipped in the midfielder, who finished emphatically. Adams, who has often slogged without reward, doubled the advantage just eight minutes later. Ings again turned provider, scooting away from Ben Godfrey and Yerry Mina before hanging a cross towards the back post, where Ward‑Prowse was waiting unmarked. But Adams, too, was lurking and, with the Everton defence having gone walkabout, he smashed in via a Gylfi Sigurdsson deflection. Given Everton have never won a Premier League game when trailing by two or more goals at half-time, it is fair to say Ancelotti had work to do. He tweaked personnel at the interval, introducing Bernard in place of Alex Iwobi, one of three substitutes from the Merseyside derby promoted to the starting lineup, but little changed. They sorely missed the suspended Richarlison – they are yet to win a Premier League game without the Brazilian since he signed two years ago – and the isolated Dominic Calvert-Lewin cut an aloof figure aside from an initial spurt, but it was the absence of Séamus Coleman, who was forced off against Liverpool, that told most dearly. Godfrey again deputised at right-back but the £25m signing from Norwich never looked comfortable. Twenty-eight seconds into the second half Everton were fortunate not to trail by a bigger margin after Adams comfortably eluded Godfrey inside the channel but the striker dawdled before getting a tame shot away. At least Godfrey tried to atone for his errors, racing back to regain possession after losing the ball upfield early in the second half. The body language of Digne and Sigurdsson, who had the captain’s armband until being withdrawn on the hour, was not so reassuring. Everton were lethargic and lukewarm at best. Sigurdsson came close to opening the scoring after a swerving shot from distance skidded off the top of the Southampton crossbar, cutting inside after collecting a Rodríguez pass, bringing a chorus of gasps from the Everton dignitaries and substitutes scattered across the stand. Everton’s appetite appeared to wane but Southampton were relentless and strode forward with the tempo the animated Hasenhüttl conducts on the touchline. He bounced around the technical area to roar his players on, yelping in disbelief as Armstrong’s cross somehow eluded Ings in the six-yard box. Southampton were supercharged, but not by any ghosts of that Leicester game. “It’s not interesting for us,” Hasenhüttl said. “We are so concentrated on what we have to improve all this time; we don’t have time to speak about anniversaries. The way the guys managed this was game outstanding.” It was a similar story in the first half, when Nathan Redmond dragged wide after meeting a cross by Ryan Bertrand, again overlooked by the England manager, Gareth Southgate, this month. Moments later, a Bertrand cross pinballed around the Everton penalty area before Michael Keane eventually averted the danger after Walker-Peters recycled possession. But that was just the start of things to come, not that Southampton will be resting on their laurels any time soon. “If you lean back a little bit, you immediately get the bill for it,” said Hasenhüttl. “We have to keep on working and keep on being focused. It seems we have definitely done some big steps forward. ”
6||Ann Ambache obituaryMy friend Ann Ambache, who has died aged 72 of a heart attack, left Northern Ireland in the 1960s for a 40-year teaching career in England. She herself carried on learning new skills all her life, which enabled her to make a move from home economics to teaching information technology to children with special needs. Ann was born in Dungannon, County Tyrone, where her parents, Bridget (nee Hart) and Patrick Campbell, ran a small farm. Ann, eldest of four children, attended Killyman junior school and Dungannon academy. She had to be self-sufficient from an early age and helped her aunt in her shop. After taking her A-levels, Ann trained as a home economics teacher at Mary Ward College in Nottingham (1967-70) and then taught in Warley in the West Midlands. She also worked for several evenings a week in a hostel for older children. There she met Jeremy Ambache, a young social worker. He asked her out and for their first date she took him to a parents’ evening at her school. They married in 1973 and moved to London, where Ann became a supply teacher at Sacred Heart high school in Hammersmith. After a career break to have their daughters, Zoe and Lucy, she returned to Sacred Heart. Ann had a real curiosity and thirst for learning and completed a BEd at the University of Surrey in 1985 while teaching. Policy changes moved home economics into food technology, which inspired Ann to retrain. She gained a certificate in counselling at Westminster Pastoral Foundation in 1991; a BA (Hons) in psychology at the Open University in 1992; a diploma in information technology and education at King’s College London in 1993 and a diploma in education for those with special needs or dyslexia at Kingston University in 1995. With her new skills she developed a rewarding career in special needs education with responsibility for IT, joining Cambridge school in Hammersmith, where she remained until her retirement in 2008. She resisted school politics and management, preferring to stay in the classroom, and was famous among her students for her portrayal of a good and bad interview job candidate – everyone remembers her impression of a scruffy, gum chewing and uninterested teenager. Ann swam and attended the gym daily at Putney leisure centre, near her home in south-west London. She enjoyed London’s cultural opportunities, especially seeing Ibsen or Chekhov plays, and was the secretary of a women’s culture and theatre group in Putney, where she and I first met, for more than 20 years. She had a wicked sense of humour and was highly irreverent; she was a “giver”, especially to her family, looking after her six grandchildren during her 13 years of retirement. She was a wonderful cook and loved to grow and pick fruit and vegetables. Ann is survived by Jeremy, Zoe and Lucy, and her grandchildren, Eva, Ella, Una, Rory, Zander and Stella, and by her brothers, John and Francis, and sister, Kathleen.
5||In the restaurant where I work, Covid has brought out the worst in customersWaitressing can be a difficult job at the best of times. The hours are long, the work is exhaustingly physical and the customers have a tendency to take out on you whatever frustrations have been building in them all week. I fondly remember one weekend brunch shift when a woman berated me because we only had white sugar for her coffee, not brown; she insisted that this was a breach of “etiquette”. She was definitely not sweet enough. I took the job last summer as a way to make ends meet while I started a new life in Manchester after moving from London. It wasn’t exactly what I’d trained for in drama school, but it paid the bills and I love being around people. I took the good customers with the bad, and found solace venting with my partner at the end of the day. Then Covid hit. We endured the closure of the restaurant due to lockdown along with the rest of the country, but from July onwards we were lucky enough to be able to set up an ad hoc outdoor space for customers. It was a relief to be able to keep the place open and all we asked of customers was to register with the Covid app, wear a mask when they entered the indoor area and stay seated as we provided table service. Maybe waitressing would even become easier, I thought, as groups were restricted to no more than six. Surely this would be a simple enough bargain to make in order for us all to stay safe while enjoying a return to some semblance of our normal lives? Yet since customers have started to stream back through our doors, I have been faced with a different reality. When I greet them and ask them to scan the test-and-trace app barcode, many will ignore me or say they don’t have their mobile phones with them, only to sit down and put their phones on the table. It’s not just my restaurant that faces this sort of attitude; one of my favourite places to eat in the city was given a two-star review by a customer complaining about being asked to register on the app. Apparently the place was “brim with ridiculous rules and concepts”. Tell that to Boris Johnson, love, not the service staff. As we’ve moved into tier 2 and now tier 3, we have had to be alert to groups of more than one household turning up. Despite the rules, it’s patently obvious that we’re receiving parties of mixed households, unless communal living has really taken off in Manchester. There is only so much we can do: I can’t ask to see their house keys, or quiz them on each other’s preferred breakfast cereal. The rules are unsustainable and shouldn’t be our responsibility. Then there’s making sure people are wearing their masks to keep each other and staff like me safe. You’d think we were taking away people’s right to vote by asking them to pop a piece of cloth over their face while they nip to the toilet. All of this would be bad enough, but to compound issues, management have decided that the maxim “the customer is always right” endures, despite staff going no further than enforcing government regulations. When you eventually get everyone seated, you hope that the hard work is behind you. But then comes the shouting across the room to get your attention, and the eyes boring into your head as you finish up serving another customer. I’ve cried in work more than once because of the way a customer has treated me. In hospitality there’s always that one difficult customer, but nothing could prepare me for life post-lockdown. We all want to get back to normal and it can feel frustrating at times, but this situation has truly brought out the worst in people. If you plan to go out this week, please remember to be polite to your waiting staff: they’re living through exactly the same pandemic as you. The writer is a waitress in Manchester
17||Joan Hocquard, Britain’s oldest person, dies aged 112Britain’s oldest person, Joan Hocquard, who drove ambulances during the second world war, has died aged 112. Hocquard died at her home in Poole, Dorset, on Saturday. Her nephew, Paul Reynolds, 74, said she had always sought to live life to the full and that she “loved eating butter and cream and didn’t believe in dieting”. She was born on 29 March 1908, under the reign of Edward VII, the same day as the world’s former oldest man, Bob Weighton, who died in Hampshire in May. Their final birthday celebrations were held behind closed doors because of the national coronavirus lockdown. The pair also shared a birthday with Alf Smith from St Madoes in Perthshire, who shared the title of Britain’s oldest man with Weighton until his death in 2019 at the age of 111. Reynolds described Hocquard as an independent spirit who had refused a card from the Queen on her 100th birthday because “she did not want people to know how old she was”. Born in Holland Park, west London, Hocquard spent much of her childhood in Kenya, where her father was a colonial officer in charge of shipping on the Great Lakes in east Africa. She later worked as a cook in a French hotel near Geneva in Switzerland, and met her husband, Gilbert, through their shared love of sailing. During the second world war, she drove ambulances in London before she and Gilbert moved to the south coast of England. The couple travelled across Europe in a camper van and went on yachting holidays until his death in 1981. In the late 1980s she met widower Kenneth Bedford, who was 20 years her junior, at the Bournemouth Gramophone Society and they had lived together since in Poole. She lived “an extraordinary innings and died peacefully in her own home, which is all you could wish for”, said Reynolds. “She was a strong-willed character and loved telling stories about how naughty she was as a schoolgirl.” The oldest living Briton is now Lilian Priest from Swanage in Dorset, who is 111.
0||Party chair insists Republicans will hold Senate after Trump voices doubtAfter Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said he could not and did not want to help some senators, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted the Senate would stay in GOP hands, saying: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” In fact, as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls, senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have sought to put daylight between themselves and Trump. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour. McSally dodged opportunities to express support in a debate. Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on policy. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election but McSally and Cornyn are in tight races. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday, before admitting: “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeating that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” According to FiveThirtyEight.com, while Trump trails Joe Biden by 2.6 points in Arizona, McSally is struggling in her battle with Mark Kelly, a former astronaut now a campaigner for gun control reform. Other Republicans facing tough fights include Cory Gardner in Colorado, David Perdue and Kelly Loeffler in Georgia, Thom Tillis in North Carolina, Lindsey Graham in South Carolina, Susan Collins in Maine and Joni Ernst in Iowa. Most forecasters give Democrats a good chance of retaking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47. Trump insisted again on Sunday that his party could take back the House but that seems unlikely, Democratic control firm enough that Speaker Nancy Pelosi barely created a ripple with her confirmation to CNN’s State of the Union that at the age of 80 she will seek to stay in the role. Corey Lewandowski, a Trump adviser, played down the president’s comments about the House but told NBC’s Meet the Press he had been “out aggressively campaigning for members of the US Senate” and had “asked his surrogates, including me, to go out and help.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” he said. “The Senate is very tough.” He also said: “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in. I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” McDaniel said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Lewandowski said the president had “helped raise money. He’s got a great partnership with Senate leader Mitch McConnell. They’ve raised money together, and we feel very, very strongly that we’re going to retain our majority in the US Senate.” Frustrated by McConnell’s rush to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court, Democrats are considering structural reform to both the court and the Senate. McDaniel said: “Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are not not hiding the fact they want to get rid of the filibuster” – the 60-vote threshold for new legislation – “and they want to fundamentally change the third branch of government [the court]. “This is a tight race, we know this, but the trend lines are good in these states. You’re seeing McSally gain momentum. You also didn’t mention candidates like John James [Michigan] and Jason Lewis [Minnesota], who are in competitive races against Democrat incumbents. “So we’re gonna keep the Senate, we’re working hard to do that.”
1||Kevin McCarra: a pioneer who changed football journalismIt was around about 1990, long before journalists had mobile phones. Kevin McCarra, the former football correspondent of the Guardian who died from Alzheimer’s disease on Saturday aged 62, was travelling from Glasgow to cover a game at Easter Road for Scotland on Sunday when his train got stuck somewhere near Falkirk. Time passed. It became clear Kevin wasn’t going to make kick-off. Still the train didn’t move. He wasn’t going to make half-time, either. Unable to contact his desk but knowing they had a space to fill and needed copy, he composed a piece about being on the train with frustrated fans, filed when he was finally able to disembark and somehow produced something true and insightful, and far more memorable than anything that had been written at the game itself. It was a moment of improvised unorthodoxy typical of Scotland on Sunday at the time. It was a bright, fresh paper, fizzing with imagination in every section. Kevin’s role was vital. In the era of Fever Pitch, fanzines and Italian football on Channel 4, Kevin was one of those who transformed football journalism. Out went the jaded hackery of old, and in came a far more literary sensibility. Kevin had been doing a PhD placing the 15th-century Scottish poet Robert Henryson in his European context when an arts centre where he worked part-time asked him to put on an exhibition about Scottish football. That led to him being commissioned to co-produce A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, published in 1984. He wrote it on an Amstrad PCW using the deeply unintuitive Locoscript. As anybody who sat near him during a game knew, it was the last thing to do with computers he ever really mastered. “Technology is a word we only use when it goes wrong,” he would say; he used it a lot. The contacts made during his research led to further writing opportunities. As disillusionment with academia set in, Kevin became a regular in Scottish Field before being invited to join Scotland on Sunday when it launched in 1988. He also co-founded the Mariscat Press, publishing poetry editions including Edwin Morgan’s 1984 work Sonnets from Scotland. Kevin later worked for the Sunday Times and the Times before succeeding David Lacey as the Guardian’s football correspondent after the 2002 World Cup. It was his dream job. He even took a pay cut to move, although only because he misremembered his salary during negotiations (characteristically – practicalities were never a forte). It was Lacey he most admired and Lacey whose prose his most resembled, crisp and free of cliche, capable of summing up a game with deceptive economy. Looking back at old pieces now what is striking is both his prescience and the unusual cadences of his writing. He was rarely controversial, although there was the incident after a friendly against Spain in 2007 when the England manager Steve McClaren referred to the upcoming Euro 2008 qualifier in Israel as “the real bull”, apparently a laboured bullfighting analogy. Kevin, taking his turn with transcription, was understandably mystified and decided McClaren had said “rainbow”, leading to McClaren being mocked up on the back of the tabloids with George, Zippy and Bungle. With somebody else, it might have created major issues, but McClaren and everybody at the Football Association knew that with Kevin it would have been an honest mishearing, no mischief intended; there was never any malice to either him or his writing. The affection in which he was held became clear during Euro 2016, when he went missing in Avignon. The football community rallied to appeal for help and the following day he was found, confused and dehydrated, by an England fan who had seen his photo on Twitter. Kevin never savaged anybody, remembered always the person behind the mistake he might be describing. Only once did a manager ever really lose his rag with him, and that was, of all people, Tommy Burns, who had been taught by his father. “I can’t believe Joe McCarra’s boy could write those things,” he hissed, pinning Kevin against the wall, before the preposterousness of the situation overcame the pair of them. It was Burns’s No 10 Kevin later had on the back of his Celtic shirt. He co-wrote a book on Celtic’s 1967 European Cup win and there was a sense he never enjoyed anything quite so much: Kevin was a famously terrible footballer – so bad that after he’d reluctantly agreed to make up the numbers for a team at Glasgow university, he was quickly subbed off as his teammates decided they would be better playing with 10 – but he enthusiastically acted out the key moments of that campaign as recreated for him by Jimmy Johnstone in his living room. Some journalists end up covering football because it’s where they are shunted, some do it because it’s a job; Kevin did it because he loved football. That perhaps came through most obviously in his broadcast work. Kevin was one of the original regular guests on Football Weekly and a huge part of its early success. After leaving the Guardian in 2012, Kevin returned to Glasgow and wrote another book, telling the history of Celtic through the biographies of nine key figures. Long after illness struck, he kept going to Parkhead and Partick Thistle. He was, as his friend Philippe Auclair put it, “a gentle fanatic”, obsessed by Celtic but never partisan. He was unashamedly erudite, but also had great warmth. He was a pioneer who changed Scottish football journalism but, most fundamentally, he was a thoroughly nice man.
3||Global report: Spain declares Covid state of emergency as Italians urged to stay homeThe Spanish government has declared a six-month state of emergency and ordered a nationwide curfew, while Italians have been strongly advised to stay at home as both countries impose tough limits on people’s movements in a effort to contain the second wave of the coronavirus. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said his cabinet had approved a state of emergency on Sunday morning that is set to remain in force until 9 May 2021. The decree will allow Spain’s regional governments to order an overnight curfew to run from 11pm to 6am, or to begin and finish and hour earlier or later. The only area of Spain exempt from the curfew is the Canary islands because of what Sánchez termed “the very positive epidemiological situation there”. Spain became the first western European country to record more than 1m Covid infections last week, and Sánchez said on Friday that studies suggested the real number was three times higher. The state of emergency also permits Spain’s regional governments to bring in full or partial lockdowns, and limits public and private gatherings to six people. “We have to protect our economic and work activity and preserve, as far as we can, the rhythms of our lives,” Sánchez said in a televised address on Sunday afternoon. “Sacrifices will be indispensable. No one, not the government of Spain nor its regional governments, want to impose a single restriction that isn’t necessary to flatten the curve and protect public health.” He said his government would seek congressional approval for the six-month state of emergency next week, and called on opposition parties to support the measures. The initial declaration comes into effect on Sunday night and will last a fortnight. Sánchez said the drastic decision had been taken following scientific and expert advice, but that it would not remain in force a day longer than necessary. He said the government believed the situation could be brought under control without the imposition of the strict national lockdown that tamed the first wave of the virus in the spring and early summer. “The more we stay at home and the fewer the contacts we have, the more protected we’ll be, and the more we’ll be able to protect our loved ones and the health of everyone,” he said. Italy’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, said the country’s escalating infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals as he announced new restrictiions on Sunday. His government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums can stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been urged not to leave their homes except on work, medical or educational grounds. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. A €1.5-2m funding package is being considered to support businesses penalised by the latest measures. There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme rightwing group Forza Nuova also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew introduced on Friday. The number of coronavirus infections in the Netherlands rose by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, hitting a new record, according to data released by the National Institute for Public Health. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boyko Borissov, became the latest political figure to test positive for the coronavirus. “After two PCR tests, I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page on Sunday, adding that he had mild symptoms and would self-isolate at home. The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, tested positive for coronavirus on Friday, joining a list of leaders who have contracted the virus that includes the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, the US president, Donald Trump, and his Brazilian counterpart, Jair Bolsonaro.
2||F1: Hamilton surpasses Schumacher with victory at Portuguese Grand Prix – as it happenedSo Lewis Hamilton takes Michael Schumacher’s astonishing record of F1 race wins, and will leave Portugal offering little prospect of anyone getting near it for the forseeable future, or derailing his hopes of joining the German on seven world championship titles. Here’s the updated list … Most F1 race wins 1 Lewis Hamilton – 92 2 Michael Schumacher – 91 3 Sebastian Vettel – 53 4 Alain Prost – 51 5 Ayrton Senna – 41 6 Fernando Alonso – 32 7 Nigel Mansell – 31 8 Jackie Stewart – 27 =9 Jim Clark – 25 =9 Niki Lauda – 25 And finally, here’s Giles Richards’s report from the circuit. Thanks for joining us and enjoy the rest of your weekend. Bye! 1 Mercedes 435pts 2 Red Bull 226 3 Racing Point 126 4 McLaren 124 5 Renault 120 6 Ferrari 93 7 AlphaTauri 77 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 1 Lewis Hamilton 256pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 179 3 Max Verstappen 162 4 Daniel Ricciardo 80 5 Charles Leclerc 63 6 Sergio Pérez 75 7 Lando Norris 65 8 Alexander Albon 64 9 Pierre Gasly 63 10 Carlos Sainz 59 11 Lance Stroll 57 12 Esteban Ocon 40 13 Sebastian Vettel 18 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 The Mercedes team principal in conversation with Sky Sports F1 … 92 race wins? Who would have thought that when we embarked on the project in 2013. It’s an almost surreal number of wins. The talent, the ability … he’s just standing out. Victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve means Hamilton has now, incredibly, finished in the points at 45 races in a row. Testimony not just to his own skill but the dominance in reliability terms that Mercedes offer compared to their rivals. His last failure to finish was at the Austrian Grand Prix in July 2018. The race-winner says: Today was tough. It was all about temperatures, and with the setup I pre-empted it. We got some slipping at the start. Into turn seven I got a huge oversteer moment, so I backed off massively … I knew I could come back later on. On taking Schumacher’s wins record … It’s going to take some time for it to fully sink in. I’m still very much in race mode mentally … I can’t find the words at the moment. Speaking to Sky Sports F1, the second-placed driver says: The opening lap was pretty good. Some cars behind with the soft tyre had the upper hand. After that though, I just had no pace today. I don’t understand. I couldn’t go past [Hamilton] … I was hoping to go for the soft tyre in the end but I don’t think it made a difference. 1 Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Bottas (Mercedes) +25.592sec 3 Verstappen (Red Bull) +34.508 4 Leclerc (Ferrari) +65.312 5 Gasly (AlphaTauri) +1 lap 6 Sainz (McLaren) +1 lap 7 Pérez (Racing Point) +1 lap 8 Ocon (Renault) +1 lap 9 Ricciardo (Renault) +1 lap 10 Vettel (Ferrari) +1 lap 11 Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 12 Albon (Red Bull) +1 lap 13 Norris (McLaren) +1 lap 14 Russell (Williams) +1 lap 15 Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 16 Magnussen (Haas) +1 lap 17 Grosjean (Haas) +1 lap 18 Latifi (Williams) +2 laps 19 Kvyat (AlphaTauri) +2 laps DNF Stroll (Racing Point) After a poor start, the Mercedes driver recovered brilliantly to take Michael Schumacher’s record! Lap 66/66: Hamilton goes into the lap 25 seconds in the lead. Bottas second, with 7.5secs in hand. Verstappen remains safe in third. It will take tremendous late drama to stop that being the podium. Lap 65/66: Gasly goes fifth! He refuses to settle for sixth, swings wide and away, and suddenly Sainz has a whiff of blood too. Lap 62/66: Perez, on soft tyres, climbs all over Gasly as they fight for fifth. Very dicey stuff given the relative lack of grip so late in the race. Lap 61/66: Drizzle alert! It may take something more substantial than that to upset the applecart, but it’s a late additional reminder to the drivers to keep their focus. Hamilton is 22 seconds clear, with history beckoning. Lap 60/66: Hamilton’s sluggish start feels a long, long time ago, and the race on the whole has settled down into fairly standard my-car’s-faster-than-your-car fare. The only drivers from the top 10 in the standings not currently in a points place are Norris, Albon and Stroll – Sainz, Ocon and Vettel are the trio punching above their recent championship weights. Lap 58/66: Bodywork issues for Bottas, who has debris hanging off to the right of his cockpit. Hamilton, muscles perhaps lulled into a bit of complacency, reports a touch of cramp. Surely no late drama to derail a one-two for the Mercedes pair? Lap 56/66: TEN LAPS TO GO! Ocon, Ricciardo and Vettel are in a Renault-Renault-Ferrari ding-dong-ding for eighth place. Four-times drivers’ champion Vettel has had a fairly unenjoyable weekend but has made up a handful of places for a points position. Lap 55/66: Still pretty serene up front for Hamilton – he’s almost 16 seconds clear of Bottas. He’s lapped everyone down to fifth place now. Kvyat, down in 16th, has attracted a time penalty. Lap 54/66: Spoke too soon – Stroll is the first retirement. Since his third place at Monza, that’s four successive failures to start or finish for the Racing Point driver. Lap 52/66: Still no retirements, despite Stroll’s earlier efforts. Still serene progress for Hamilton up front. Russell has now taken Giovinazzi, and meanwhile Albon has had two warnings for track limits and is on notice. Lap 50/66: Russell, down in 14th, is having an enjoyably competitive race, clambering all over the back of Giovinazzi despite the best efforts of his Williams, which hops off the track as the car loses downforce. Lap 47/66: Bottas has stopped the rot of ebbing pace and pulls away a little more from Verstappen – the gap is now 8.2secs. Sainz relegates Ricciardo to ninth, while Raikkonen rounds out the points places. Oooh – impressive work in the pits from Red Bull … a superb 1.8secs stop for Albon. Lap 46/66: Twenty laps to go. Verstappen is shortly to be within seven seconds behind. As things stand, there’ll be no constructors’ title for Mercedes today, but Michael Schumacher is looking a lot like ending the day with the second-most all-time F1 race wins. Lap 45/66: The gap from Hamilton to Bottas is holding steady, but the one from Bottas to Verstappen … not so much. The Red Bull racer is now within eight seconds of second. Gasly takes Ricciardo for seventh place. Lap 43/66 Full standings 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Pérez 6 Ocon 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Sainz 10 Raikkonen 11 Albon 12 Vettel 13 Norris 14 Giovinazzi 15 Russell 16 Kvyat 17 Grosjean 18 Magnussen 19 Latifi 20 Stroll Lap 42/66: Fake news … Bottas comes in, and he takes the hard compound as well. He rejoins behind Hamilton and is losing even more pace. Gap is now over 11 seconds. Verstappen, on the medium compound, is still third, 10 seconds behind the Finn. Lap 41/66: Hamilton pits, takes the hard compound, and rejoins in second behind Bottas … who is considering switching to softs. Lap 39/66: Everyone below Ocon in sixth position has now been lapped, but still no retirements to report. Bottas is falling even further behind Hamilton – the gap is about to be 10 seconds. Lap 38/66: George Russell pits from seventh. An encouraging opening stint from the Williams driver. He comes back out in 14th. Hamilton has pulled out another second from Bottas – suddenly the lead is around nine seconds. Lap 35/66: After all that, Sainz retakes 10th moments later. Vettel is up to third after Leclerc pits – the Ferrari re-emerges in fourth. Bottas briefly cut the gap to Hamilton by half a second, but it’s holding steadyish around the eight-second mark. Lap 33/66: Sainz and Raikkonen are slugging it out for that 10th place. They trade the final points position multiple times before Raikkonen emerges, chest puffed out. “Cool the car,” reports Bottas’s dashboard. Uh oh. Could another retirement be on the way? Standings at halfway: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Leclerc 4 Verstappen 5 Ocon 6 Pérez 7 Russell 8 Ricciardo 9 Gasly 10 Raikkonen Lap 30/66: As half-race distance approaches, the gap from first to second expands to over eight seconds. Lap 29/66: Hamilton is moving beautifully, seven seconds clear of Bottas. Leclerc is 23 back, with Verstappen 21 further behind in fourth. Raikkonen is back in the points in 10th. However Stroll, in last, has attracted another penalty, this time for exceeding track limits. Lap 26/66: Leclerc, in third after Verstappen’s stop, is 16 seconds behind Bottas. Sainz pits to switch for mediums, to leave Gasly the final racer on soft tyres. With Vettel in the pits, that leaves Hamilton, Bottas, Leclerc, Gasly, Ocon, Russell, Giovinazzi and Magnussen are the only drivers without stops to their name. Lap 23/66: Five-second penalty for Stroll! That’s small comfort for Norris, who is now down in 19th after their collision. The wins record is very much on for Hamilton – 3.3secs now the lead. You may have noted incidentally that Williams’ George Russell, without a point this season, is currently running ninth. He’s never finished higher than 11th in a grand prix. Lap 22/66: Bottas is suddenly slipping to almost three seconds behind the new leader. Always fun to see a top 10 shaken up as stops start playing a part btw … Current standings: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Gasly 6 Sainz 7 Ocon 8 Vettel 9 Russell 10 Giovinazzi Lap 20/66: Hamilton’s quick progress has taken him right into Bottas’s slipstream, he makes use of DRS … to take the lead into turn one! A pretty regulation overtake and almost immediately he pulls a second out from his teammate. Lap 18/66: Lance Stroll spins while trying to go wide on the kerb to take Norris – suddenly he’s down in 11th, and there’s bits of front wing hanging off for the Racing Point driver. Some sweary testimony from Norris’s side of things on the radio. Lap 17/66: Sainz and Gasly are having a great little ding-dong for fifth. The McLaren driver shuts the door belligerently a couple of times to maintain his place. Eeeeeee Verstappen’s front right looks more than a little problematic. Lap 16/66: Hamilton sets the fastest lap of the race, despite his apparently dicky tyre. He’s been holding steady around 1.9secs behind his teammate. Lap 15/66: Ocon is in the points in 10th. Ricciardo is in and rejoins with medium tyres, while, intriguingly, Hamilton radios in to report discomfort with his left front tyre. Lap 13/66: Ricciardo more or less waves Stroll through into eighth. Raikkonen’s had enough of the soft compound and has rejoined in 20th on mediums. Verstappen is over nine seconds off the lead, 6.8secs behind Hamilton in second. Lap 12/66: Leclerc’s Ferrari is back up to where it started, taking fourth from Sainz. Vettel, incidentally, is down in 13th. Verstappen still third but he wants to pit. Lap 10/66: Those on soft tyres – Sainz, Verstappen, Norris, Raikkonen, Ricciardo, Gasly and Albon – will soon have a decision to make. They’re being outpaced by rivals on the medium compound. Gasly is up to sixth, while Stroll takes ninth from Raikkonen, whose incredible start suddenly feels like it’s from a different race weekend. Lap 9/66: Fastest lap of the race for Bottas. Leclarc takes Norris. Raikkonen’s brilliant start is fading, with Ricciardo now up to seventh, and Gasly also finds a way past. 1 Bottas 2 Hamilton 3 Verstappen 4 Sainz 5 Leclerc 6 Norris 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Raikkonen 10 Stroll Lap 8/66: Verstappen relegates Sainz to fourth, while Leclerc – also on the medium compound tyres – takes Raikkonen’s sixth spot. Hamilton is just shy of two seconds down from his teammate, with Verstappen a further 2.5secs back. Lap 6/66: Bottas retakes the lead and straight away pulls clear from Sainz. Verstappen’s taken Norris and is lapping quicker than anybody on the track. Into lap seven, and Hamilton eases past Sainz as well, as the leading drivers running medium tyres start to capitalise. Lap 3/66: Verstappen’s interesting start has eased into a battle for fourth with Norris. Raikkonen is just behind, having made up 10 places from the start. Lap 2/66: Sainz LEADS! Hard to blame Bottas there as all drivers take interesting approaches to find the desired line. Hamilton still third. Lap 1/66: Oh my days. Rain IS falling. Cars lunging wide at corners two and three. Raikkonen spitting fire while on the charge to sixth. Sainz took second from Hamilton … before … Hamilton swallowed up … and Verstappen hits Pérez! Wild start, with the Dutchman taking second from Bottas, while Hamilton is unable to lead the charge from pole and loses the lead. A few corners later Verstappen is off the track after catching the Racing Point … LEAVING BOTTAS IN FRONT! Mirror, signal, ’AV IT. Go, go, go! They’re off for the formation lap. And apparently that rain I mentioned, that was due to just about miss the race, might actually be about to play a part … Gasly says a few spots have just landed on his visor. Given the tyre fun teams endured yesterday, that could really shake things up. STAND BY YOUR BEDS … race incoming … In seven minutes’ time, brace yourselves for a dramatic start. Stroll and Verstappen collided at turn one in practice on Friday, and Sainz is wary that it could cause a hairy situation at the start of the race. Speaking to F1.com, the McLaren driver said: “That Turn 1, it’s asking for some accidents. The angle of the corner and how fast the guys on the outside will approach it – and how slow the guys on the inside [will be] and which angle we will approach it – it will be tricky! It’s going to be a bit of an experiment this track, and hopefully it can create some cool racing.” The drivers have just been out to make the now-familiar End Racism gesture, with Hamilton wearing a Black Lives Matter shirt. Some fans are present at the circuit this weekend, and the message was warmly received. Speaking to Sky Sports earlier, Hamilton displayed a different shirt bearing the hashtag: “#ENDSARS”, a protest against Nigeria’s infamous Special Anti-Robbery Squad. Some more context here … While the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve makes its F1 bow, it’s not completely alien to everyone on the grid and working at some of the teams. Within weeks of the circuit’s completion in 2008, Ferrari and McLaren spent two days testing that December. Renault, Toro Rosso (now AlphaTauri) and Williams also spent some tinker time there in early 2009. Ricciardo won the British F3 championship on the circuit in 2009, while Pérez competed in GP2 the same year. Albon, Leclerc, Russell and Stroll all competed in the Formula 3 European Championship. Asked about the venue earlier this weekend, Hamilton said: “Oh god – it’s hardcore. It’s a really, really hardcore circuit. There are places where you can’t see where you’re going. You’re looking at the sky for periods of time. Understanding your braking points, there are no references when you’re looking at the sky. It really is one of the most challenging circuits I’ve been too.” In the drivers’ standings, Verstappen closed the gap on Bottas in second at the Eifel GP. The Finn’s failure to finish from pole due to a power problem left the way open for 23-year-old to take second place. Hamilton has a mammoth 69pt cushion at the top. Drivers’ standings 1 Lewis Hamilton 230pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 161 3 Max Verstappen 147 4 Daniel Ricciardo 78 5 Sergio Pérez 68 6 Lando Norris 65 7 Alexander Albon 64 8 Charles Leclerc 63 9 Lance Stroll 57 10 Pierre Gasly 53 11 Carlos Sainz 51 12 Esteban Ocon 36 13 Sebastian Vettel 17 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 Another subplot today is that, mathematically, Mercedes could secure their seventh successive constructors’ title. It would require them to better Red Bull’s points haul from the weekend by 40 or more, which would require both Max Verstappen (who starts third) and Alexander Albon (starting sixth) to both have days to forget. Constructors’ standings 1 Mercedes 391pts 2 Red Bull 211 3 Racing Point 120 4 McLaren 116 5 Renault 114 6 Ferrari 80 7 AlphaTauri 67 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 The cars are on their way out on the pit lane, with the start 35 minutes away. On the first hot runs in Q3 Bottas led the Mercedes pair out and set the initial pace with a 1min 16.986sec, an advantage over Lewis Hamilton of four-hundredths of a second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was ultimately third, still in touch, a tenth back on the leaders. Their times, however, were down on earlier runs as the wind picked up in the hills of the Algarve and with the drivers still struggling for grip on the newly resurfaced track Mercedes offered both their men options for their final runs – what rubber to run and whether to make two or three laps. The latter was crucial – two laps carried less weight in fuel but three offered the possibility of the rubber working marginally better on the final run. Both Hamilton and Bottas switched from the soft to the medium tyre but Bottas chose a two-lap run and Hamilton the three. Hamilton had an extra lap to work his rubber, putting in two quick runs after his out lap. It proved inspired but it could not have been closer as the lead seesawed between them. Hamilton’s first flying circuit set the pace with a 1:16.934 only for Bottas to better it with a 1:16.754. But the Finn then had to peel off into the pits as Hamilton circled one more time, banking on having the very best of what grip there was at the death. It worked and he delivered as he checked out with a 1:16.652, a tenth clear of Bottas and two-tenths up on Verstappen. 1 Lewis Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Valtteri Bottas (Mercedes) 3 Max Verstappen (Red Bull) 4 Charles Leclerc (Ferrari) 5 Sergio Pérez (Racing Point) 6 Alexander Albon (Red Bull) 7 Carlos Sainz (McLaren) 8 Lando Norris (McLaren) 9 Pierre Gasly (AlphaTauri) 10 Daniel Ricciardo (Renault) 11 Esteban Ocon (Renault) 12 Lance Stroll (Racing Point) 13 Daniil Kvyat (AlphaTauri) 14 George Russell (Williams) 15 Sebastian Vettel (Ferrari) 16 Kimi Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) 17 Antonio Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) 18 Romain Grosjean (Haas) 19 Kevin Magnussen (Haas) 20 Nicholas Latifi (Williams) Before we get to a qualifying catch-up, an unsettling story from yesterday that has affected things behind the scenes in Portimão … Vitaly Petrov, the Russian former driver who was a steward at the Portuguese Grand Prix, has stepped down after his father, Alexandr, was shot dead at his home in Vyborg, 80 miles north-west of St Petersburg. He will be replaced by Bruno Correia, the Formula E safety car driver. On Thursday Petrov had been criticised for being used in the stewarding role by Lewis Hamilton in response to the negative comments Petrov had made on the British driver’s anti-racist stance this season. The FIA stated Petrov had stepped down from his position after “a personal bereavement” and Russian media is reporting the incident as an assassination. Petrov has returned home to Russia. Happy Sunday! Welcome to lap-by-lap coverage from the first Portuguese Grand Prix since 1996. It’s already been a dramatic weekend at the 12-year-old Autódromo Internacional do Algarve, making its F1 bow, with drivers frustrated by a broken drain cover that halted final practice and delayed qualifying, and then a brilliantly tight qualifying session (of which more in a sec). It’s all led up to a Mercedes one-two on the grid, fronted by defending champion and runaway 2020 drivers’ standings leader Lewis Hamilton, who has been racking up records in recent times, and today has his first opportunity at a big ’un, outright. Michael Schumacher overhauled Alain Prost for race wins at the 2001 Belgian Grand Prix, when he took his 52nd victory. Between 2001 and 2006 he added 39 more, leaving him light years ahead of everyone else. In recent times, Hamilton has reeled his haul in and two weeks ago at Nürburgring he joined Schumacher on 91. Given the British driver’s dominance in recent seasons, and his team’s superiority over the chasing pack, it’s a a question of when rather than if he will make the record all his own. His teammate Valtteri Bottas starts second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen third and Charles Leclerc an encouraging fourth for Ferrari. Rain is forecast to arrive at Portimão in a few hours, but as things stand we should just about get a full race in bright, cloudy conditions. With BST ending overnight in the UK, sending a nation into its six-monthly fart about to find instructions of how to change the clocks in their cars and on their ovens, the race starts at 1.10pm GMT.
17||Fijian-born British soldiers lose latest legal fight to stay in UKEight Fijian-born soldiers who served with the British army in Iraq and Afghanistan have been rebuffed in their initial attempt to seek a judicial review of the handling of their immigration claims. A high court judge said the Commonwealth veterans were “out of time” – but the veterans are able to demand a fuller oral hearing in December, where they will make a final attempt to win the right to remain in the UK. The British army actively recruits from Fiji and those who serve more than four years have the right to remain in the UK if they can afford the application fees. But the eight say that because of systemic administrative errors they were not properly informed of their rights when discharged. Esita Tuimanu, from Commonwealth Neglected Veterans, said the eight were victims of “institutional discrimination” from the Home Office and Ministry of Defence and they would “keep on fighting till the end”. The veterans and their lawyers say they intend to run a public campaign in the run-up to the final high court hearing, in the hope that ministers will allow them to remain in the UK without paying the usual application fees of £2,389 per person. One of those joining the campaign is Tuimanu’s 10-year-old daughter, Gracie-Ann Kelly, whose father, Etuate Bakaniceva, served in Iraq and Afghanistan. She has started making badges in support of the veterans and posting videos about her efforts on YouTube. “They must not be forgotten for their service to the Queen,” she said. She was born a British citizen because of her father’s service but has been unable to see him for the past six years, partly because of the immigration complications that followed after he had served in the army. Bakaniceva was prematurely discharged in 2010, a year after he had been injured in an RPG attack in Musa Qala, Afghanistan, that killed another British soldier, Cpl Danny Nield. Bakaniceva could not afford the cost of applying for citizenship for both him and his wife after he was discharged, and was suffering from tinnitus and PTSD. Struggling with his condition, he eventually returned to Fiji to get help. But Tuimanu said that because he had been away for more than two years he had to reapply to reenter the UK and see Gracie-Ann or obtain treatment. His medical and citizenship problems “tore his family apart”, she said, and his young daughter does not want others in a similar position to suffer in the same way. “Gracie-Ann is fighting for justice for these veterans because she wants to see the Commonwealth eight veterans get to have the peace and luxury to family and private life. This was a privilege she never had the opportunity to enjoy,” Tuimanu added. Most of the eight claimants have not been named, but one, Taitusi Ratucaucau, is facing a £50,000 NHS bill after a brain tumour, with the hospital waiting to see if his immigration status is being resolved before levying any bill. Costs of £12,000 were awarded against the veterans, who have been crowdfunding their campaign, by Mr Justice Lane following the initial ruling. As he ruled against the claimants, the judge accused them of “an inappropriate attempt to mount a legal challenge in respect of what is in reality a campaign to change the law”. A government spokesperson said: “The Home Office and Ministry of Defence work closely with our foreign and Commonwealth recruits to make sure they are aware of how they and their families can attain settlement in the UK, and the costs involved.” “Whilst legal proceedings are ongoing, we cannot comment on these cases.” The lawyers for the claimants, led by Anthony Metzer QC from Goldsmith Chambers and Vinita Templeton from Duncan Lewis Solicitors said they would “continue to pursue legal redress vigorously for what we consider to be a just and principled cause”. The final oral hearing is scheduled for 1 December.
2||Lewis Hamilton wins Portuguese GP to break Michael Schumacher's F1 recordOnly time will tell how long Lewis Hamilton’s extraordinary success story will run. At this moment, however, it is enough to acknowledge the world champion as he is now – in winning the Portuguese Grand Prix to become the most successful Formula One driver in history. A sportsman at the peak of his powers who has delivered now so consistently, for so long, that like the true greats he is almost making the extraordinary look commonplace. Which is to do him a disservice, everything about his victory summed up why he is one of the greatest of all time. His touch was exquisite, the win emphatic. As he crossed the line at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve to take his 92nd win, one more than Michael Schumacher, his race engineer Peter Bonnington summed it up succinctly. “What a race,” he said. “You are rewriting the history books.” Which he is. Schumacher’s records were thought untouchable. Hamilton has them all in his grasp and will likely shatter them to the winds. He already holds most pole positions and now race wins. This season he will match Schumacher’s seven titles and there is every chance next season surpass that milestone too. Yet much as this was a recognition of the accumulation of success, a numbers game, it was also a moment of sheer emotion for the world champion too. Two weeks ago, on equalling Schumacher at the Nürburgring, he had been moved, humbled, he said. Here in Portimao there was a sense of giving free rein to revel in the joy of having achieved something no other driver has ever managed. Having climbed from his car he went to enjoy a long embrace with his father Anthony, who had been so vital in supporting Hamilton’s career when he began racing. There were tears in his father’s eyes as his son stood atop the podium, doubtless made all the more poignant now the pair have reconciled after their once close relationship broke down in 2010. For Hamilton himself there was unalloyed joy and a distinct sense that this was a moment he would allow himself to savour. He deserves it and the recognition for it. It had been his remarkable judgment that led him to run an extra lap in qualifying that helped ensure he took pole. It is an almost other-worldly talent possessed by only a tiny number of sportspeople. He has combined this with an enormous natural talent and an intimidating ability to turn in performances that are so often flawless. In Portugal it was his touch in managing his tyres such that he had pace a class apart from his rivals. Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas, who was second, admitted he could do nothing to challenge the world champion. Indeed if there are chinks in Hamilton’s armour he guards them well. Physically and mentally the British driver presents a rock against which the waves of the opposition crash with futility. It has taken him 262 races to reach his remarkable 92 wins, having scored his first at Canada in his debut season in 2007. Now 35 years old, his record since then has been hugely impressive. He is the only driver to have taken a win in every season in which he has competed, now stretching across 14 years in F1. Since Mercedes proved so strong when the turbo-hybrid era began, he has been ruthless in taking every opportunity and returning an extraordinary success rate. He has 71 victories for the team and bar 2017 when he took the title with nine wins has scored 10 or more a season every year since 2014. It is relentless success that has perhaps made it sometimes feel almost as a foregone conclusion yet it is anything but. This trait, the repeated inch-perfect execution across circuits, conditions and machinery season-in, season-out is what other drivers recognise as making him so hard to beat. Max Verstappen, who was third for Red Bull, acknowledged it. “Everybody knows he is very quick but what has been his strong point is he is very consistent and very rarely makes a mistake,” Verstappen said. “That’s why he got to these numbers so quickly, it’s very impressive.” Hamilton did so in Portugal with a masterclass that epitomised Verstappen’s assessment. Recovering from a testing start when he lost places from pole on cold rubber, the world champion held his composure and put his head down to then manage his tyres to perfection. The track surface lacked grip and was a challenge but Hamilton had its measure, exploiting the additional pace he was able to eke out from not overworking his rubber to retake and then hold a significant lead over Bottas. Portugal has not hosted a grand prix for 24 years since 1996 when Jacques Villeneuve won at Estoril, in doing so making a memorable pass on Schumacher. This time Hamilton showed the same fine race management the great German so often exhibited. Indeed, he was on rails through the undulations of the hills of the Algarve’s rollercoaster. Once he had ensured he had put less wear into his tyres and regained his lead, he never looked back, taking the flag 25 seconds from Bottas. More is surely to come, this moment a special one but Hamilton’s entry in the history books is far from finalised yet. Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc an excellent fourth and there was a superb fifth for Pierre Gasly in the AlphaTauri. Carlos Sainz was sixth for McLaren, Sergio Pérez seventh for Racing Point. Renault’s Esteban Ocon and Daniel Ricciardo were in eighth and ninth and Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel in 10th.
18||Girlhood: Girlhood review – breezy, 90s-tinged electropopSinger-songwriter Tessa Cavanna and producer Christian Pinchbeck first crossed paths in 2017. He heard her singing, so the story goes, when she walked past his narrowboat in east London and was so impressed he invited her to hop on board and record in his studio. The resulting project, Girlhood, marry sweet, soaring vocals with iPad instrumentals, channelling the expansive spirit of the Avalanches and the gospel-tinged beats of Moby. In other words, at times they can sound anachronistic. It’s the older tracks, such as Bad Decisions and Milk &amp; Honey, that really shine on their self-titled debut – the former with its taut percussion and uplifting vocals; the latter all spiralling melodies and trip-hoppy scratches. Queendom, meanwhile, is smooth and soft, while Fever Sweat recalls the atmospheric warmth of producer Flume, and Keep On and The Love I Need possess a housey euphoria. So, while there’s nothing especially fresh-sounding here, Girlhood is a solid set of breezy electropop with a hint of future possibilities.
19||Nightmare on asylum street: His House, the horror film about the migrant crisisThere has never been a whole lot of overlap between the social realism of Ken Loach and the twisted horror of A Nightmare on Elm Street. But that’s about to change with the release of His House, a strikingly original debut from the gifted British film-maker Remi Weekes, which was snapped up by Netflix at Sundance earlier this year for an eight-figure sum. His House follows a South Sudanese couple – Wunmi Mosaku as Rial, Sope Dirisu as her husband Bol – who are dumped on a bleak Essex housing estate while their appeal for asylum is considered. Their temporary home is blighted by peeling walls, dodgy wiring and hostile neighbours. Worse than that, it’s haunted. If they flee, Rial and Bol risk deportation for violating bail. Stay, however, and they will need to do battle with the wall-dwelling creatures, which appear to have followed them from Africa. This isn’t the first film to use the conventions of horror to address this modern crisis: Mati Diop’s Atlantics imagined the women of Dakar being possessed by the ghosts of migrants who had perished at sea. But it is undoubtedly the scariest. His House thrives on two types of threat, the social and the supernatural, each intensifying the other. Horror audiences will be accustomed to figures lurking in the back of the frame – it’s just that, in this case, there’s no knowing whether it will be a scuttling monster, a meddling immigration official, or a lout. When the idea of a horror story involving asylum-seekers was first proposed to Weekes by producers, he was unsure if he had any personal connection to the material. Although his grandparents are from St Lucia and Sierra Leone, he was raised in London. “But once I thought about it, I was reminded of how I felt growing up in this country,” says the 33-year-old, sitting in his home with a bicycle leaning against the wall behind him. “You’re torn. There’s one side that wants to assimilate and be accepted by a culture that is ambivalent toward you. Then another side wants to reject that, to be proud of where you’re from, to rebel against the norms. That’s always been in the background of conversations with my family and friends: which parts of us are English and which are from other places?” The theme of tribalism underpins His House. Back in South Sudan, Rial scarred herself with the markings of two warring factions to improve her chances of survival. Now in Britain, she finds it harder to move between tribes. In the film’s most provocative scene, she approaches a group of black British teenagers for help, only to receive a chastening reminder that skin colour is no guarantee of solidarity. Weekes consulted with Waging Peace, an organisation that opposes genocide and human rights violations in Sudan, and Right to Remain, which helps people navigate the UK asylum system. This was to ensure a realistic grounding for a story that takes flight into the nightmarish. “It was important to know how asylum seekers are treated,” he says. “The draconian rules, the uncaring bureaucracy, it all shows this lack of empathy.” Physical displacement and disorientation become, in the film, a breeding ground for internal horrors. “Being effectively under house arrest, you can really take a battering psychologically. All the spooky stuff that happens in the house I wanted to treat as tangible. Whether it’s real or not doesn’t matter – it feels real to the characters.” Weekes first made his name as one half of the partnership Tell No One, turning out playful, effects-driven video shorts with his childhood friend Luke White. The duo’s name suggests the sinister or the secretive, though nothing could be further from the truth. “We just wanted to put stuff online without telling anyone,” says Weekes. “It was more a reference to our psychology, to not letting ego get in the way. We’re very understated people. Get us in a meeting and we go quiet.” Posting their shorts on YouTube and Vimeo, the pair attracted commissions from fashion and advertising. Those films have an enchanting simplicity: in one, coloured umbrellas pop open like vibrant floral blooms, while another shows arms layered digitally on screen to create a tree of limbs. His House also features a multiple-arm scene, as does Weekes’s Channel 4 horror short Tickle Monster. Does he have a fear of limbs? “I don’t think so,” he says with a sheepish giggle. “Tickle Monster came from a conversation I had with a friend. He was dating someone who kept tickling him. Even though he hated it and it made him feel awful, his laughter seemed to the other person like some weird form of consent. I thought, ‘That could be a horror film.’” He has also encountered another kind of monster: Harvey Weinstein, who was desperate to get his paws on His House, back when it was a hot script doing the rounds. “When I turned the Weinstein Company down, they got upset and tried to sue me. They’re very aggressive about getting the rights to films. If it wasn’t for the #MeToo movement that blew up the company, they probably would have had their way.” Now that’s a scary story. • His House is in selected cinemas now, and on Netflix from 30 October.
5||Sudan is being rewarded for its revolution with blackmailFew countries in the world have been subjected to as many punitive sanctions as Sudan. After the deposed president Omar al-Bashir came to power in a military coup in 1989, the country was gradually cut off from the rest of the world, with the upholding of human rights the rationale. Economic sanctions were followed by a spot on the state sponsors of terrorism list, and then by the indictment of Bashir by the international criminal court. At some point it became hard to keep up with all the legislation, punishment for the reckless harbouring of terrorists in the 1990s, and the brutal slaughter of marginalised ethnic groups in areas such as Darfur. There were sanctions on individuals, a US travel ban on all Sudanese-born people, acts of Congress and lawsuits by members 9/11 victims’ families. The country became a sort of human rights cause celebre, attracting Hollywood stars and a vast network of lobbyists in Washington who, whenever it seemed like there might be a relaxation of sanctions, campaigned fiercely to keep them going. Bashir was a president over whom it was easy to reach consensus. Here was an African brute in the classic mould, a military man who turned on his own people, and a sharia-wielding terror sponsor to boot. But it was not Bashir or his government that suffered. He remained in power, if anything getting stronger. He and his vast network of cronies had the means to circumvent sanctions, finding ways to do business and enrich themselves. The Sudanese people, those whom the global human rights community was ostensibly supporting, struggled in isolation, in poverty and with a lack of access to basic healthcare. Eventually, interest in Sudan faded. The war on terror ran out of steam after the killing of Osama bin Laden and the weakening of al-Qaida, and the moral outrage over Darfur found catharsis via war crimes indictments. The international community moved on, but all the sanctions stayed. The world remembered Sudan last year, when an epic revolution overthrew Bashir at long last. His removal came at a heavy cost. Many were killed in confrontations with security forces, and the economy, already on the brink, was pushed over the edge. But it was worth it. The feeling on the streets was that the blood, the economic instability, the political jeopardy were all worth it if the Sudanese were to have a shot at democracy and dignity. The United States, the Sudanese people’s alleged white knight, took one look at the success of the Sudanese revolution and decided to blackmail the country in return for taking it off the state sponsors of terror list, reintegrating it into the international financial and trade system, and providing aid. Last week Donald Trump made clear that the price tag would be $335m (£256m) of compensation for terrorist attacks that took place under the old regime. Alongside this, the US is forcing the fragile new interim government, already struggling to maintain its mandate amid worsening economic conditions and the plotting of Bashir loyalists, to recognise Israel and normalise relations – a move that is hugely unpopular with the Sudanese people, and about which they weren’t consulted. Even for those of us in Sudan who had given up expecting more, this naked exploitation of a country brought to its knees but still crawling to freedom is hard to stomach. The choice for the Sudanese government is to risk economic collapse and a resurgence of the old forces – essentially the overturning of the revolution – or to accept all of the US’s conditions. That is no choice at all. Trump crowed about the deal, tweeting that Sudan had “agreed” to pay the $335m, and that this was “justice” for the American people. The agreement to normalise relations with Israel was announced last week, and has already triggered anger domestically. The condition seems to have been thrown in just because the US could, and amounts to bullying a country with which Israel is not likely to have many trade or diplomatic ties anyway. It’s about building numbers and momentum in the Arab world so that more valuable regional assets, such as Saudi Arabia, can be convinced to normalise relations too. That is all Sudan is – a weak pawn. It’s a case study in how the moral framework within which human rights law is drafted and enforced is designed not to bring about regime change and the safety and security of people suffering under despots, but to leverage the victimhood of those people to advance other interests. The first of these interests is self-image. Western powers can maintain their charade of virtue by coming down hard on poor countries that have little strategic importance. The second is a need to divert scrutiny away from allies, such as Saudi Arabia, that have never been in the dock to answer questions about sponsorship of terrorism or the quashing of internal dissent. Who has attempted to hold Riyadh accountable for its palming off of Osama bin Laden to other countries to wreak havoc, its exportation of dangerous hardline Islamism? Indignation, sanctions, censure and condemnation are instead reserved for countries such as Sudan. Even with these burdens, the Sudanese people managed to liberate themselves from Bashir’s grip. But the injustice they have suffered was compounded by the very system that was supposed to help them: the west’s hypocritical, counterproductive human rights regime. • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist
16||The Knife of Dawn/New Dark Age review - isolation meditationsThe goodwill that inevitably greeted this double bill – a proper staged event with live music! – couldn’t quite hide the disappointment with the first half. Hannah Kendall’s opera The Knife of Dawn, originally staged at the Roundhouse in 2016, is a rather laboured and didactic piece that succeeds only in informing us about a largely forgotten moment in colonial history. It follows the aftermath of the 1953 elections in British Guiana, the first under universal suffrage, which were overturned by British authorities. The story is told from the point of view of the Guyanese poet Martin Carter, one of the many members of the victorious People’s Progressive Party who was jailed. He is on hunger strike and is starting to hallucinate, haunted by offscreen female voices – his wife and daughter, other political prisoners, long-dead Guyanese slaves – who drive him to the brink of madness. Despite a fine performance by baritone Peter Braithwaite, the monologue lacks any dramatic momentum, mistaking showing for telling. We are told that Carter is a great poet, which he was, but it’s not evident from Tessa McWatt’s excruciating libretto, which spends an hour outlining the historical background and ends just as it starts to explore any artistic and emotional ramifications. Much more effective is the second half of the bill, New Dark Age, in which existing compositions by three leading contemporary composers are reworked into a 10-part song suite that narrates post-pandemic life, accompanied by Grant Gee’s artful slow-motion film. The only original piece is Anna Meredith’s swooping Fly By Night, but even the compositions that are more than five years old, such as Missy Mazzoli’s quartet from Vespers for a New Dark Age, setting poems by Matthew Zapruder, seem to have an eerie post-Covid resonance. The shimmering Vivaldi-meets-Philip Glass textures of Meredith’s Stoop seem to sum up a locked-down population straining to enjoy the bright sunshine of April 2020, while Anna Thorvaldsdottir’s two choral pieces – a blend of austere medieval plainsong and holy minimalism – serve as a threnody for the victims of the pandemic. By the end of the suite, with Meredith’s bleak a cappella Heal You (text by Philip Ridley) and her icy, discordant, malfunctioning harpsichord-and-strings piece Low Light, the bemasked audience at the ROH seemed emotionally prepared for a second lockdown. • Available to stream on demand to ticket holders until 23 November.
20||Serco staff told to wear masks in courts and cells after complaintsEscort and security officers working for Serco and other firms have been told to wear face masks in courts and cells amid complaints about inadequate social distancing in the criminal justice system. The abrupt policy change, which comes into force on Monday, has been imposed by the Ministry of Justice on the outsourcing company, which also runs a widely criticised contact-tracing service for the government that is supposed to limit the spread of coronavirus infections. The MoJ instruction also requires all security staff, including those working for GeoAmey, another outsourcing company that carries out similar prisoner guarding and transporting duties, to wear masks when on duty. Until recently it was assumed by the court service that work inside courtrooms was sufficiently socially distanced or individuals adequately protected by perspex screens. But the rapid rise in infections during the pandemic’s second wave has forced a review of health safety measures. The Guardian has been told of one incident in a criminal trial where a judge requested security staff to put on face masks but they declined to do so. Concern has been expressed by lawyers and other court staff over the more relaxed regulations inside court buildings compared with compulsory mask wearing in shops. Last week, the barrister Sarah Forshaw QC tweeted that mask-wearing for security at court would be desirable. Another barrister tweeted: “Well, none of us could have predicted this. Also, why are GeoAmey etc not telling the cells staff to wear masks or providing PPE? In every cell area I’ve been in during the pandemic, gaolers have been maskless.” Concerns have also been expressed by Intermediaries for Justice, the experts who sit alongside vulnerable witnesses and defendants in court, helping them to understand and communicate during proceedings. Catherine O’Neill, the chair of the charity, said: “Our members are concerned that dock officers are not wearing masks. The conference rooms are extremely small and intermediaries throughout the country are reporting concerns that when they visit the custody suites there’s poor ventilation but no one seems to be wearing PPE [personal protective equipment]. “I have seen barristers wearing visors and masks. One judge used gloves. But the dock officers in Serco uniforms were not wearing any PPE. Serco is running the test-and-trace contract. I cannot understand why they do not have a duty to look after their employees and to the prisoners who will be the last to have a voice. “After being in court the other day where no masks were worn in the building, it felt like a different world when I stepped outside and all the cafes and shops were compliant and doing their best.” A Serco spokesman said: “As of 21 October [the date the MoJ letter arrived], all Serco officers have been mandated to wear PPE face masks by our customer, the MoJ. “Prior to that date, safe systems of work were in place which were endorsed by the MOJ, where a risk assessment process determined whether a mask was to be worn; for instance for confirmed or suspected Covid cases only or where the 2-metre rule could not be met. “All safe systems of work and risk assessments were aligned to PHE guidance; this has clearly now changed to reflect more stringent measures.” A spokesperson for GeoAmey said: “With limited exceptions, from Monday 26 October it will be mandatory for GeoAmey employees to wear GeoAmey-provided medical-grade PPE face masks when entering an HMPPS establishment, within the court custody suite and associated docks, and aboard vehicles and in offices where social distancing cannot be maintained.” An MoJ spokesperson said: “All custody and security staff are required to wear masks where social distancing is not possible. Following consultation with partners this will be extended to all circumstances.” Judges are understood to have been given discretion to decide whether security staff need to wear them while sitting in the dock alongside a defendant.
18||Royal Northern Sinfonia/Cottis – buoyant return with Mozart and an intriguing rarityThe autumn season has started late for the Royal Northern Sinfonia – as it has for almost every British orchestra. But this weekend it embarked on an initial seven-week series of concerts in its home auditorium at Sage Gateshead, with a socially distanced audience of around 300 in the concert hall, and an online audience watching via a livestream. The programmes are a nice mix of reassuringly well-known pieces with rarities and new works. In the opening concert, which was conducted by Jessica Cottis, the familiar feelgood music was by Mozart – the overture to The Marriage of Figaro and the 39th symphony, K549, both given suitably buoyant, if slightly routine performances, with just the occasional moment when the ensemble was not quite as precise as it might have been had the orchestra been playing regularly together for the last seven months. If a short piece, Strum, by the composer-performer Jessie Montgomerie seemed a disappointingly routine workout for strings here, never conveying the freshness and energy reported for her music, the real collector’s item was Jean Françaix’s Double Bass Concerto, with the RNS’s newly appointed principal double bass, Philip Nelson, as the soloist. Françaix wrote concertos and chamber music for a huge range of instruments, but unlike Hindemith, another neoclassicist who was equally prolific, he generally did so with a sense of humour. The gruff little march with which the double bass concerto opens is surely tongue-in-cheek, and the lyrical episodes in the later movements seem to have been inserted just to take the solo instrument as far out of its comfort zone as possible, though Nelson obviously relished every opportunity to put it in the spotlight. The home stream didn’t run as smoothly as those we’ve seen from other orchestras and halls – just teething problems, I’m sure. But it’s a shame the concerts are only being made available online live, and those who pay to watch them are unable to view them again, while others who couldn’t make the live cast, can’t catch up with them later. • Sage Live 2020 continues until December.
11||NHS denies elderly people were refused care during early CovidNHS bosses have denied claims that thousands of frail elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic in order to stop the health service being overrun. NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. “The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts. It was older patients who disproportionately received NHS care. Over two-thirds of our Covid-19 inpatients were aged over 65. “The NHS repeatedly instructed staff that no patient who could benefit from treatment should be denied it and, thanks to people following government guidance, even at the height of the pandemic there was no shortage of ventilators and intensive care.” The newspaper claimed the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. The Sunday Times said its claims were the result of a three-month investigation that involved speaking to more than 50 sources in the NHS and the government about the health service’s response to the pandemic. As a result, they decided to stop “large numbers of elderly and frail patients” going into hospital in the first place, so that intensive care wards would not be overwhelmed, which meant that many patients died of Covid-19 at home or in care homes, it added. Ambulance crews and hospitals were told to be more selective than usual about who should be admitted, “with specific instructions to exclude many elderly people”, the Sunday Times said. Dr Alison Pittard, the dean of the Faculty of Intensive Care Medicine, said patients had not been denied care. “Throughout the first wave of Covid-19 the NHS did not run out of critical care capacity, which remained available to everybody who would benefit from it,” she said. The Sunday Times pointed out that of the 59,000 excess deaths in England and Wales in the first six months of the pandemic, only 8,000 occurred in hospital, while 26,000 were in care homes and 25,000 in private homes. It also claimed that an “age-based frailty score” commissioned by Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, played a key role in the alleged policy of denying care. A spokesperson for the Intensive Care Society said, however, that while an expert group did undertake work on developing guidance for doctors on which patients should be prioritised for admission, it was “subsequently stood down on 28/29 March 2020, with Department of Health and Social Care or NHS implementation, after a review of capacity and pandemic trajectory”. NHS sources are adamant that “NHS hospitals did not run out of intensive care beds, so there was never a need to refuse anyone treatment on the basis of NHS capacity. There was categorically no blanket national decision to refuse care to any group of people, including on the basis of their age”.
7||Scottish Tory leader: I still can't see why Dominic Cummings did not resignThe Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross, has reignited the row over Dominic Cummings’ Durham lockdown trip by indicating that he could not see how the prime minister’s most senior aide did not resign over the incident. Ross, who quit his junior ministerial post in protest at Cummings’ 264-mile journey from London at the height of Covid-19 restrictions, said the actions of Boris Johnson’s adviser were “indefensible” and that they had undermined the government. In a fresh intervention unlikely to prove popular in Number 10, Ross stood by his decision to stand down and suggested Cummings should have followed his lead. Pressed on whether he believed Cummings should have resigned over the affair, Ross told the Guardian: “If someone who was not involved at all resigned then, yes, I don’t see how the individual themselves couldn’t take that position. I was so far removed from the actions yet even that far away from it I felt what he did was indefensible and that’s why I would assume, or I feel, he would take the same decision but he didn’t.” Ross was particularly unconvinced by Cummings’ excuse that he had gone on a separate drive with his family while he was in Durham to nearby Barnard Castle, apparently to test his eyesight. “I felt the only way I could be true to myself was to resign from government and to express my opposition to what he’d done, particularly the driving 60 miles to test your eyesight.” Noting his wife’s job as a police officer, he said: “I did think, how would she manage if she pulled someone over for driving issues and they used the defence that they were testing their eyesight?” He has no regrets: “Several months on, I still believe it was the right decision to take.” Rather than setting back the 37-year-old MP’s career, within months of his resignation in May from the role as parliamentary undersecretary of state for Scotland he was thrust back into the frontline of politics when he became the Conservatives’ leader north of the border uncontested. He has since set about reinvigorating the Scottish Conservatives’ approach as the SNP renews its calls for a second independence referendum. Nicola Sturgeon’s party is riding high in the polls ahead of next year’s Holyrood election. Ross, who has a seat in Westminster but not in the Scottish parliament, appointed Ruth Davidson, who held his job until 2019, to be his party’s leader in Holyrood. Davidson has been no fan of Johnson and any apparent attempt by Ross to differentiate himself from No 10 could play well with the home crowd, given the prime minister’s popularity in Scotland is questionable. In his conference speech this month, he called on his party to end the “defeatism and disinterest” over the country’s future in the UK, arguing that an SNP majority in next year’s Holyrood election was not inevitable. Reflecting on the speech, Ross said he had wanted to “make it very clear that it’s in our name that we are both Conservative and unionists”. “I said in my speech it’s in our DNA and if you don’t believe in strengthening the union and the bonds that we share across four nations of the United Kingdom then you’ve got to reflect on if you’re in the right party or not,” he said. “The feedback I’ve had back since is people at various levels in the party think it is right that that message was delivered just now because the defeatism and disinterest only benefits the SNP and their agenda to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK and I want to do everything I can to stop that.” It comes as a poll this month put backing for independence at a record high of 58%. The SNP constitution secretary, Mike Russell, indicated on Thursday that Scotland could face a second independence referendum as early as next year, following the victory for the Better Together camp in 2014. Ross called Russell’s comments “deeply disappointing but sadly predictable”. Reports also emerged this month about a leaked memo from a political consultancy firm given to senior Tories which said continuing to dismiss calls for another independence referendum could be counterproductive. It proposed potentially handing more power to Edinburgh. Ross said he did not receive the memo, but dismissed the suggestion of more powers going to Holyrood, suggesting the current ones should be used to better effect. On Sturgeon’s handling of the pandemic, Ross highlighted her communication skills in what some might characterise as a subtle dig at Downing Street. “No one would doubt that Nicola Sturgeon is a highly effective communicator but when you look at the response to the pandemic in Scotland, and across the UK, it has been largely similar,” he said. “So people who suggest there has somehow been a different approach to dealing with coronavirus in Scotland to the rest of the UK are simply unable to point to anything substantial that has been done differently. But there has been a difference in terms of the communication.” Asked about Downing Street following Scotland in U-turning over the summer on exam results, Ross said: “From students receiving their exam results in Scotland, the U-turn took longer by the Scottish government than it did by the UK government. Now I think the UK government should have seen what happened in Scotland and changed the decision before exam results south of the border were even delivered … but the fact is that it took the Scottish government longer.”
5||Tenants are facing eviction again, despite the UK government's promisesAfter a seven-month gap, the housing courts are open. Although many of them will not be operating at any capacity until early November, some cases are starting to be heard. In mid-October I represented a typical couple, Monty and Lola (not their real names). They were in court to prevent a bailiff’s appointment that had been scheduled for the Friday. The government has insisted that such hearings should continue. It has set in place two main protections for tenants. First, in the majority of cases, landlords have to wait several months after serving notices on tenants before issuing proceedings. Second, where cases were begun during the first lockdown, landlords must serve a “reactivation notice”, telling the courts whether a tenant has been affected by Covid. The idea of both provisions is to filter out the cases where the justification for eviction is clearest. Monty and Lola were excluded from either protection because a final possession order had already been made against them before Covid. In drafting the rules, the government refused to include any safeguards for people in that situation. Eighteen months earlier, their landlord had served a section 21 notice, a document that requires a tenant to leave without the landlord needing to show the tenant has done anything wrong. Monty and Lola went to their local Citizens Advice office and were told that the landlord could not win. He had taken a deposit from them but had not registered it within the statutory time and any section 21 notice would be invalid. The government has promised, many times, to repeal section 21 – however, it has indefinitely postponed acting on that promise. Although Monty and Lola had been in a strong position, they tried to be fair. They told the landlord’s solicitor they just needed to stay in their home until June 2020 when their son was due to leave school. The solicitor offered Monty and Lola a compromise: they could stay till the summer so long as they promised to leave then. They signed a consent order granting the landlord outright possession against them, never imagining that the pandemic would destroy all their plans. The issue before the court was simply whether that order had been properly made. The hearing was supposed to start on the Wednesday at 2.45pm using the court’s cloud video platform. Fifteen minutes beforehand, I logged into an online waiting room. I could see an icon representing me and one for my opponent. I could see a blue dot by the names of the people in the hearing, as the judge invited each of them to speak. But I could not hear them, and nor could they hear me. By now, my pulse was racing at around 200 beats a minute – think what it was like for my clients. The hearing was stopped and began again by telephone at 3.30pm. The judge had promised us a decision that day, but I needed to explain my client’s case, and the landlord’s barrister had to reply. Time wore on: past four, four thirty … We stopped at five, with no decision but the promise of a judgment on the Thursday. On Thursday morning, I spoke to my clients and asked how they were. “Terrible,” said Monty. “We couldn’t sleep,” added Lola. Monty was focusing on their son who is in year 12. He suffers from dyslexia and has a statement of special educational needs. They had been expecting to take him out of school after his GCSEs. But his mock grades had been so poor (and, because of Covid, they had become his final results) that he had been forced to stay at school another year to re-sit his exams. That was why they were trying so hard to stay in a home they had previously been planning to leave. Lola was focusing on the practicalities: they would not be able to find a moving company in the short time available to them. She and her husband had already driven more than 20 times to storage, they had moved everything they could. What they had left was heavy furniture, things they could not move without someone else’s assistance. They had asked the local authority to help, but it had refused. She could not imagine how they would move everything before the bailiffs arrived. “We can’t do it,” she told me, “we just can’t.” I had my telephone on speakerphone as the judge gave us her decision. She spoke gently and softly, but with urgency. The judge noted the decision of the higher courts that I had quoted. She referred to the cases my opponent had cited. The tension was so great, my hands clawed up. I could not type. She said that she agreed with me on the law – a consent order is binding in possession cases only if both parties had been absolutely clear in recording the factual admissions that would justify granting possession. That hadn’t happened in this case. Accordingly, she set aside the possession order and dismissed the warrant. Court officers would call the bailiffs and tell them the appointment was cancelled. When I rang Lola and Monty later, they sounded drunk with relief. Covid made everything rushed. It meant my clients had no proper warning of the bailiff’s appointment. It caused the hearing to be listed just days before the bailiff’s date. It meant that if we lost there would be no time to appeal to another judge. If the local authority had ended up moving my clients to emergency housing, it would have been shared accommodation – including possibly with people who might be ill. The government is aware that there is a problem, and has recently begun a process of negotiating with the bailiff’s bodies, inviting them to hold back from evictions in tier 2 and tier 3 areas. While this is to be welcomed, it doesn’t go far enough. There isn’t any proper legal basis on which bailiffs can refuse to carry out court orders, even at the government’s request. The new measures also are not being properly publicised, when (as we saw in Monty and Lola’s case) the problem in evictions is repeatedly that tenants don’t know their rights, and landlords rely on their ignorance. Much better would be a return to the summer’s ban on evictions. That system worked well and protected people who needed it. Until we do, many tens of thousands of people like Monty and Lola are going to suffer unnecessarily. • David Renton is a housing barrister at Garden Court Chambers
15||‘We had nudity on the greens!’ The battle over Britain’s golf coursesHollingbury golf course is a big splodge of green bleeding into Brighton’s grey urban sprawl. For more than a century, its 18 holes have risen above the seaside city towards the ruins of an iron age hillfort, which is now enclosed by holes nine, 12, 13, and 14. From Hollingbury’s highest point, it is possible to look west on a clear day and see the hills of the Isle of Wight. As housing has spread around the course, which is owned by the council, so has tension between golfers and walkers, who are permitted to cut across it on a network of footpaths and old drovers’ tracks. Relations seem calm on the autumn day I visit, but I gather “Fore!” is not the only four-letter exclamation to have bounced along the manicured fairways. In late March, the awkward relationship flipped on its head when a lockdown ban on golf coincided with a yearning for green space among Britain’s confined households. A national campaign, supported by the Brighton MP Caroline Lucas, called for golf courses to be opened to the public to relieve crowded parks. At Hollingbury, which has no fences and is part of the South Downs national park, residents responded like calves put out to pasture. They cartwheeled on the fairways and picnicked on the greens. “It was like being in the mountains up here, with that open-space feeling that makes you feel immediately better,” says Michaela Spryanova, an office administrator who lives just beyond the course’s western edge. Rachel Henson, an artist and translator, came here every day, basking in the spring sunshine and sweeping views over Brighton and the Channel. She taught her daughter to ride a bike on the sloping fairway of hole 10. “We learned all the common birdsong together,” she says. But then, in June, golf was permitted once more – and golfers reclaimed the course. “We knew it was coming, but it was a terrible shock,” Henson says as we walk with Spryanova from their children’s school after the morning drop-off. We stroll up towards the hillfort on one of the old paths to which non-golfers are again confined. “It depressed me so much I couldn’t come up here for a while,” Henson adds. The struggle for space at Hollingbury – and a second council-owned golf course two miles to the west at Waterhall – reflects a wider debate about conservation, ecology and democratic access to green space. As a pandemic triggers a revolt on many of Britain’s fairways, it poses a vexed question: is it time we opened up all golf courses to the public for good? One of the joys and challenges of golf is that it requires a lot of nice green space. How much space is disputed. A common claim that Britain’s golf courses occupy more land than housing is based on dodgy estimates, but it is a lot of land. The American writer Malcolm Gladwell once considered the scale of gated golf courses in Los Angeles, a city of few parks. He calculated that if you gave each player on a basketball court the space a golfer commands, the court would cover 12 hectares (30 acres); the hoops would be more than 400 metres apart. “They’d have to play on motorcycles,” Gladwell wrote. Yet this calculation depends on a course being busy. Not all courses are busy. Steve Garrioch, who has been the captain at Hollingbury since 2009, tells me he was one of significantly more than 500 members when he joined 20 years ago. There are now 122 members and about twice as many season-ticket holders. Garrioch, a leather merchant, blames an oversupply: Hollingbury is one of six courses within five miles of Brighton Palace pier in a city of about 300,000 people. But its decline is not unusual. According to a participation report by KPMG late last year, membership of golf courses in Great Britain dropped to a low of slightly more than 850,000, down almost 20,000 in a year. In Scotland, membership has dropped by 14% since 2014. Yet the number of courses – more than 2,000 – is relatively stable. Hollingbury, which opened in 1908, is not exclusive. “It’s for working-class people,” Garrioch says. “We’ve got taxi drivers, builders … there’s nothing elite about it.” Yet perceptions fuelled the debate about the role of courses in lockdown. “I think a certain US president has done golf no favours,” says Guy Shrubsole, a campaigner and the author of Who Owns England?. For Shrubsole, Donald Trump – and the eponymous courses on which he has played out a large part of his presidency – exemplifies the image of golf as a gated, gilded pursuit. In early April, when many councils threatened to shut the gates of crowded parks, Shrubsole launched a petition at change.org calling for golf courses to be opened. More than 7,500 people signed it. Lockdown was highlighting space inequality; studies show that people in poorer postcodes not only have smaller gardens, or none at all, but also less access to smaller parks. Pushing open the gates of golf courses began to feel like a moral imperative. “There’s a sense that golf is played by a small number of people and that they are potentially quite wealthy, retired, white men who don’t necessarily represent society,” Shrubsole says. It is not known how many courses opened to the public. It was a fraught process for many that did. “We had nudity on the greens and kids riding bikes straight over the bunkers,” Garrioch says. Elsewhere, there were reports of quad biking, horse riding and rampant picnicking. One couple were spotted playing a rather different sport in a bunker at Glenbervie golf club near Falkirk in central Scotland. “This isn’t Butlin’s,” an anonymous member of the club told the Daily Record. “It’s frustrating that members aren’t even allowed to get their daily exercise by playing a round on their own in the fresh air, yet you’ve got locals having sex in the bunkers. Where’s the social distancing in that?” But for the responsible majority, including Henson, Spryanova and their families, the overnight arrival of new parks was a revelation. “I wanted to shift debate and say there was something deeper going on here – this was about our exclusion from public space and our inability to provide enough of it,” Shrubsole says. That debate was big in Brighton before the pandemic. Ten-year management contracts at Hollingbury and Waterhall were due to expire on 31 March. “It came up at pretty much my first committee meeting last year,” says Marianna Ebel, a German-born IT engineer who was elected as a Green party councillor for Goldsmid ward in May 2019. Brexit inspired Ebel, 35, to enter local politics. She is now the joint chair of the council’s tourism, equalities, communities and culture committee, so council-owned golf courses are her responsibility. For a while, it was assumed a new operator would simply take over the leases. “But I remember looking at the membership numbers,” Ebel says. “I thought: ‘Instead of continuing, how about rewilding the courses?’” In October, the council appointed an estate agent to market the courses, offering 25-year management leases. But they also invited bids for other uses, including projects to restore the wildlife-rich chalk grassland on which the courses were laid. “We simply cannot miss this exciting opportunity to create a health &amp; wellbeing sanctuary and a wildlife haven for all,” read a petition launched in late December by the Brighton branch of Extinction Rebellion (XR), the environmental campaign group. Counter-petitions called for golf to be saved. Meanwhile, Liberal Democrat councillors pushed for the space to be used for affordable housing. More than 5,000 people signed the rewilding petition, including Chris Packham, the presenter and campaigner. In January, XR Brighton held a protest outside a committee meeting. They marched on Hollingbury. “We’re not anti-golf,” insists Ben Benatt, an ecology surveyor and XR member. “It’s about a sustainable solution that addresses the climate and biodiversity emergency.” In January, the council awarded a new contract for Hollingbury, securing its future as a golf course. It was a blow to campaigners and the families who had roamed the course. But the council also announced that Waterhall, where membership was in steeper decline, would shut down for a rare experiment: the rewilding of a golf course. “They call chalk grassland rainforests in miniature,” says Kim Greaves, as we crouch low on the first green at Waterhall. The 37-year-old played here briefly as a teenager. These days, he works with adults with learning disabilities and teaches Brazilian jujitsu, a martial art that relies on skilful leverage. He is also an amateur naturalist and part of the campaign to restore Waterhall. Golfers abandoned the course when lockdown stopped play just seven days before the old lease expired. It had stood here since 1923. Six months later, the greens are cracking up. Daisies and ragwort are growing and the old holes and bunkers are filling with soil and debris. The clubhouse, which sits just above the first green, has sweeping downland views. There is one proposal to move the building towards a rugby club, where dog walkers now park to enjoy the old course, and turn it into an education centre. For now, it is a symbol of a lost era. Abandoned trophies left in the window of the Spike Bar collect dust next to a golf glove, on which a large bumblebee has expired. The very thin layer of soil that covers chalk in valleys across the south-east of England – the result of centuries of grazing – lets rain drain straight through it. Nutrients are scant, so dominant grasses, and the shrubs and trees that would succeed them, tend not to do well. Instead, an array of resilient wildflowers cling to the earth, supporting rare species of butterfly and birds. Diversity on the old greens is still low; it will take years for the effects of mowing and pesticides to be flushed out. But Greaves wants to show me what is happening on the fringes of the fairways. Wildflowers with evocative names – betony, harebell, devil’s-bit scabious, lady’s bedstraw – are creeping in from the rough. “I even saw a round-headed rampion in the middle of the fairway,” Greaves says of a survey he did in the summer. “It might have been there without flowering for decades.” The delicate blue flower, also known as the Pride of Sussex, is a magnet for the chalkhill blue butterfly. Rewilding here will require management. Without any intervention, ecological succession will do its thing, even on thin soil. Last month, the council took responsibility for the project after a leaseholder pulled out. Greaves is anxious to start controlling the hawthorn that is already dominating areas between fairways. In other ecosystems, big fauna would do this kind of work. “Perhaps we’ll introduce elephants here eventually,” Greaves says with a smile. Golf still offers pleasure and exercise to hundreds of thousands of people. Many clubs enjoyed a growth in visitor numbers when they reopened in June; golf is nothing if not a socially distanced sport. Even XR Brighton says a sensitively managed links is far from the worst way to preserve green space, “especially if it brings a revenue stream that can help manage it in the right way”, Benatt says. Housing can be an obvious – and lucrative – alternative, especially when privately owned courses can rescue their finances with a sale to developers. Reading golf club, another old, struggling course, will next year merge with Caversham Heath, a club two miles to the west. A controversial housing development will take its place. But Waterhall’s fate adds weight to campaigns for old courses to remain green yet public, making permanent the freedom that excluded communities briefly enjoyed this year. Four years ago, Lewisham council closed a municipal 18-hole golf course that had occupied an old Georgian estate in Beckenham, south-east London. It is now a public park with a restored lake for swimming and boating. “It shows what local campaigns can do,” Shrubsole says. It will take time for balance to be restored at Hollingbury. Today, walkers and joggers outnumber golfers by far. “It’s just getting ridiculous,” says Brian Coomber, a club member who is looking for his ball in the rough next to the 10th fairway. He says people have been using the footpaths way more since golf resumed, interrupting play and messing up the fairways. “Don’t get me wrong, I’ve got a dog myself, but at the end of the day this isn’t common land,” he says. His friend, Dave Slocombe, nods in agreement. Days later, the men leave Hollingbury to join East Brighton golf club, which is only three miles away. Henson and Spryanova still walk on Hollingbury, where Spryanova says a few comments from golfers have made her children feel uncomfortable on their walk to school. Lockdown inspired Henson’s art. She made videos of the course, in which images of cartwheeling children fade into more recent footage of golf. Birds sing in the background. As we stand at the hillfort, taking in the sweep of Brighton, she can still picture those weeks. “At sunset, everyone would have been sitting here looking west, each little group taking a mound,” she says. “It looked a bit like a very spaced out village green.”
21||Bubble review – tetchy, tender tale of love under lockdownThe playwright James Graham has suggested it is too early to address the politics of the coronavirus crisis head-on in dramatic form. Instead, he gives us a “Covid romcom” that captures the domestic isolation and claustrophobia of pandemic life. On the brink of lockdown, Ashley (Pearl Mackie) and Morgan (Jessica Raine) have had an “amazing” first date just as the “whole frigging world is shutting down”. Should they take a leap of faith and quarantine together or face isolation alone? This one-hour drama enacts both outcomes in parallel narrative strands. In one reality, they end up in Morgan’s open-plan attic flat. In the other, they conduct an app-based courtship. As a part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival, it was staged in the theatre and simultaneously streamed online. Sleekly directed by Adam Penford, it takes place on a stripped-down stage that mirrors the stripped-down nature of the relationship evolving on it. Online, the camera shows the women more intimately on a split screen. As a drama, it is an eloquent survey of the past eight months with lively repartee, and it is impressive that Graham can take the over-familiar (jokes about face coverings, the horrors of shopping, and the insomnia induced by it all) to make it freshly witty, with sparky moments of insight. Reflecting on Zoom technology, Ashley says: “It’s like a historical re-enactment of talking.” Later, she observes how gardens have become the “new class divide”. Graham has proved himself to be a master of political playwriting, with shows such as Brexit: The Uncivil War, The Vote and This House. While this is primarily written in a comic vein, there is politics here. We are reminded of Boris Johnson’s Covid-19 experience and the killing of George Floyd. Both become heated points of contention between the women, and the play flares to bigger life as a result, if only briefly. “This fucking virus, man, it’s racist,” says Ashley, as a comment on the uneven burden of key work on BAME communities, including her mother. There is clever observational comedy in both narratives, and the two versions of coupledom push against each other, rather like the parallel worlds in The Last Five Years, but the “together” version is better investigated with all the awkward domestic intimacies, quibbles and moments of bonding. Ashley is a classic millennial – an upbeat vegan yogi who owns a micro-pub and watches reality TV. Morgan, a school teacher, lives off white wine and espressos and is more bristly. Both actors steer their characters from over-excitability to growing tetchiness and occasional tenderness. The nature of love and togetherness is explored, too, though perhaps with too light a touch. “What was it you liked about me?” asks Morgan as the couple sink into the fug of quotidian home life, and she dismisses love as nothing more than manipulation, though the play offers up its own happy ending. There has been a steady output of Covid-era romances over the course of the pandemic, both online and latterly on stage, such as in Sunnymead Court, which also has lesbian love at its centre, and the recently revived Lungs, so it is all the more of an achievement that Bubble finds freshness against this backdrop. Morgan and Ashley’s relationship does not particularly gather in emotional intensity or even in romance, but it always stays joyfully warm and entertaining. • Bubble is part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival.
3||'He was a father figure': loved ones remember victims of UK's Covid second waveWhen Roehl Ribaya left intensive care after 60 days in the summer, his family thought his battle with coronavirus was over. In July, he left the doors of Blackpool Victoria hospital to applause from staff as lead consultant Dr Jason Cupitt said it signalled the hospital had “survived the first wave of this silent killer”. But the 47-year-old experienced difficulties from then onwards, finding tasks such as walking up stairs challenging. He was breathless and fragile. On 13 October, he had a cardiac arrest, leaving him in a coma until he died two days later. Complications from Covid-19 led to Ribaya’s death and his story is among recent tales of loss as the UK experiences a second wave of the virus. “He was depressed when he came out of the hospital because he is 47 and should be fit and well but he felt like a 90-year-old man,” said his close friend Mark Delabajam. Delabajam and his wife, Angela, had formed a strong bond with Ribaya and his wife, Stella. When the couple first moved to Blackpool from the Philippines, Ribaya had offered them his house to stay in after only meeting them that day. They spent Christmas and holidays together. He said that when Ribaya came out of the hospital, even though he had challenges he would always try to be positive for those closest to him. “He was strong for his family and friends but we knew he was struggling with his breathing,” Delabajam says. “I had a conversation with his wife who said he would often cry in the middle of the night.” Ribaya was an aerospace engineer who came to the UK from the Philippines, following in the footsteps of his wife who got a job as a nurse here. “He was like a father figure to many, not just us – there are lots of overseas workers coming in from the Philippines at the moment as hospitals are short-staffed. All those Filipinos that come over, he is like the father figure to most of them,” Angela Delabajam said. The couple said they saw Ribaya the Sunday before he died and he seemed all right although he had been complaining of shortness of breath. If he could send a message now, Mark said it would “lecture people if they gathered in groups or in crowds … He would say my experience and what I went through hopefully will give you an insight into how bad or worse it could be.” Hambi Haralambous, 69, a music legend in Liverpool and the founder of the Motor Museum Studio in Lark Lane, which has hosted bands including Oasis and the Arctic Monkeys, died from coronavirus on 16 October. Haralambous posted photos of himself from his hospital bed, warning people about not taking Covid-19 seriously. His son, Narada, says his father had to wait three days before getting his coronavirus test and was told he would have to go to north Wales for it. Eventually, he got a diagnosis but his health got worse and he was admitted to intensive care. Haralambous was born in London to Cypriot parents who came to the UK for work. He was seven when he moved to Liverpool and as a young man, he went to art college before travelling in India. He met his first wife around this time and had two children. He later remarried and had another son and daughter. Haralambous fronted the popular synth band Hambi and The Dance in the early 1980s, which were signed to Virgin Records. He then moved into recording and managing for other artists, and later retrained in film. “When my dad was ill in hospital he told me about how unfair this was and how angry he was as he had so much more he wanted to do,” said Narada. “I asked, what it is you want to do, Dad? He said he wanted to finish off certain [creative] projects. That was his passion and what he was thinking about.” He said the family went through periods of thinking he was getting better.“After a while, he seemed to improve and the doctors were happy with his progress … then he called me one morning and he said the doctors said he was not going to make it. I was shocked as they had just moved him to a different ward.” “I spoke to the doctors. I wanted to do that before telling the family and they reassured me a bit. They said that they had not told my father he wasn’t going to make it but they had said he had deteriorated a lot and worried and concerned about him.” Narada said his father’s condition got worse and he died not long after this conversation. “People are not taking this illness seriously and I am sick of seeing it … People don’t understand what this is doing but seeing doctors and nurses, and what have to deal with [shows the toll]. They are doing such a good job of looking after people. No one has a clue until it hits you,” he said. Another local legend, Rotherham taxi driver Haji Tanveer Hussain, who worked up until his death to support his family, also died from the virus, on Wednesday 7 October, a few weeks after getting ill. Tributes flooded in for the Pakistan-born driver since his death, with colleagues and customers of Gold Star Taxis worker expressing their sadness at the loss of a “humble” and “joyful” man. Nasar Raoof, a friend, said Hussain always offered him golden nuggets of advice when he was feeling hopeless. Raoof recalls one particular time when he bumped into him at a local garage and he had had a tough day and felt people were being ungrateful for his hard work. He said Tanveer told him satisfaction comes from within and “by what you do and how you help people”. “It brightened up my day because it was not going well and it was hectic. It brought a smile to my face,” Raoof said. He had conversations with Hussain about his concerns working at a time when cases were so high, particularly in Rotherham. “He was worried but he said it was always about striking a balance between being able to provide for your family and being able to stay safe while you do your work,” Raoof said, adding that he always joked that he wished he had a job in an office instead. During the peak of coronavirus, Hussain was one of a few drivers who offered to do free pharmacy runs for vulnerable people unable to go outside and get their medication. “Every customer really loved him. He was really just a smiling joyful person. He was polite and courteous – putting himself out there in harm’s way to provide a service. These were the messages that came through social media. There were customers ringing in to offer their sympathies and condolences,” Raoof said.
12||In brief: Solo; The Forger's Daughter; Little Weirds – reviewsSolo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind) Rebecca Seal Souvenir, £14.99, pp304 Could there be a more apt moment for a book about working on your own? The former Observer journalist Rebecca Seal is a long-term “soloist” who knows all about the glories and gut-churning grind of self-employment. Deep-diving into productivity literature, economics and social sciences, as well as hard-won experience, she’s crafted a primer that covers topics from resilience and focus to procrastination and the curse of comparison. It contrives to be kind, realistic and genuinely helpful, all without lapsing into business speak and psychobabble. Install a copy on whatever surface is functioning as your desk, and you may even feel a little bit less alone. The Forger’s Daughter Bradford Morrow Grove Press, £12.99, pp288 According to Bradford Morrow, literary forgers are coy about their craft, preferring to think of it as creative endeavour rather than crime. His hero, Will, is just such a man – or he used to be, until he got caught. Now, decades later, a villainous character from his past has materialised, demanding that Will create a copy of the rarest book in American literature, Edgar Allan Poe’s Tamerlane and Other Poems. The novel flits evocatively from upstate New York farmhouses to Manhattan auction houses, and there’s an aptly gothic tinge to the tense drama that ensues. Little Weirds Jenny Slate Fleet, £9.99, pp240 The actor and comedian Jenny Slate works hard at being weird in her debut essay collection. Must we really think of her as a homemade croissant, oozing “antique decadence” and made up of “layers and layers of fragility and richness”? Peel away the artifice, and she turns out to be rather like the rest of us, albeit with the volume turned way up. She’s a gardener, a dog-lover, and “very divorced”. She gets stage fright still. And, when she stops trying quite so strenuously, she becomes a writer of tender, zestful prose. • To order Solo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind), The Forger’s Daughter or Little Weirds go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
5||Brexit was no aberration. The European Union needs to learn from itIn fewer than 100 days, Brexit will have been completed. Britain will be outside the European Union customs union and the internal market. But Brexit poses questions for the EU as well as for Britain. It challenges what might be called the ideology of Europe. It is, after all, a serious matter for a democratic organisation when a major member state decides to leave. “It would,” declared Donald Tusk, then president of the European council, shortly after the Brexit referendum in 2016, “be a fatal error to assume that the negative result in the UK referendum represents a specifically British issue … the Brexit vote is a desperate attempt to answer the questions that millions of Europeans ask themselves daily.” President Macron of France was honest enough to confess to the BBC’s Andrew Marr early in 2018 that it was possible a referendum in France could even have yielded the same result as in Britain. What, then, are the lessons? In her Bruges lecture of 2010 (as important as Margaret Thatcher’s lecture of 1988, though less noticed) German chancellor Angela Merkel pointed to a continual and creative tension between two Europes – supranational Europe and intergovernmental Europe. If that tension is disturbed, and supranational policies intrude upon national identities, there will be popular resistance. The problems sparked by migration and the euro show in graphic form how the EU can arouse such resistance, if it goes beyond what is acceptable by seeming to challenge the national identity of member states. The strong executive action needed to resolve the euro and migration crises could only be taken by national governments working together. These crises were confronted primarily by the governments of the member states in the European council: the commission and the European parliament played a distinctly secondary role. The Covid crisis, like past crises, is leading to talk of further integration. Some EU leaders seek new economic and budgetary instruments culminating in fiscal union so as to place the euro on stronger foundations. But with fiscal union, what issues would be left for national elections and national governments when so much economic policy has been removed from the agenda? Further integration, let alone treaty amendment, is the last thing Europe needs. For supranationalism is now a threat to the fulfilment of the European ideal, not a facilitator of it. As long ago as 1990, when Jacques Delors, former president of the commission, told the European parliament that he wanted Europe to become a “true federation” by the end of the millennium, the then French president François Mitterrand, watching on television, burst out: “But that’s ridiculous! What’s he up to? No one in Europe will ever want that. By playing the extremist, he’s going to wreck what’s achievable.” Few in Europe seek to submerge their country’s national identity in a federation. Instead, they seek to pursue their own national interests constructively within a co-operative European framework. Perhaps Britain should have done the same. There is, paradoxically, a sense in which Brexit Britain, together with Gaullist France, were in the vanguard of European development, rather than hindrances to it. For both appreciated – Britain, thanks to its long evolutionary history, and the Gaullists as a result of France’s experiences during the war – what the sacrifice of sovereignty would actually mean in practice. When, in the 1990s, prime minister John Major declared that Europe was not yet ready for a common currency, his warnings were ignored and he was regarded as an obfuscator. But perhaps the other member states should have heeded what he said. That would certainly be the view of those young people in the Mediterranean member states who find themselves unemployed as a result of the austerity policies caused by the euro. For those member states emerging from dictatorships, it was easy to say, rhetorically, that they were eager to sacrifice sovereignty. But all of them found their acceptance of shared sovereignty was subject to very strict limits: Germany, when it came to sharing debts; Greece, when it came to budgetary restrictions; and the Visegrad countries of central Europe (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia), when it came to accepting a due quota of Syrian migrants. What Europe needs, as Tusk frequently pointed out, is not more Europe but better Europe – practical improvements, such as completion of the European services market. Services, after all, make up 70% of economic activity in the EU, but there are still about 5,000 protected professions. Europe also needs a digital single market, which Mark Rutte, prime minister of the Netherlands, has calculated would add €400bn (£370bn) to Europe’s GDP. The EU, then, must remain primarily an intergovernmental institution in which the member states, through the European council, dictate the pace of change. But such a Europe of states would be an intergovernmental organisation with a difference, since member states would be considering not only their own national interests but the interests of the whole continent. Europe has suffered in the past from the absence of such a perspective. Had it been there in 1914, had national governments considered the interests of Europe as a whole rather than merely their own national interests, war would have been avoided. Brexit, then, was not an aberration. Instead of applauding or condemning it – for, after all, Brexit is yesterday’s argument – the EU must seek to learn its lessons. • Vernon Bogdanor is professor of government at King’s College London, and author of Britain and Europe in a Troubled World
18||Billie Eilish review – immersive adventure with fish and spidersOf all the online attempts to fill the gaping chasm where live music used to be before coronavirus, Billie Eilish’s livestream has attracted the most attention. Understandably so. The 20-year-old has a far keener visual sense than any of her peers, expressed through her album covers and self-directed videos. If a pop artist can come up with something eye-catching enough to make you temporarily forget there’s no chance of proper gigs for the foreseeable future, goes the thinking, it’s probably her. For your 30 bucks, you get a 55-minute performance, a “pre-show” that involves clips from a forthcoming Eilish documentary and a variety of celebrities – including Lizzo and Eilish’s “surrogate dad” Steve Carrell – imploring fans to vote in next month’s US election. A lot of fuss has been pre-emptively made about the “extended reality” technology used in the staging of Eilish’s performance, but what the show itself most closely resembles is a souped-up version of a late-60s or early-70s pop TV special devoted to a single artist, an impression underlined by the fact that between-song changes to the set are masked by the screen fading to black. Clearly, though, things have moved on. The technology means Eilish and her fellow musicians – brother Finneas and drummer Andrew Marshall – appear to be performing underwater, with fish swimming around them, or in the middle of a glistening cartoon forest, or, for All the Good Girls Go to Hell, in a corridor of images of environmental catastrophe and protest marches that stretches into infinity. It isn’t clear how live the music is, although Eilish’s vocals audibly are, and all the more impactful for being devoid of the showboating latter-day pop singers tend to go in for: during Xanny, a kind of 21st-century teenage equivalent of Neil Young’s The Needle and the Damage Done, her voice comes out as a kind of sighing mumble, as if she’s so bored with druggy excess she can barely be bothered to articulate her contempt. Occasionally, you’re struck by the feeling that the simplest staging ideas are the most effective: a single spotlight that strobes and casts a Nosferatu-like shadow behind the singer, a vast spider that crawls around the stage during You Should See Me in a Crown. And occasionally the technology is used to create a simulacrum of the communal experience of a gig. Fans watching at home find webcam images of themselves flashed up on the screens. Some of the fans appear prepared for this, holding up homemade signs and making heart shapes with their hands. Others do not: one girl is so startled by the sight of herself, there seems every chance she’ll be carried away from her computer on a stretcher. It’s both striking and entertaining – no one who stumped up the cash is likely to feel short-changed – but it doesn’t feel anything like being at a live show, as Eilish acknowledges. “The only benefit of not having a crowd,” she says, “is that none of you are in the pit, fainting, like usual.” The time may come when someone harnesses technology in order to produce an online live music experience that’s fully, game-changingly immersive. This isn’t it, but as stopgap exercises go, it’s impressive, if haunted by the sense that no one really knows how long the gap it’s stopping will last. “One day, if we vote the orange man out, we might see each other again,” says Eilish, before the screen fades to black again and the credits roll.
0||'Sue if you must': Lincoln Project rejects threat over Kushner and Ivanka billboardsThe Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards put up in Times Square. “Sue if you must,” Matthew Sanderson said. The New York City billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, displaying apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. According to Johns Hopkins University, more than 8.5m coronavirus cases have been recorded across the US and more than 224,000 have died. Case numbers are at record daily levels and one study has predicted 500,000 deaths by February. New York was hit hard at the pandemic’s outset. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday, Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president against allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing first amendment rights of free speech and the “reckless mismanagement of Covid-19” by the Trump White House. In a legal response on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson told Kasowitz: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, citing supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticise freely”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting in March, in which Kushner criticised New York governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter, Sanderson wrote, “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” A footnote to Sanderson’s letter cited “one of the seminal libel-proof plaintiff cases”, that of a well-known mobster whose reputation was “so tarnished … he could claim no damages for defamation”. “Mr Kushner and Ms Trump’s claims will fare no better than Boobie Cerasini’s given their tarnished reputations on Covid-19,” it said. Sanderson also said “this isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian on Saturday, that seems unlikely. Donald Trump “has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.”
3||Europe's Jewish population has dropped 60% in last 50 yearsEurope has lost almost 60% of its Jewish population over the past 50 years, mainly as a result of the collapse of the Soviet Union after which many Jews left eastern Europe as borders opened, a study shows. Only about 9% of the global Jewish population now lives in Europe, compared with nearly 90% in the late 19th century – but similar to the proportion 1,000 years ago. In total, an estimated 1.3 million Jews live in Europe in 2020, about 0.1% of the continent’s population. Two-thirds of them live in France, the UK and Germany. The figures are in a report produced by the London-based Institute for Jewish Policy Research, which attempts to give a comprehensive picture of Jewish populations in European countries. “Jews have not only been an integral part of European history and culture but are actually one of its oldest and original component groups,” says the report, titled Jews in Europe at the Turn of the Millennium. “However, throughout history, the inherent weakness of a landless and powerless minority vis-a-vis territorially based societies and their constituted powers often put theJewish people in a condition of dependency and instability, and translated into powerful ups and downs in the Jewish presence.” Between the end of the 18th and 19th centuries, the number of Jews in the world rose to more than 10 million, and climbed further to 16.5 million on the eve of the second world war. Most of the growth was in eastern Europe, then America and then Palestine and Israel. The murder of 6 million Jews in the Holocaust reduced the global population to around 11 million, “radically disrupt[ing] what had been up to that moment the continuous build-up and transformation of European Jewry”. In 1880, 88% of the world’s Jews lived in Europe. By 1945, this share had fallen to 35%, then to 26% in 1970 and to 9% in 2020. Most of this decline happened in eastern Europe, where the share of the global total fell from 26% in 1945 to 2% in 2020. In the latter decades of the 20th century, the “opening of the doors of the Soviet Union” meant that more than 1.8 million Jews left eastern Europe between 1969 and 2020, resulting in “a drastic shift in the Jewish population’s centre of gravity from the east to the west of the continent”. The study also reports that almost 70,000 Israeli-born Jews now live permanently in Europe, about 25% of these in the UK. The vast majority of European Jews – including 90% of British Jews – are not actively planning to emigrate to Israel or elsewhere. A minority of European Jewish families have more than five children, with the highest proportion (24%) in Belgium, which has a large ultra-Orthodox population. The lowest proportion (5%) is in Poland. More than three-quarters of Polish Jews are married to non-Jews, but only 14% of Belgian Jews. Intermarriage has been a “significant factor in the erosion of the Jewish population size” as children in such families are often not brought up as Jewish. The UK Jewish population had the smallest proportion (4%) of converts to Judaism, and Spain the largest (25%). In every one of 12 EU countries , Jews were more pro-EU than the non-Jewish population. In Hungary, there was the biggest gap, with 51% of Jews saying they had a strong attachment to the EU, compared with 19% of the total population. There were also big gaps in Poland, Austria and Hungary.
21||Lone Flyer: The Last Flight of Amy Johnson review – soaring spiritAmy Johnson is, in many ways, still the epitome of the romantic female adventurer. Finding international fame as the first woman to fly solo from England to Australia in 1930, she lived fast and died young, breaking a host of records before crashing to her death at the age of 37. In this revival of Ade Morris’s 2001 play about her life, we glimpse the woman behind the celebrity pilot and aviation engineer, as frustrated by social convention as she was determined to embrace adventure. We meet Johnson in her dying moments and her life flashes before our eyes over the course of the play. We flit back and forth from that frantic, final flight to her early years in Hull and at Sheffield University, then to finding her passion for flying and meeting the loves of her life. Lucy Betts’s direction navigates a socially-distanced stage so cleverly that we barely notice the lack of touch between its two actors. In flying jacket and cap, Hannah Edwards, as Johnson, is spirited, sparky and full of yearning for a remarkable life . She steers between steeliness and vulnerability in the narration of her story, while Benedict Salter switches with virtuosity between several roles, including Johnson’s gentle father, her remote first lover, Franz, and her husband and fellow pilot, Jim Mollison. It is Johnson’s poetic subjectivity that leads the storytelling and the script zings with colour as she speaks of a near-drowning in a “huge fist of sea” – the freezing waves were “a million needles of icy hot”. She refers to wartime zeppelins as “flying badgers” and to a teacher who has “a face like cold suet pudding”. A revolving trolley is the central prop and mostly functions as Johnson’s Gipsy Moth plane. Jamie Kubisch-Wiles and Thom Townsend’s sound design, together with Harry Armytage’s lighting, signal scene changes without any other big shifts in the set. The sea is suggested by undulating white light; a cinema hall is evoked with flickering illumination and piano music; and the sound of a school bell or an aeroplane engine’s thrum instantly create an atmosphere, alongside the eloquence of Morris’s script. It is clear that Johnson is a maverick, pushing against norms to be the woman she wants to be rather than the “teacher or nurse” she is expected to become. She speaks of her fear of being stuck in an unfulfilled life which, it is hinted, led her sister to kill herself. Travelling through a series of dull jobs, from a typing pool to the lingerie department of Peter Jones and a law firm, she finally trades it in for a “more precarious existence at Stag Lane aerodrome” in London. Her dilemmas feel strangely – even sadly –contemporary as she reflects on marriage, motherhood and personal freedom. “Love makes me dependent and I hate that it saps all my adventure,” she says, though she craves it, too. The play also, obliquely, shows how the world judges female heroism. She is described as a “blonde” and as a “daughter” by the press, even after her extraordinary accomplishments as a pilot. At the height of her fame, she seems to be caught in an uncomfortable and intrusive alliance with the press. “Fame is like battery acid – use it, don’t drink it,” she says, almost as a warning to herself. This aspect, while not heavily investigated, again feels contemporary and reminiscent of the way in which adventuring women such as the late Alison Hargreaves – the first female mountaineer to scale Everest alone and without supplementary oxygen – have been judged. Discordant cello music signals a return to her final moments in the air. It sounds slightly shrill by the end and we return to this scene too often, but the play holds its power right until that final crash, and all the hope of a magnificent, adventuring life in it. • At the Watermill theatre, Newbury, until 21 November.
19||Honest Thief review – low-stakes thrillerLiam Neeson is Tom Carter, AKA “the In and Out Bandit”, a bank robber who has swindled 12 banks in seven states, accruing $9m. Importantly, he’s “met a woman” and is ready to hand over the money and turn himself in. In this low-stakes thriller, FBI agents Niven and Hall (Jai Courtney and Anthony Ramos) scupper his plans for a quiet life by attempting to kill him and steal the money for themselves. Former marine Tom is having none of it. With Neeson well within the confines of his comfort zone, tailed by corrupt cops and diving out of hotel windows, the film should be better. Yet it drags, not least in tedious scenes of him earnestly telling new girlfriend Annie (Kate Walsh) how she’s put him on the straight and narrow.
20||Royal Mail to hire record number of Christmas tempsRoyal Mail is to hire a record 33,000 temporary workers for the Christmas period – two-thirds more than usual – to handle the UK festive parcel frenzy triggered by the surge in online shopping. Christmas is always the busiest time for the postal service, but this year it is seeking record numbers of temporary recruits to help to sort an even higher flow of packages as high-street closures during the pandemic have forced shoppers online. The UK has about 90,000 postal workers and Royal Mail typically hires 20,000 seasonal workers. This year, the extra staff will work mainly in sorting offices, delivery vans and data centres. Sally Ashford, the Royal Mail’s chief human resources officer, said: “During these unprecedented times we believe it is critical that Royal Mail continues to deliver. We want to do our best to deliver Christmas for our customers and support the effort on the pandemic. This helps the whole country to celebrate and stay safe during these difficult times.” The company aims to fill more than 13,000 vacancies in mail sorting offices in England, 1,400 in Scotland, 700 in Wales and 500 in Northern Ireland. About 1,000 additional workers are also sought for Royal Mail’s dedicated Covid-19 testing kit collection team, while other sorting and driving roles are on offer in logistics and at its Heathrow international hub. There are also temporary positions in data inputting. The pandemic has accelerated the shift to online shopping, with restrictions closing non-essential high street shops for months during 2020 and further closures not being ruled out. Royal Mail staff have worked throughout the pandemic, despite significant safety concerns from unions. Last week, Royal Mail announced that its postal workers would for the first time collect parcels on the doorstep, in one of the biggest changes to the service as it adapts to the decline in letters and rapid growth in online shopping. Royal Mail reported a £139m increase in total revenue in the five months to 30 August, as the pandemic caused a surge in parcel deliveries. While letter deliveries collapsed, parcel volumes during that period rose by a third year-on-year – an increase of 177m parcels. It normally carries 1.3bn parcels a year. Rivals such as Amazon and other parcel companies have, however, helped to erode its market share.
20||Desperate UK Covid home workers renting solace from nimble-footed firmsTired of working on the kitchen table or juggling conference calls and family life, and with no return to their desks in sight, many of the country’s office workers are seeking out alternative workplaces – from hotel rooms and cocktail bars to fitness clubs – for a change of scene. Businesses are hoping that the offer of a desk, reliable wifi and refreshments will attract workers weary of half a year of working from home, while boosting their income in challenging times. On a wet weekday morning, Edmund Weil has bagged a cosy corner table at Swift Shoreditch, a cocktail bar in the hip east London district. But he’s there for a business meeting rather than the drinks. “Everyone has seen a lot of home,” Weil said. “Lots of people who don’t have a home office are at the stage where if you have to choose between a face-to-face meeting and Zoom, they choose face to face.” The father of three children, including a four-month-old baby, Weil has been looking for places to work where there are fewer distractions. As a bar owner, he is more used than most to spending daylight hours in venues dedicated to night-time socialising, but he is part of a growing number of workers finding temporary desks in different locations. Coral Anderson, the general manager of Swift Shoreditch, said the 10pm curfew has hurt trade at bars that usually make most of their income in late-night trading. Swift Shoreditch has signed up to a “work from bars” initiative created by Fraser Campbell, ambassador for whisky brand Dewar’s. Its intention is to highlight venues that are now welcoming workers, while bringing new customers to businesses struggling with reduced trade and government regulations. “Bars have changed their opening hours to open at 12 o’clock, they have started doing food, they have amazing wifi, and tables with distance between them,” Campbell said. Campbell’s online map of 150 venues across the UK, from London to Aberdeen, has been visited almost 20,000 times in the four weeks since launch. Anderson hopes joining the map will help Swift Shoreditch to reach a wider audience. The number of British workers travelling to work has been falling since early October, according to official figures, and a quarter of workers are still working exclusively from home. Following the government’s U-turn over the return to the office in September, some of the country’s largest hotel chains have begun to offer daytime room rentals to workers in search of peace and quiet, as hotels grapple with a lack of international tourists and slump in business travel. Hilton has launched day rentals across the majority of its more than 160 UK hotels, from one of its most luxurious hotels, the Conrad London St James, which costs from £150 a day, to £44.85 a day for a room in York’s Hampton by Hilton. Meanwhile, European hotel group Accor, owner of brands including Novotel and Ibis, has launched a similar offering at about 220 locations from Brighton to Edinburgh. Hilton offers rooms with a desk and chair, facilities to make hot drinks, as well as room service and wifi, and use of the gym or swimming pool, with a promise of high levels of hygiene. “Hotels are having to be creative,” said John Rogers, the head of brands and franchise operations for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at Hilton. “Where historically there would have been large volumes midweek of corporate business, clearly those volumes are lower.” Beyond hotels, the David Lloyd fitness club chain has reported a 40% increase in online inquiries for corporate memberships, which it attributes to employers wanting to provide staff with gym access and a workplace. Growing demand for one-day desk rentals has sparked a change at flexible workspace provider Fora, which previously rented out offices for a minimum of one month. Fora, with 11 buildings across London and Reading and plans for more, offers a day pass at a cost of £40 in the capital and £25 in Reading. “People aren’t certain how much office space they need right now and how often they want to go into work,” said Enrico Sanna, the chief executive of Fora, who is himself working from the stylishly designed building on Broadwick Street in Soho. “There is a hardcore of people who don’t want to be at home. These are people who can do it for three months, but not past that, as it’s not the right setup mentally or physically.” Opening a new business during a recession is for the brave, but Dominic Cools-Lartigue jumped at the chance to open a restaurant, gallery and co-working venue in Shoreditch. The building, which houses the Tramshed Project, once an East End tram generator, became available after its former occupier, a fine dining restaurant, collapsed into administration in April. When the Guardian visited a few days after its reopening, about half of the well-spaced tables in the 1,860 sq metre (20,000 sq ft) building were occupied by laptop users. Laurent Louvrier, the chief executive of the artificial intelligence firm SuccessData, had booked one of Tramshed’s booths for a brainstorming day with three of his 11 staff. The startup terminated its lease in a building run by flexible office provider WeWork during lockdown, saving a “not negligible” amount of money. Instead, small groups from SuccessData meet once a week at venues such as the Tramshed Project, where a four-person booth requires a minimum daily spend of £30 on food and drink. “This is all we need at the moment,” said Louvier. “Just opening this vast space as a restaurant right now wouldn’t be viable,” said Cools-Lartigue. “The co-working will help the with the evening restaurant bookings. Hopefully one will feed the other.”
20||Sunak must extend universal credit or be forced into another U-turnRight from the start of the Covid-19 crisis the government was never in any doubt about the implications of putting the economy into deep freeze. The Treasury knew it was going to be bad, so there was a furlough scheme for employees, financial assistance for the self-employed, grants, loan guarantees, a business rates holiday, a deferral of VAT, and a £1,000-a-year increase in universal credit. The last of these – the £20 a week increase in UC – has tended to be overlooked in recent months as attention has focused on what should replace the furlough, but as things stand the temporary increase will be reversed next April. Make no mistake, this has all the hallmarks of a slow-burn crisis for the government that it would do well to address while it has the time. Otherwise, it will eventually be forced into yet another U-turn at a moment not of its own choosing. The Treasury says it is keeping UC under review, but its message is that the extra £20 a week comes at a hefty cost – £9b this year – and that there is only so much money to go round. More for welfare means less for other public services. It is as simple as that. Except that it isn’t. The increase in UC was supposed to be temporary for the same reason that the furlough was supposed to be temporary: the Treasury assumed that by now the Covid-19 crisis would largely be over and that the economy would on its way to a complete recovery. Rishi Sunak’s decision last week to beef up his job support scheme was an acceptance that the effects of the pandemic are going to be felt until at least next spring. New restrictions, either through the two-week circuit breaker in Wales or the tiered systems in England and Scotland, mean businesses will close and workers will be laid off. Sunak hopes that most of the closures and the layoffs will be temporary but many of them won’t be. It’s Sunak’s job to worry about the public finances and there is no question that the government has been borrowing a lot. The deficit stood at just over £200bn in the first six months of the 2020-21 financial year – comfortably a peacetime record. Yet faced with the threat of mass unemployment, the chancellor last week made the only possible decision: to extend the furlough in all but name and ignore the impact on the deficit. Sooner or later he is going to be faced with a similar decision over universal credit – and if he has any sense he will come to the same decision. The original increase in UC back in March was the right thing to do. Although no Conservative would admit to it, years of benefit cuts had left the UK’s welfare system unfit for purpose in normal times, let alone during a government-imposed lockdown that was certain to cost many jobs. Torsten Bell, the director of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, noted last week that low earners have been at the centre of the economic storm. Not only have they borne the highest health risks while higher earners have been working from home, they have been three times as likely to have been furloughed as high earners, and four times as likely to have lost their jobs in the first phase of the crisis. It’s not hard to see why. Many low earners are in consumer-facing jobs in sectors such as hospitality, tourism and leisure. These are the bit of the economy that faced the biggest hit in the spring and in the case of hospitality are about to suffer another tough period. Bell adds, though, that income inequality has not changed all that much during the pandemic, with the blow reasonably equally distributed among low, middle and higher income brackets. Why? Partly because those on the lowest incomes were less likely to be working going into the crisis, partly because of the wage top-ups provided by the furlough, and partly because of the cushion provided by UC. “This increase in income from the state, coming at the same time as the decrease in income from the labour market, meant that the overall incomes of the poorest fifth were close to being unchanged in the first phase of this crisis,” Bell said in an article for the online magazine Tortoise. “Without this policy action they would have fallen a full 8%.” There is one other reason why Sunak needs to make the welfare system more generous: it would be good for the economy, and ultimately the public finances. A paper produced by the TUC and the thinktank, the Institute for Public Policy Research, models the impact of either doubling child benefit or increasing the child element of UC by £20 a week. Either measure would lead to a reduction in child poverty, which would be welcome in itself, but the IPPR researchers found there were also sizeable multiplier effects, under which each one pound of stimulus produces more than one pound’s worth of output. The reason is that the poorest 40% of the population have a higher tendency to spend any extra income than richer groups. Put simply, if you are having trouble putting food on the table, the first thing you do if your UC goes up is to head down to the supermarket. The money feeds straight back into the economy, creating work for food suppliers and cashiers, who in turn spend some of their extra income. The study estimates that multipliers could be as high as 1.7 or 1.8 for the changes it is proposing. Something for Sunak to consider as he works out when to fly the white flag over UC. • Sign up to the daily Business Today email here or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk.
2||NRL grand final 2020: Melbourne Storm beat Penrith Panthers– as it happenedAnd with that, we should leave the Storm players to their celebrations. And the Panthers to their commiserations. Melbourne won it in the first half; Penrith ensured there was a period of squeaky bum time for the Storm as time ran out, but ultimately, Cam Smith’s team held on and are NRL premiers once again. Thanks for joining us. Here’s Emma Kemp’s match report: The Storm players get up onto the stage and one-by-one receive their premiership rings from Craig Bellamy. Time for Cameron Smith to speak again - plenty of thank yous, respect for Penrith etc. Peter V’landys and Andrew Abdo get a mention for getting the competition back up and running. But nothing about his future plans, natch. He signs off with some words of wisdom for his teammates: “Lastly, fellas, this 2020 season, it’s one like no other and what we’ve been able to achieve tonight, it’s - we’ll never forget it. We’ll remember it for the rest of our lives and a big congratulations to everyone, particularly the boys that are celebrating their first premiership. Hold on to that forever, boys.” Cue Tina Turner.... The kid looks a bit overwhelmed. “This is unbelievable,” he says. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history. “It’s been a great year. Been able to play with the GOAT and these boys again, thanks, Penrith. You are really good. 17 in a row is an unbelievable achievement. Well done to you guys. Thanks to our fans who stuck strong. Especially our ones back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back there at the moment and we wear the V on our jersey proudly. Can’t wait to go back there and celebrate with you guys, so thank you.” And your Clive Churchill medal winner is.... Ryan Papenhuyzen! Clive Churchill medal announcement is on its way... Josh Addo-Carr and Cam Munster, being nice about Penrith. Here’s JAC: “We knew the Panthers would come out firing. We got the start that we wanted. You know, full credit to Panthers. They will be a very tough side for many years to come.” And Munster: “We know what Penrith are like, the best team. Their attack outstanding. That’s the reason why they are the minor premiers. We knew we had to start well. We didn’t off the kick-off, but 50/50 in some tries there, just ended up getting the right bit of green. But full credit to Penrith tonight. It’s been the best team all year like I said.” And the maestro Cameron Smith: “We did it the hard way there, 11 men in the end. Penrith were coming home with a wet sail and playing the footy they played all year. It’s just been terrific. “As a club and team and organisation, we’ve admired what Penrith have done this year, to win 17 in a row in this competition, it’s a special effort. On top of what everyone’s been through this year, as I said before the game, it is going to be a great contest. There’s another couple of minutes on the clock, I don’t know what would have happened there. You’ve got to give credit to Penrith. They fought to the end. “I’m just really proud of this - not just this football team that played tonight, the entire squad. There’s a handful of players there that they trained, they trained hard every year and applied it every day, applied themselves every day to help the 17 going out on the weekend and they didn’t even get a game of football this year. You know, the entire squad has done a fantastic effort. We haven’t been home for about five months. You know, just with the conditions that we’ve been under, I think it’s just a remarkable effort to be here tonight and to get a victory.” A disappointed Nathan Cleary: “Super disappointing. I thought I let the boys down, but, yeah, hopefully we’ll be back. “There were a few moments through our intercept and obviously the one at half-time, and, just let in too many ordinary tries. They were too good. “We’ve got a taste of it now. It’s going to hurt for along time, but it’s fuelled us for next year. Train harder than ever now.” Melbourne tryscorer Ryan Papenhuyzen: “I’m so emotional.Oh, wow! The whole day was just the unknown. You don’t know what’s going to happen. You’re so confident in the boys, but these guys coming off 17 in a row, the most butterflies I’ve ever had. These boys, we’ve done it so tough this year. We have the V on our jersey because back home they’re doing it a lot tougher than we are. That is unbelievable, so proud of the boys. I didn’t think I would be able to do one of these and we’ve done it. “Our first half, that’s the best defensive performance I have seen from our side this year. We had confidence after last week that we could start well and done that. They came back strong at the end, but our first half definitely set the platform. That’s unbelievable.” What a finish to the game! My goodness, the Panthers made you think they could actually pull off a miraculous comeback. In the end, they fell just short, as Melbourne Storm once again prove they’re the best in the business. Stick around for the post-match interviews. 80 mins: Such drama late on but the Storm hang on! Melbourne are NRL premiers! 80 mins: Cleary scores! He runs at the Storm defence all on his own and goes over! He declines the kick and they’ll have one final chance to score - one play to go the length of the pitch... 79 mins: It’s been one hell of a fight by Penrith, but they’ve simply run out of time. Melbourne look like they’re going to hold on. Meanwhile, Smith is sinbinned for a professional foul and the Panthers will finish with 11 men on the pitch. 77 mins: Time is running out for Penrith. Mansour can’t get on the end of a loose ball in the Storm in-goal following a Kikau kick... it’s not going to be their night. 74 mins: The Storm defence looks slight ragged as Penrith turn up the offensive heat. Lui kicks a high swirling ball forward which Papenhuyzen does really well to hold in the Storm in-goal. It’s now that the nerves will be heightened and errors can be made. 73 mins: The Panthers are back in this! Incredible scenes in Sydney! Lui throws a brilliant ball over the top to Mansour who’s all alone out wide and touches down! Cleary’s kick is askew, but still, we have a game on our hands here. Are the Panthers about the stage one of the greatest comebacks of all time? 72 mins: The Panthers have the wind in their sails now - they can smell a comeback. They get anther six as the crowd turns up the volume. Clearly jinks forward... 71 mins: Panthers ball. Crichton threatens. Storm repel the attack. But hang on - they’re looking into a professional foul now – Hughes on Kikau as the Panthers man looked to race onto a kick. Cam Smith argues the toss but it’s ruled as a professional foul and Hughes is off! Drama at ANZ Stadium with nine minutes to go in the 2020 grand final! 69 mins: The crowd erupts as Crichton gives the Panthers a glimmer of hope! Cleary is at the centre of the move, passing to Lee who in turn feed Crichton. The youngster steps inside and out before barrelling across the line and, with 11 minutes remaining, do we have a game on our hands? 67 mins: Papenhuyzen! What an athlete! He leaps yards over the touchline to knock a high kick back into play. Amazingly he keeps it alive - tremendous effort! 65 mins: A brief moment of excitement for the Panthers as they look to break on the left hand side, but Mansour’s unexpected attempted kick is smothered and the move fizzles out. The groan from the stands is audible... 63 mins: The Storm are nearly through again here after a brilliant pass from Kaufusi to Lee, but he is held up. Last tackle is called and the pressure eases. 61 mins: Melbourne hold a 20-point lead, with 20 minutes to go, and they begin a new set on the 20m line. But they make a mess of it and Penrith come away with the ball. 60 mins: Even if Penrith received a boost from that try, time is rapidly running out for them to capitalise. A quarter of the grand final remains, and the Storm are again pressing forward. 57 mins: Dale Finucane is hit hard by Kikau, and the big man gets up gingerly. In fact, he’ll have to come off for an HIA. It’s a brutal game, rugby league. 54 mins: Are Penrith back in this one now? Certainly the crowd have been revived by that try - and the slice of luck finally afforded to them. 53 mins: But hang on, Penrith look to have got one back! Yeo dinks a kick through and Brian To’o races onto it and grounds the ball right in the corner! There’s a degree of controversy over the legality of the kick in the first place, Yeo having taken advantage of running behind one of his own players, but the Bunker isn’t bothered about that. To’o is adjudged to have stayed in play and the try stands! Cleary adds the two, off the post and through. 52 mins: It looks like the Storm have scored again, as play is switched from left to right. Hughes kicks through and Vunivalu sprints ahead of Mansour to touch down! But replays show it wasn’t a clean touch down, and the try won’t stand. Worrying signs for Penrith, regardless. 51 mins: Here come the Storm, surging down the left hand side of the ANZ Stadium pitch. The passing is slick, the running is hard... 48 mins: Mansour gets dragged back about 10m by three Storm players - not the direction the Panthers need to be going at this stage. Melbourne look in total control - and that feeling doesn’t go away as moments later Kikau is pulled up for touching the ball a second time as he tries to roll it under his boot. Oh dear, these errors are going to be costly for Penrith. 46 mins: Papenhuyzen scores! Is that it? Brilliant play from the Storm man who spots a hole in the Panthers’ line, puts his head down and hoons off to score what could be a crucial try for the Storm! Smith... misses with the extras! But still, a healthy lead has just got even healthier and the Panthers have it all to do. 45 mins: Moments later Penrith are called for a Leota knock-on. He challenges the call but after a brief break, it’s unsuccessful. 43 mins: Cleary launches a huge kick under pressure that Vunivalu allows to bounce. He recovers and the Storm go again with a fresh six. But Addo-Carr makes a hash of his handling, some confusion follows and there’s a knock on somewhere. Penrith will feed a scrum. 41 mins: And we’re back under way in Sydney. Given what Cleary just said, can the trophy engraver crack on with writing Storm on the premiership trophy as soon as Melbourne score again? Here they come early this second half... Munster kicks at the end of their six - a decent one at that. Ivan Cleary still believes. “Obviously didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next. Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try. We can do that. Anything can happen. Get some momentum going. That’s the goal at the moment. They don’t score again and we’re next to score.” Sterlo on the TV has just said it will be the greatest premiership comeback if the Panthers can get back into this one. He’s not wrong. Billy Slater, meanwhile, says of his old mate Smith becoming the all-time top points scorer in grand finals (42): “Just another record for Cameron Smith. Boy, didn’t he go to work in that first half. The great No 9, it started with an early kick out of dummy half. He turned the Penrith Panthers around and allowed his aggressive defensive line to get up and apply the pressure on it. He kicked multiple penalty goals and it’s just his true indication in defence, he’s so effective in that middle third of the field. He’s suffocating Penrith Panthers, but picking up the right options and also picking up the first try of his grand final career. So this is his grand final career. So this is his first grand final try. If this is his last game, he’s certainly making it count.” The first 40 minutes in brief: Melbourne took the lead through a penalty try after Tyrone May stuck out a leg on Justin Olam Suliasi Vunivalu scored a second after intercepting Nathan Cleary’s pass and running nearly the full length of the pitch Cam Smith, who also kicked two penalty goals, took advantage of a loose ball on the stroke of half-time to score Melbourne’s third Luckless Panthers have had two tries disallowed - first Josh Mansour and then Stephen Crichton What a half of NRL football! It’s going to take quite some comeback from the Panthers if they are to catch the Storm after the break. Penrith will feel disappointed to be 22 point down without a reply, but many have found out to their cost that Cameron Smith in this kind of mood is an awful proposition. The irrepressible Smith has been immaculate with his kicking this half, and added that try late on for good measure. If this is going to be his last game, he’s going about making it a memorable personal performance. There’ll be plenty more twists and turns to come. Time to take a breath for now though. Half-time show coming up... 40 mins: Smith celebrates a try! The immediate call is “no try”! Koroisau knocks the ball out of Smith’s hands as he tries to pass, but the veteran picks it up quickly, spots an opening and dives over the line. There’s no problem with that and Smith has his try! He adds the extras and the Storm will head into the sheds with a commanding lead! 38 mins: Oof, Asofa-Solomona surges forward as Melbourne threaten the Penrith line again. 36 mins: The intensity-ometer has just been turned up, as a couple of bone-crunching tackles come in from the Storm defence. The ball eventually goes forward and Melbourne will feed a scrum. The challenge for Penrith now is to keep Melbourne out until the half-time siren sounds. 34 mins: Melbourne get another set of six - and another chance inside the Panthers half to trouble the scorekeepers. Smith goes to Munster, who is brought down 5m out from the line before Kaufusi attempts a kick that is smothered. The Panthers survive. 32 mins: Channel Nine has done the analysis and Vunivalu was travelling at 33kph as he raced off towards the tryline there. Incredible sequence of play, and the Panthers must be feeling like it might not be their night already. 31 mins: Here come the Panthers, looking to get on the scoreboard for the first time tonight. Martin looks to break through on the right hand side, it comes back inside to Cleary who looks to fling a long high ball back to the left flank... but Vunivalu is there! He plucks the ball out of the air, falls to the ground but springs back up and hares off towards the Panthers’ try line. They’re not going to stop him in a foot race! Vunivalu takes to the air in customary fashion and dives over the line! No bother for Smith with the conversion. Again. 27 mins: With the resulting kick, Smith makes no mistake from a very similar position to his last kick and the Storm extend their lead again! 26 mins: Some big hits coming from all angles at the moment. Fisher-Harris is pulled up for a late hit on Brandon Smith, who joins Welch off the pitch for HIA. 24 mins: Smith attempts a kick to touch but it hits Martin in the legs, so it’ll be a Penrith feed in a scrum. 22 mins: It’s been quite the opening quarter of this match – hectic to say the least, and filled with plenty of attacking moments. And there’s more drama now as Kikau is called for picking the ball up in an offside position. Smith will have a chance to add another couple for the Storm. He’s deadly accurate and Melbourne edge further ahead. 17 mins: The crowd can sense something here... Martin leaps like a salmon to take an AFL-type mark to the delight of those in the stands, but it comes to nothing. An aside: it’s great to hear real fans and real reactions in a proper sized crowd at a sporting event. There must be plenty looking on from afar with a touch of jealousy that there’s a major sporting event that fans are able to enjoy in person. 16 mins: Now the pressure turns to the other end - Cleary flicks to Kikau, who bursts forward before Crichton gets the ball and tries to dive over the line! The call is no try, and judging from the Panthers’ muted reaction, that’s probably the case. Yes, he doesn’t get it down and we’re stil at 6-0. 14 mins: The Storm had momentum here, but Bromwich is hit hard and loses the ball. With that goes a bit of the pressure on Penrith, who can breathe again and look to build from deep in their own half. 12 mins: Here goes Mansour, making some metres for Penrith. Then Kikau takes up the mantle, but he turns the ball over to Melbourne after playing the ball after his arm hit the ground. Danger looms here. 10 mins: That’s two Bunker decisions that have gone against the Panthers already tonight. Not a great way to start the game for them, but both looked to be correct. 8 mins: Mansour leaps over in the corner to get the Panthers back on level terms! They look to get a little stuck in the middle of field, but some quick hands from Luai to Kikau and then to Mansour on the outside opens things up. But the Panthers are left disappointed by the review system again - this time Crichton is penalised for running into the defensive line and the try won’t stand! 5 mins: Well, that’s a turn-up for the books - penalty tries are a rarity in the grand finals. How will the Panthers respond to that now? 4 mins: Is this a the first try of the game? No, says the referee, despite Melbourne’s celebrations!. Addo-Carr keeps the ball alive for the Storm, flicking it back inside to Olam, who tries to burrow under May to the line. He doesn’t get the ball over, but on review the call is that May’s leg prevented Olam from scoring and he’s given a penalty try! Smith adds the extras from the sideline, and the Storm lead early! 3 mins: Melbourne hold their line despite the early pressure from the Panthers though, and will now get a first chance to move downfield. 1 min: And we’re off! Cleary boots the Black Hawk-delivered ball down field, where the Storm struggle to pick it up. Hughes let the ball bounce, the Panthers pounce and it’s Penrith ball from a scrum! Great start for the team in black. National anthem: Chloe Zoule has some pipes! She delivers a rousing rendition of Advance Australia Fair. And we’re just about ready to go (just the six minutes behind schedule so far, which isn’t too bad). Here they come! Smith leads the Storm down the tunnel and out into the stadium... to a chorus of boos from the “home” crowd. The reception as the Panthers arrive could not be more different. The minor premiers burst out of the tunnel to a rock soundtrack and a hearty welcome. 40,000 fans are inside the stadium tonight. The match ball has been delivered onto the pitch by.... a Black Hawk helicopter. Because, why not? We’re nearly at kick-off. The teams are just getting ready to leave the sheds and enter the arena. Ivan Cleary talks: “[This week has been] a little bit less commitments than usual but can still feel the buzz. In Penrith, the community is right into it so it’s been really cool. It’s obviously a difficult season for everybody involved. I just - the fact we have been so consistent’s been probably the thing that’s really pressed me andI’m most proud about. “[The weather] is definitely a factor, how you control are the ball, kicking game. Defence particularly in their end of the field is going to be key tonight. “We’ll have some definite things about how we start but you’ve also got to play the game. There are going to be moments out there tonight and you’ve got to be alive and ready to play. We have been able to do it all year and I think we can do it again tonight.” Craig Bellamy talks: “A bit excited, a bit nervous. You never get sick of coming to a grand final but it has been a lot different this year. Only came down yesterday. Usually you’re down here three or four days before the grand final.The guys have been great all year and they’ve handled what we’ve had to handle and it’s been a great year and hopefully we can finish off in style today.” Asked what his message was to the Storm players, Bellamy said: “I want them going out and playing their strengths. Back themselves and do what they do well. That’s why they are in the team.They are in the team for a certain reason, what they do well. We need them to go out and do that well today.” NRLW: In case you missed it earlier, the Broncos underlined their utter dominance of the women’s competition with a 20-10 win over the Roosters. That’s an incredible three straight Brisbane titles since the competition’s inception. The pre-match entertainment is under way at ANZ – Amy Shark has just wrapped up her set. If you want a view on that, head to Twitter – there are plenty of opinions on that website. I’ve no intention of labouring the point about what the NRL has been through to get to this point, so will instead point you in the direction of this, by Emma Kemp: Much like some sports stars, coronavirus does not adhere to regulations, and the line between risk and reward was as fine as they come. The NRL operated at the behest of the pandemic, and just about got away with it. Read the full piece here: Channel Nine’s update on the weather has the conditions “wreaking havoc”. Can’t wait. Cameron Smith: Will he? Won’t he? The Storm great is still giving nothing away (officially) about his future after tonight’s game. It’s been the talk of the town all week (and for ages before that to be honest), but Smith is not going to be drawn. Earlier Freddie Fittler had a go at getting him to, but with no joy. “I’ll just try to keep the team with a level head,” Smith said on Channel None. “A result won’t determine my decision past this year. Whatever the result is, I will go away and think about it after this game. Whatever will be, will be.” Team news: No late changes for the Storm, but Ivan Cleary has sprung one with Tyrone May starting in the centres for the Panthers. Brent Naden will start on the bench. It is just the eighth time utility May has started a game this season Panthers: Dylan Edwards, Josh Mansour, Tyrone May, Stephen Crichton, Brian To’o, Jarome Luai, Nathan Cleary, James Tamou (captain), Apisai Koroisau, James Fisher-Harris, Viliame Kikau, Liam Martin, Isaah Yeo. Interchange: Brent Naden , Kurt Capewell, Moses Leota, Zane Tetevano. Reserves: Mitch Kenny, Dean Whare, Matt Burton, Spencer Leniu. Storm: Ryan Papenhuyzen, Suliasi Vunivalu, Brenko Lee, Justin Olam, Josh Addo-Carr, Cameron Munster, Jahrome Hughes, Jesse Bromwich, Cameron Smith (captain), Christian Welch, Felise Kaufusi, Kenneath Bromwich, Nelson Asofa-Solomona. Interchange: Brandon Smith, Tino Faasuamaleaui, Dale Finucane, Nicho Hynes. Reserves: Tom Eisenhuth, Paul Momirovski, Tui Kamikamica, Ryley Jacks. Tonight’s referee is Gerard Sutton. The toss: This happened earlier – the Panthers won it and will kick off proceedings later tonight. Weather update: It’s been steadily raining pretty much all day in Sydney – the opening round of the Women’s Big Bash League has already been impacted by the rain – and slippery conditions, both underfoot at ANZ and in terms of ball-handling could well be factors in deciding the NRL grand final. My weather sources (the internet) tell me there’s a lot more rain to come tonight too. Well, here we are then. The final act of an engrossing, unique and plain bonkers season, the likes of which we will surely never see again. Coronavirus did its best to derail the 2020 campaign, but, given we are about to enjoy the spectacle of a grand final at ANZ Stadium, you could say it failed. Sure, the NRL had to demonstrate a degree of agility and deal with a few curveballs along the way, but a mix of stubbornness, determination and a large slice of luck has meant we are in a position where there will be a 2020 premiership winner. You could argue there will be an asterisk by the name of either the Panthers or Storm later this evening, given the disruption to the season, but that’s a discussion for another time. For now, there’s a grand final to be played, some elite rugby league to be enjoyed and a Kick off is scheduled for 7:30pm AEDT, which is about an hour away. Plenty to talk about before then, so why don’t you drop me a line at mike.hytner@theguardian.com or tweet @mike_hytner. It’s always more fun having others on board.
2||Melbourne Storm hold off late Penrith charge in grand final to claim fourth NRL premiershipIt started with an illegal outstretched leg and finished with a frantic flourish that was very nearly a Penrith comeback for the ages. Ultimately, though, Melbourne Storm confirmed they are the dominant NRL team of the 21st century. The Panthers were less than four minutes into their first grand final in 17 years when Tyrone May’s stuck out his right limb, which stopped Justin Olam burrowing under him and over the line. Josh Addo-Carr had kept the ball in play with a smart flick at the corner but, for the few moments after on-field referee Gerard Sutton ruled this a “no try”, May had seemingly done his job. Seconds later the indefatigable Cameron Smith had made the first of three conversions – he finished the 80 minutes with 14 points – in the Storm’s 26-20 triumph, a turbo-charged, sometimes grotesque, often spectacular affair. The scoreboard at ANZ Stadium read 22-0 at half-time; the Panthers scored three times in the last 12 minutes. That early penalty try was the first since one was awarded to Jamie Lyon in 2013. These oddities tend to happen in season-deciders. Just utter the phrase “six again” and every Canberra Raiders fan will understand its significance. Yet in the strangest of seasons, and after a 16-team competition somehow side-stepped a pandemic, order was, in a sense, restored via Melbourne's sixth grand final win – albeit the 2007 and 2009 titles were stripped due to salary cap breaches. And while Penrith must wait at least another year to add to their 1991 and 2003 premierships their counterparts, displaced amd living out of suitcases since June due to Covid-19, ensured their era of superiority continued. This was the Storm’s 10th grand final in 23 years, and one up against the youthful vitality of the minor premiers. But it was their first premiership without the other two-thirds of the big three in Billy Slater and Cooper Cronk, and may yet send the last out on a high, should 37-year-old Smith retire. He refused to shed any light on the subject on the night. It was also an individual triumph for coach Craig Bellamy who, at 61, is the oldest coach to win a decider, overtaking super coach Wayne Bennett who was 60 when he guided St George Illawarra to glory over the Roosters in 2010. And while Bellamy’s charges were pushed until the death – not to mention the late sin bins for Brandon Smith and Jahrome Hughes – the brutal first-half dismantling they had already inflicted proved a fine safety net in a game where little is safe. There was a sense in those first 40 minutes that luck was on the Storm’s side. Olam’s penalty try was the start. Then, Josh Mansour’s seventh-minute try was disallowed for Stephen Crichton’s obstruction. Soon thereafter Crichton himself thought he had touched gold only to be told he had only made contact with a bit of air. Smith kicked two penalty goals. There were also periods – before the frenetic finale – during which the Panthers’ play warranted a 19th straight win, when set after set and wave after wave had the Storm stretched thin, their every sinew strained. But there were others, too, like when Nathan Cleary misdirected a pass and had the misfortune of watching the intercept fall for Suliasi Vunivalu. The Fijian took it to ground, then he flew, melting away 80 metres at 33km/h as mere mortals in black chased vainly in his wake. This turn of events had a distinctly Houdini flavour - the Panthers appeared to have buried themselves alive despite their clear capacity to get themselves out of a bind. Except that, instead of emerging intact, Ivan Cleary’s men never resurfaced. The whole escapade wreaked of Vaudevillian wickedness, headlined by a Cameron Smith caricature. The veteran of “will he or won’t he?” fame made another cut 60 seconds before the break, right when Penrith needed to stem the bleeding. The initial call was “no try”, on the assumption Smith had dropped the ball before retrieving and dashing through an opening. But replays showed Apisai Koroisau had knocked it from his hands, and another conversion later it was 22-0. “Obviously it didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next,” coach Cleary said at half-time. “Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try.” Five minutes into the second half, Clive Churchill medallist Ryan Papenhuyzen sprinted 70 metres after the break to score untouched from a scrum. The game looked gone, but it was not the death knell it should have been. With 28 minutes to play, Penrith raced from 26-0 down, reducing the margin to six with three seconds remaining and one final play to level it from the kick-off after a late Cleary try. But after a cross-field back and forth the ball landed in Felise Kaufusi’s hands to wrap up Melbourne’s fourth title. “This is unbelievable,” Papenhuyzen said being named player of the match. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history.”
3||Possible Veronica Guerin murder weapon found in Spanish drug raidSpanish and Irish police are examining a revolver found during a raid on the Alicante villa of the convicted Irish drug trafficker John Gilligan to determine whether it was the weapon used in the murder of the journalist Veronica Guerin. Gilligan, whose gang murdered the campaigning reporter on the outskirts of Dublin in 1996, was never convicted in connection with her killing. He did, however, threaten Guerin and her young son when she investigated his wealth and lifestyle. A Dublin court acquitted Gilligan of ordering Guerin’s murder in 2001. Despite the judge having “grave suspicions” about Gilligan’s involvement, the uncorroborated evidence of his former criminal associates was not enough to convict him of murder. Spain’s national police force said in a statement on Friday that the weapon, a Colt Python, had been recovered during a series of raids in Torrevieja and Orihuela Costa. Gilligan and five others were arrested following the operation, which was carried out in collaboration with officers from Garda and the UK’s National Crime Agency. “Those arrested were led by a known Irish criminal and were part of a group of violent drugs and arms traffickers and were specialists in shipping illegal merchandise to the UK and Ireland from Spain,” the Policía Nacional said. The investigation led to the seizure of three 9mm pistols, eight kilos of marijuana and 26,000 pills, and a more unexpected discovery. “In one of the searches carried out in Alicante as part of the investigation, a Colt Python, the same model of revolver that was used in the journalist’s murder, was found buried in a garden,” said the statement. “Spanish officers are working with the Irish police to determine whether it is the same weapon.” At the end of Gilligan’s trial almost 20 years ago, Judge Diarmuid O’Donovan said he was responsible for a “haemorrhage of harm” and for which he had shown no remorse. “Never in the history of the state has one person been responsible for so much wretchedness to so many,” he said. The judge, however, told the no-jury court that he had no choice but to acquit Gilligan of murder because the main prosecution evidence, from one of his former accomplices, Russell Warren, a state-protected witness, was unreliable and uncorroborated. Gilligan was jailed for 28 years for importing 20,000 kilos of cannabis resin worth £32m, but found not guilty of four charges of possessing weapons and ammunition. Gilligan was released from prison in October 2013. He fled Ireland the following year after being the target of two gun attacks.
22||Saturday Night Live: Adele hosts as cast pulls off the Jeffrey Toobin gagsThis week we kick off with a send-up of the second and “praise Jesus, final” presidential debate. Donald Trump (Alec Baldwin) tries to play nice by complimenting moderator Kristen Welker (Maya Rudolph), although he’s his usual unhinged self when directing nutty personal attacks and lies against Joe Biden (Jim Carrey), who struggles to keep his temper in check. From the get, the sketch is riddled with awkward pauses, missed cues and bungled lines – a frustrated Carrey exclaims ‘Damnit!’ – and it quickly devolves into a mug-off between the guest stars (Carrey’s rubber-faced caricature captures almost none of the real Biden’s idiosyncrasies, serving instead as pure ego trip). Puttering to a weak end, it’s the worst of the election cold opens so far, which is really saying something. Adele hosts for the first time, talking about how her 2008 performance on the show was the catalyst for her breakthrough in America. She thanks Sarah Palin directly. She then addresses confusion over why she’s not pulling double duty as host and musical guest – “I’d rather put on a wig, have a glass of wine or six and see we happens” – tabloid obsession with her weight loss, and her penchant for cursing when nervous. There’s little in the way of humor, but Adele comes off as laid back, which is a nice change of pace from a couple of noticeably nervous hosts. The first sketch is set in 2019 and sees a group of friends visiting a fortune teller, Kate McKinnon, who relays blurry visions of the hellscape that is 2020, which none can comprehend. (She tells one, “In 2020 you do something so terrible none of your friends will ever speak to you again … you eat inside a restaurant!”) The best sketch of the season thus far, it really sticks the landing with a final revelation that one of the friends is Jeffrey Toobin’s daughter. A new Chad sketch finds Pete Davidson’s laconic slacker visiting a haunted house and being confronted by a restless ghost, who tries to confide in him about her murder but accidentally kills him. It’s slight even by Chad standards, but Adele acquits herself well as the spirit. On a new season of The Bachelor, Adele is a contestant. Looking for love after a series of public heartbreaks, she refuses to pace herself emotionally, breaking into song at the drop of a hat, much to the chagrin of the bachelor and the other contestants. It’s a mostly lazy excuse to have Adele belt out some her hits, but it’s hard to complain since she gives it her all. A campaign commercial for Trump Addicts of America sees Biden voters admitting their fear of a post-Trump world: “My entire personality is hating Donald Trump. If he’s gone, what am I supposed to do? Talk to my kids?” The premise is solid, since previously apolitical anti-Trumpers definitely deserve to be mocked, but SNL is absolutely no position to sit in judgement. It’s impossible not think, “The lady doth protest too much.” The night’s musical guest is HER, who performs the soulful Damage. On Weekend Update, Colin Jost compares Biden’s performance in the debate to Giants quarterback Daniel Jones much-memed trip at the 20-yard-line earlier this week (a comparison that doesn’t seem to bear out the post-debate snap polls, but whatever). In another bit of SNL’s patented both-sidesism, Jost laments how old and out of it both candidates are: “This election is the equivalent of a baseball team giving a four-year deal to Willie Mays NOW.” Melissa Villasenor joins the desk to talk about her summer quarantine. She quirkily rolls through a number of random impressions – the little Rascals, Link from Zelda, Stevie Nicks and Sia. Then, following another solid dig at Toobin, this time courtesy of Michael Che – “He’s from the New Yorker, so you know that jerk was dry as hell!” – they welcome the Village People, who respond to Trump’s playing their music at his rallies by singing “Cease and Desist” to the tune of YMCA. Next, Rudolph plays a grandmother paid a socially distanced visit by her grandchildren. They try to sugarcoat their struggles with jobs, money and marriage with millennial jargon, but her constant refrain of “WHA?” breaks them down until they’re forced to air their failures in the most basic terms: “We had a three-way and he liked the other girl more!” It’s good to see Rudolph playing a purely silly character again. A message from the tourism board of Africa sees Adele and McKinnon playing horny divorcees hot for the “tribesmen”. It’s a seemingly problematic bit – let’s see if it provokes the same outrage Bill Burr got for calling out white women a few weeks ago – but it’s hard to focus on anything other than Adele’s full-bodied breaking throughout. Then HER takes the stage for a performance of Hold On, taking a break from crooning for a solid guitar solo. The final sketch sees Adele and Rudolph in a commercial for Ass Angel Perfume Jeans – women’s jeans that use a dangerous amount of chemicals to cover up embarrassing “lady smells”. It hits all the beats of a modern-day prescription drug ad, despite being set in the 80s. This strikes me as indicative of one of the major problems of current-day SNL– half-decent ideas fail to land because the writers can’t commit to a basic premise. This episode was about on par with the last three, although it contained a few more laughs. H.E.R. put in a very good performance and Adele held her own, save for breaking in the penultimate sketch. Mercifully, we’ll only have to weather a few more election cold opens, although we can only pray a Biden victory won’t result in Carrey sticking around like Baldwin did.
7||Labour vows to force another Commons vote on free school mealsLabour has thrown down the gauntlet to Downing Street by pledging to force another Commons vote if it does not U-turn on its refusal to provide free school meals in England during the holidays, as a senior Conservative MP admitted the government has misjudged the country’s mood over the issue. In a fresh intervention that will boost the campaign being led by the footballer Marcus Rashford, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said on Sunday his party would push for another vote if there is no change of course before Christmas. Labour was defeated by the government in a vote on the policy last week, prompting businesses and councils – some of them Tory-led – to step forward to offer to feed children in the October half-term break, but the government has so far dug in to defend its position. In an apparent softening of tone after a No 10 spokesman last week refused to praise councils and firms offering help, the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, said Rashford deserved “huge credit” for his work on the issue although he stood by Downing Street’s line. It comes as Sir Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative chair of the influential Commons liaison committee, said the government had “misunderstood the mood of the country” on free school meals. As the government continues to resist appeals to reverse its move, Jenkin told the Sophy Ridge on Sunday programme on Sky News: “I think we have to admit that we have misunderstood the mood of the country here.” Highlighting that the government had funded local councils to provide support, he added: “The public want to see the government taking a national lead on this and I think the government will probably have to think again on that, particularly if there’s going to be more votes in the House of Commons. “I think when you have got the chairman of the education select committee [Robert Halfon] not supporting the government on this – and he’s a Conservative – I think the government has to listen to the Conservative party.” Asked how he would vote in any further Commons divisions, Jenkin said: “I shall wait to see what the government says and how they respond to the situation.” Halfon, who voted against the government on the free school meals motion on Wednesday, wrote in the Spectator on Saturday: “Combating child hunger should, therefore, be a cause that all Conservatives can embrace. That should include the temporary extension of free school meals over the holidays while (and only while) the economic impacts of the pandemic continue to be felt.” Downing Street has already been forced to perform a U-turn once on the issue, deciding to provide £15-a-week meal vouchers to eligible children over the summer after Rashford campaigned on the issue, but it has refused to do so for the holidays ahead. Asked what had changed, meaning children who got them then should not get them during the autumn or Christmas holidays, Lewis told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday: “There’s a couple of things [that] have changed. Obviously, back in the summer we had all the schools were closed, we had that full lockdown period. Things have moved on, we’ve now got about 99% of schools and children back at schools … that’s really good. So we are in a different place but there’s more than that.” He added: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over a £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.” Dr Rosena Allin-Khan, Labour’s shadow mental health minister, told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: “We are honestly hoping that the Conservative government dig deep and look introspectively and perform a U-turn on this, but we certainly will be pushing for a vote before Christmas.” The children’s commissioner, Anne Longfield, told the same programme she thought the government should provide free school meals over the holidays, adding: “I’ve been horrified by the debate, really disappointed about the debate over recent days. We’re a wealthy country, it’s 2020.” “To have a debate about whether we should make sure that hungry and vulnerable children should have enough to eat is something which is strikingly similar to chapters, I think of you know, what we’d expect to see in Oliver Twist, a novel published in the 19th century. So let’s stop the divisive and distracting conversations, and start focusing.”
12||On Connection by Kae Tempest review – persuasive and profoundKae Tempest has added one more string to an already crowded bow: On Connection is the first nonfiction work by this Mercury prize-winning musician, Ted Hughes award-winning poet, acclaimed playwright, novelist, and chief creative chronicler of the last decade. It’s also Tempest’s first publication since changing their name from Kate, and using they/them pronouns. On Connection is a book-length essay whose subject has been somewhat overtaken by recent events. Its thesis – that our need for connection can be fostered by creativity in general and live art in particular – has become all the more compelling since lockdown. Who hasn’t missed the electric charge that crackles between artist and audience? Or felt frustrated at how live music and theatre are undermined and dismissed by a government that fails to recognise their immense value? But Tempest isn’t talking about merely missing a good night out at a gig or show. On Connection looks at creativity as a means of counteracting the numbness of the modern world. We get so caught up in an ever-spinning consumerist hamster wheel that we neglect what is true within ourselves and one another. “In a disconnected state, self-awareness is one of the first frequencies to be scooped out and muted,” they write. “When this happens, I need creativity to reconnect me.” Throughout, there are familiar shades of mysticism and mindfulness, of anti-capitalist theorising and the hippies’ tune-in, drop-out arguments. More explicitly, Tempest writes about being inspired by Carl Jung’s The Red Book and his theory that we possess a wild, inner “spirit of the depths” as well as a “spirit of the times”, the everyday ego that’s concerned with more immediate goals and ambitions. Both are needed, Tempest feels, but we’ve got them way out of whack. “In order to regain our balance, we need to remaster the ability to go deep, to ‘turn away from outer things’. To face what is in ourselves.” Each chapter is prefaced by William Blake quotations, and it’s no wonder his writing appeals to Tempest: both artists’ work is concerned with tapping into something ancient and mythic. Tempest’s call to reconnect with what Blake terms the “infinite” within ourselves proves persuasive and profound. Anyone who has seen Tempest live has likely witnessed their talent for sparking connection, even if they insist this is a mysterious, unreliable thing. But when it does come, it is wondrous: “I am granted access to a freedom so resolute it leaves me shining head to toe… Looking out at the crowd, I see reality at last. People really feeling things.” While some of their thoughts may not be new, they are surely worth repeating in this disconnected, distracted world. And Tempest, as you’d expect, delivers them gorgeously, rhythmically, but also with clarity and a fierce grace. I drank On Connection down like a fresh glass of water. • On Connection by Kae Tempest is published by Faber (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
19||Cordelia review – atmospheric but uneven thrillerIn Adrian Shergold’s uneven thriller, actor Cordelia (Antonia Campbell-Hughes) continues to suffer the aftershocks of trauma from an event that took place 12 years prior. When her twin sister (also played – though less convincingly – by Campbell-Hughes) leaves her alone in their London flat for the weekend, the fragile Cordelia begins to spiral, convinced a stranger has been rifling through her knickers. Johnny Flynn is fun to watch as sleazy upstairs neighbour and violinist Frank, and with its flocked wallpaper, claustrophobic hallways and dingy paisley curtains, the flat helps create a creepy atmosphere. Still, tension is frequently punctured by clunky dialogue. “I got mired in real life, and Rada was useless,” Cordelia says wistfully.
20||How are restaurants going to survive the winter? Outdoor heatersIt’s been a tough year for many small businesses, particularly restaurants and retailers. But they’ve been doing their best to survive, despite all the restrictions. In my home city of Philadelphia, many restaurants have moved their operations outdoors – and some with success. Tables are filled. And just last night I walked by an entire spin class going on outside a local fitness center. People are doing their best to adapt. That’s good news and I’m happy for them. But there’s a looming problem: winter is coming! Can these businesses keep operating even as temperatures begin to drop? “For sure,” a friend who owns a diner told me recently. “As long as we can get more heaters. Know where I can find a few?” The pandemic has created some booming markets in games and puzzles, cleaning products, technology tools, pools, organic cat food and just about anything you can buy online. When the pandemic began people were desperate for toilet paper. But now there’s a craze affecting many desperate business owners: outdoor heaters. “We couldn’t get any at Lowe’s, Home Depot, Ace Hardware – the only place where we were able to source them is [party rental company] Tablescapes, and they charge thousands for rentals,” a Chicago restaurant owner told Eater Chicago. “It doesn’t make sense financially to spend $8,000 on four heaters.” It’s not just restaurants that need the heat. My local fitness center wants to continue outdoor classes as long as possible and a zoo in Oregon wants them to keep visitors coming. (“After getting open and figuring out how to operate safely through Covid times, having outdoor space every year, we always have to think ahead,” Portland zoo co-owner Mark Miller told local TV station WGME). Many homeowners are putting in outdoor heaters on their patios as they plan for a winter of potential lockdowns. All of this means good news if you’re in the business of making, supplying, servicing and selling outdoor heaters. The Boston Globe has reported a 70% increase in heater searches on Wayfair’s website and the phrase “patio heaters” has its highest Google search volume, according to a report in USA Today, which also provides a handy list of places where you can try your luck finding one. “We’re ordering as much as possible,” Josh Rookstool, the director of sales for Sunheat outdoor heaters, which are stocked by Wayfair and Home Depot, told the Marker. “However, there are still major backups in production.” Rockstool’s company says that sales have increased more than 400% this year. And it’s not just small businesses selling heaters that are profiting. Companies that provide propane, accessories and repairs are also seeing enormous increases in demand. Can’t find an outdoor heater for your small business? Maybe you should consider what one restaurant owner is doing: building mini igloos for your customers. Yes, that’s right. Igloos. David Lahousse, who for the past 20 years has owned Kay’s Restaurant in Woonsocket, Rhode Island, has added two greenhouse-style igloos to his parking lot and plans to add eight more. The igloos, which cost about $1,400 each keeps the temperature 20-30 degrees warmer than the outside, with one party inside at a time. “I want to make it a winter wonderland, you know?” he told local news station WPRI. “It’s not all about the money for me. I want people to have these jobs. I don’t want to lay anyone off.”
3||'Cycling capital of death': Bogotá bikers battle violence on city's streetsAndy Villalba, a tattooed and scrawny bicycle mechanic in Colombia’s capital, has long been wise to the dangers of cycling in such a chaotic city. Now, amid a boom in both cycling and bike theft, he is giving workshops in road safety and self-defence. “Welcome to Bogotá,” said Villalba, who has lost count of the number of times he has been threatened for his bicycle. “The cycling capital of death.” Cycling in Colombia is thriving. As in other cities around the world, the pandemic has prompted many commuters to forgo taxis or buses, and bike use is up 40% since last year. More than 100km of bike paths were laid in Bogotá during the lockdown. Meanwhile, professional cycling has proven to be the country’s most successful sport: elite riders have won medals at tours across Europe and last year Egan Bernal became the first Colombian to win the Tour de France. But as more people step into the saddle, bicycle thieves and homicidal drivers are forcing them to fight back with self-defence classes and weapons. “The most effective use of violence is to avoid a physical confrontation, but if it comes to it, the D-lock is your best friend,” said Villalba, 33, at a recent workshop. “Hold that in one hand and with the other use the frame of the bike as a shield.” Villalba also advises cyclists to build a network of fellow cyclists, avoid slow bike paths at night, and to cover any expensive branding on their bikes with stickers. Though Bogotá has significantly reduced violent crime over the past two decades, robberies are still a daily reality. From January to September this year, 8,023 cases of bicycle theft have been reported, up 36% on the same period the previous year. Some riders have taken to carrying baseball bats and extendable batons to protect themselves. “Carrying bats and weapons is necessary in some of the rougher neighbourhoods on the edge of the city,” said Jaime Mercho, an enthusiast. “But D-locks and chains are just as good.” Cyclists across the country united in outrage this month after José Antonio Duarte, a 56-year-old security guard, was killed by a van driver while cycling over a bridge north of Bogotá. Footage of the incident went viral, showing the van running straight into Duarte, flipping him over the railing to fall 4.5 metres, landing on his head. “Do me a fucking favour,” tweeted Bernal, when he posted the video. “How easy it is to end someone’s life … I hope there’s justice.” The local governor promised a thorough investigation, though many cyclists said they were unsurprised by the incident. Abdon Bermúdez came to Colombia four years ago from Venezuela, and works as a bicycle messenger. “My bike is my means of transport and work,” he said. “And I see all the time that drivers don’t respect cyclists – they don’t care that we have as much of a right to be on the road as they do.” A common complaint of cyclists is the lack of consideration from other road users. In Bogotá, drivers routinely neglect to use indicators, and all road users run red lights. A law passed in 2016 gave cyclists more rights on the road, though motorists often honk at riders in their lane. Sandy Millares runs a small bike messaging company in Bogotá, covering dozens of miles a day across the city. During her five years as a courier, Millares has seen it all. “People have used their cars to drive into me, motorcyclists have run their hands over me as they pass, and I’ve had bikes stolen,” the 30-year-old said, taking a break after a delivery. “I love my job but I know it’s dangerous,” she said. “And I love my city, but I know there’s certain neighbourhoods and routes that I can’t go to – as a cyclist and as a woman.”
0||'Deep down, he's a terrified little boy': Bob Woodward, John Bolton and others on TrumpBob Woodward: ‘I can’t think of a time I’ve felt more anxiety about the presidency’ Bob Woodward is associate editor of the Washington Post and the author of 20 books on American politics. In 50 years as a journalist he has covered nine presidents. His reporting on the Watergate break-in and cover-up with his colleague Carl Bernstein helped bring down Richard Nixon and won the Post a Pulitzer prize. His latest book about Donald Trump, Rage, is based on 10 hours of interviews, spread over 19 taped phone calls, often initiated by the president himself, in which Trump proved “only too willing to blow the whistle on himself”, as the Observer’s review noted. There is an atmosphere in Washington of high anxiety. Trump is melting down, to put it charitably. His campaign has been about lashing out, about wanting his former political opponents – President Obama and Joe Biden, who’s now running against him, of course – to be indicted then charged. Then there was his announcement that he is not necessarily going to accept the electoral result against him. The idea that the president would put in doubt the basic process of democracy and voting is not only unacceptable, it is a nightmare. Now you have the added factor that Trump’s also had Covid-19 and he’s on steroids, saying things like, “It is a blessing from God that I got the virus”. I can’t think of anything more absurd, or crueller, than calling it a blessing from God. More than 210,000 people have died in the US. For the president of the US to talk like that is unbelievable, but I think people have become numb to it. The outrages pile up, in a way. People have forgotten the risks. I think Kamala Harris put it very well in the vice-presidential debate: what’s happened in the US with Covid-19 is the biggest failure of the president to exercise his responsibilities, perhaps in the history of the US. This is a really dangerous period before the election. I got to know Trump very well in hours and hours of interviews I did with him for my book, Rage, and I think if there were to be some accident, some problem, during the final campaign weeks, he would capitalise on it. Henry Kissinger, of all people, was warning recently that we should worry about some sort of crisis, and reminded people that the first world war started because of an accident. Probably no one’s wanting to start a war right now, but we have a climate in the Middle East, and in the South China Sea, which China has really militarised, where you could have some spark trigger a mild confrontation – not that I think Trump’s going to manufacture that. Trump is not sufficiently tuned into the attitudes and experiences of other people, which is an essential requirement of a leader. After George Floyd was killed, I asked him about the tensions ignited in this country not seen since the heights of the civil rights movement. I said we were men of white privilege, that we’ve got to understand the pain and anger black people feel in this country. That’s when he said something that astonished me: “Wow, you sure drank the Kool-Aid! I don’t feel that at all.” He just rejected the idea that somehow white people have to understand the pain and anger of others. I think that’s one of his chief problems. He thinks in terms of his own pain and anger, and what he wants to do, which is to be re-elected. Trump also told me the US has nuclear weapons that are so devastating even President Putin and President Xi of China don’t know about them. I’m not exactly sure even today whether he was exaggerating or talking about something real. But what’s a really important question to consider here is how much power is in the presidency: when we decide to go to war, whether you look at Vietnam or Afghanistan or Iraq, it’s all been led by the president, essentially, as commander in chief. As we’ve gone into a media environment of impatience and speed because of the internet, the president is also in this position to seize the airwaves. As his son-in-law Jared Kushner said, the news is going along and then Trump tweets something and everyone drops whatever it is. Trump realises this. He uses it. He has that power. He loves being in control. He loves the spectacle. The circumstances have all converged here to give him extraordinary power. Looking to the aftermath of the election, Trump’s set the table to say that if he doesn’t win, he’s going to be suspicious of mail-in votes. I think the question is: if he loses, will his political party get together and go see him and talk to him, and say, you can’t do this? You can’t do it to the Republican party and most importantly you can’t do it to the country. There has to be an orderly transference of power, if that’s what it comes to. This is the level of anxiety I have now as a reporter: I go to sleep and get up in the middle of the night and start checking the news because God knows what might have happened. We are sitting on pins and needles in this country about every moment, every action, every assessment, and it is draining. I think lots of people have got to the point where they are tuning Trump and the political situation out as well as they can. Unfortunately, the impacts on people’s lives carry on, given the virus, given there’s no plan, or organised way of dealing with this. It’s all seat-of-the-pants impulsive decision-making. I can’t think of a time – and I’ve been a reporter for nearly 50 years – where I’ve felt more anxiety about the country and the presidency and the future. JR Mary Trump: ‘If he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over’ Mary Trump is a psychologist and the niece of Donald Trump. Her father, Fred Trump Jr, the president’s older brother, died when she was 16. Her tell-all book about the president and the Trump family, Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man, sold almost 1m copies on the first day it was published in July this year. My theory about the way Donald has run his campaign is that he knows he’s in desperate shape, so he’s going to burn it all down, sow more chaos and division, because that’s where he succeeds. He knows that he’s losing – he’ll deny it mightily – and at some level he understands what’s at stake. If he loses, he’s probably going to prison. So, if he’s going down, he’s going to take us all down with him. I’ve always believed that deep down Donald is a terrified little boy. The amount of fear he’s feeling now has got to be unhinging him. Not only did he get sick with the virus, there’s the tax story and his prospects in the election looking really bad right now. He’s got to be absolutely panicked. Throughout the campaign I thought that the absolute worst scenario would be for him to get the virus and then get well. I know that sounds awful. He’s ignored the severity of the pandemic all year because the idea of illness as weakness is so deeply ingrained in my family, that even an association with it is unacceptable, and that’s why now we’ve got 210,000 Americans dead. But now his statement – you can beat it, don’t be afraid of it – is going to result in more people becoming sick, and many of those will die. Even before he said that, I believed he was engaging in mass murder, but that sealed it for me. Anybody who’s capable of putting hundreds of millions of people at risk to avoid looking bad doesn’t care about you. Since Donald was elected, I’ve been surprised by nothing he’s done or said. But I have been shocked by the wholesale abdication of responsibility by the Republican party during this election campaign and throughout the past four years. I didn’t understand the extent to which they would be willing to enable him in Congress and in his cabinet. If they had done their job and acted as a separate branch of government, he would have been contained. By siding with him 100% of the time, they have ensured we are now faced with several concurrent disasters that are getting exponentially worse. No other president in history has been able to push the envelope the way Donald does. He’s always trying to see what he can get away with and, as I have seen through the course of his life, he’s always got away with everything. No one holds him accountable. He constantly gets rewarded for failing. The Republicans understood what he was capable of and have allowed him to push through an agenda that is completely at odds with what the majority wants. In Donald, I see somebody who is afraid, lonely, desperate, unloved. I hesitate to paint a compassionate portrait of him because he’s so culpable. However, I do have compassion for the three-year-old who was without his mother for a whole year when she was sick. That loss of affection and having no one to soothe him was deeply harmful. And when she recovered to the extent that she did, she did nothing to heal the wounds of that separation, and that’s before we get to my grandfather, who was always an awful person, capable of such abject cruelty and sadism. So now we have an adult Donald who is sad, lonely, ignorant but who also has immense power – and that is a terrifying prospect. People need to stop worrying about what might happen if he loses but doesn’t accept the results and laugh in his face. That’s the best way to undermine him. If he wins, it won’t be legitimate. He’s already using the powers of his office to shake people’s confidence in mail-in voting at a time when people want to be voting by mail during the pandemic. He’s telling his followers if Biden wins it will have been rigged, telling them to show up at the polls to make sure there’s no fraud, which is voter intimidation. If you’re a black person in America and a bunch of white guys with automatic weapons are standing outside the polling station you won’t want to vote, which is exactly what Donald wants to happen. If he stays in the Oval Office, I’m going to try to get a British passport because I don’t think I’ll fare well. He’s an extraordinarily vindictive person surrounded by people who are willing to help him be vindictive. But that’s personal: in terms of the country, if he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over. The western alliance is over. We’ll be entering an incredibly dark period of autocracy on a global scale. JR John Bolton: ‘He was envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan’ John Bolton was US national security adviser under Donald Trump from 2018 to 2019. Having started his career as a lawyer, he held senior roles in the state department and justice department during the administrations of Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush and George W Bush, who appointed him 25th US ambassador to the United Nations. His book about the Trump presidency, The Room Where It Happened, was published in June this year. People complain that Trump has a short attention span, myself included. But when it comes to his own re-election he has an infinite attention span. Decisions are made not on the basis of the pros and cons of the policies being debated but on what the domestic political blowback could be. Every president takes politics into account but with Trump it’s qualitatively different. It’s not just a factor. It’s the factor. Everything is a distinct transaction – maybe that’s how you’re successful in the real-estate business. If he doesn’t see the immediate bottom line impact, he wants to move on to something else. For example, with our close allies, he says things like: “Here we are defending you and you don’t pay for our bases and you have trade surpluses with us.” Well, we’re not there to defend them. We’re there because we have a mutual defence alliance. We think it’s in our interest as much as the allies’ interest to be forwardly deployed. We’re not there as mercenaries. And we wouldn’t want to be there as mercenaries. But he doesn’t get that. I think his election campaign is in deep trouble. Because of what happened in 2016, when everybody thought Hillary was going to win, he can say the polls are fake news and that he’ll win anyway. And he’ll say that right up to election night and probably after it. But unless the pollsters have done absolutely nothing to try to fix their methodology since 2016, you have to say that he’s in trouble. Each day you get closer to the election, by definition it’s that much harder to make up the gap. Nothing in life is certain but it looks like he’s heading for a pretty substantial defeat. He’s trying to turn his Covid-19 infection to his advantage. I assume that’s what he thought he was doing with his grand entrance to the White House, posing on the balcony like Il Duce. I think it had the opposite effect. One thing I’ve been waiting for is the wave of sympathy that you would expect from the American people when their leader is taken ill. Maybe it’s out there but there isn’t any evidence of it at this point. I had certainly heard all the criticisms of Donald Trump before I took the job of national security adviser but I felt that the gravity of the presidency, the weight of the responsibility, would have an effect on him the way it’s had on every contemporary American president once they took office. It turned out I wasn’t right. The transition and opening six months were bungled and a lot of Trumpian habits and attitudes were formed in that period. Although I had aspirations to create more orderly policy processes in the national security area, it was too late to do it. I was in retrospect overly optimistic that I could correct problems that were inherent in Trump’s approach to the job from the get-go. It became clear in ways that I previously found impossible to contemplate that he had no philosophy, no grand strategy, he didn’t think in policy terms. Every day was a new adventure. And the way I think successful foreign policy is laid out is by careful analysis and deliberation, careful implementation, review and persistence. All of these are things that basically don’t exist in the Trump administration. There was so much that he didn’t know and he has very little inclination to learn it. It’s hard to have an evolving conversation when his data base never changes. I don’t regret taking the job. I went in and lasted for as long as I could and then I came out and wrote a book so everybody would know exactly what was going on. There are still people in there now who are trying to get him to do the right thing. One thing I worry about in a second term is that people like that will simply not join the administration. Up until now, it was reasonable to say, I’ve got enough confidence I can make a difference. It’s very hard to make that argument now after four years. I don’t think he has the character or fitness to be president. I once said to a psychologist that Trump doesn’t have character and the psychologist said, sure he does, he has a character defect. So I’ll leave that to the shrinks. We never should have nominated him. Nobody ever said that politics ends up with the best people for government. But there’s something wrong when someone like this can prevail. I think he was kind of envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan. They are big guys and they do big guy things and he wants to be a big guy too. I can’t explain why he has this affinity for authoritarian leaders but there’s no doubt he does. I don’t believe he was reluctant to employ me because of my moustache, as some people say. Would he have made a flip remark about it at some point? Sure, that’s entirely possible. Whatever his flip remarks – and he’s derogatory about almost everybody, sooner rather than later – he did hire me and I actually lasted 17 months. If Trump loses and leaves on 20 January, of the four national security advisers, I will be the longest serving. It’s not like there was a battle between us over two competing worldviews, because he doesn’t have a worldview. And that was the hardest thing for me to understand and appreciate. AA Anthony Scaramucci: ‘He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world’ Anthony Scaramucci was a little-known New York financier when Donald Trump made him the White House director of communications in July 2017. He was fired just 11 days later after a string of public relations gaffes but remained a vocal Trump loyalist for the next two years. However, the president’s racist attacks on four Democratic congresswomen of colour led Scaramucci to withdraw his support. Since then he has become an outspoken critic of Trump, who frequently lashes out at Scaramucci on Twitter. His book, Trump: The Blue-Collar President, was published in 2018. In our country we’re so polarised now you have to hate the person you disagree with. But I don’t hate Donald Trump. If anything I’m somewhat sympathetic to him because there’s obviously something wrong with him. There’s a screw loose and you don’t have to be a psychiatrist to see that. You just have to look at the manic behaviour, the absurdity, the lack of maturity. He’s not a fully developed adult. He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world and I fear for the country. There’s something wrong with him and the people around him are too afraid of him to intervene on his behalf. He talked about “draining the swamp” but the swamp is now like a gold-plated hot tub. He’s taken the corruption up to a whole new level. I think if he loses the election, it’s over for him. I don’t see how he can survive this. He’ll probably get indicted. However, if he does, he probably won’t serve in jail – I don’t think America likes putting its ex-presidents in jail. So he’ll most likely get prosecuted with his sentence commuted. He likes to mud-wrestle his opponents but he can’t do that with Joe Biden because Biden is an old-school disciplined politician. His positive-negative differentials are 20% higher than Hillary Clinton’s. But I’m smart enough to know that the polls are closer than people think. If Trump wins, there is going to be a further destruction of American society. He’ll start to dismantle the institutions of our democracy, and the country will become weaker as a result of it. There’ll be more disorder, more protests, more racial tension. The move back to the White House, after hospital, tried to create these optics that he’s a superman. But you’ve got 210,000 Americans dead, so if you do a matrix, there’s about 9 million Americans who have had family or friends hurt by the virus, so that’s not going to play with them. He’s a minority politician, he’s a minority president. He’s never had the popular vote; he will have won the electoral college twice, and lost the popular vote twice. The fact is he’s an idiot. He’s unfit to serve in the office of the president. He doesn’t have the management capability. He doesn’t have the ability to empathise. He’s not a leader. He’s an un-American bully. You could say he had a lot of those attributes as a candidate in 2016 so why did I support him? And I would say, yes, I chose to overlook that because I was trying to be loyal to my party and its nominee. I started out disliking him. Then I thought, OK, I’m in the Republican party, he’s going to be the Republican candidate and now he’s won the presidency, so he’s going to be the first Republican president since George W Bush, let me figure out a way to like him. I worked for him and I have to own that for the rest of my life. I’ve acknowledged my mistake, I’ve apologised for it, and I’ve admitted that I was wrong in my political judgment and assessment of him as an individual and as a political leader. People say to me, he hasn’t changed at all, and I accept that. But I’ve changed. I’m way more psychologically minded. I’m more aware of the pain and trouble he’s causing people. I’m very happy I got fired. It probably saved my marriage and my business career. I was loyal to him for two years but the year after my book came out he told four women who were democratically elected to Congress – three of whom were born in the US, the other a naturalised citizen – to go back to the countries they originally came from. They told my Italian-American grandparents that 100 years ago. When I said that he was being racist, he started going after my wife on Twitter. I told Mayor Giuliani: “You’re disavowing your personal integrity and your family’s history by supporting this man.” You can’t talk like that as the American president in 2020. He’s a despicable guy. I don’t think most of his supporters think he’s the best man for the job. They see him as a culture warrior, though. The conservative news outlets have told them that we have a full-on culture war going on in the United States, and he is the last white man standing to protect America from the black and Hispanic latte-drinking transvestites who are going to take over their government and culture. The president’s strategy is let’s see if I can turn out every racist in America, and he hopes there are enough to beat the non-racists. The secretary of state Mike Pompeo’s supporting him because Pompeo looks in the mirror and sees a future president. We have 63 million people in the US who have voted for Trump for one reason or another, and what I can do is explain my change of heart. We now have almost four complete years of data on his ineptitude. It’s nothing personal, he’s not the right person to be president of the United States. AA
11||Tory leader’s £1bn office buying spree ‘leaves dangerous legacy’ for councilIan Harvey cannot help but chuckle when recalling how easy it was to borrow £385m from the Public Works Loans Board to buy BP’s vast Sunbury-on-Thames research centre soon after he became Conservative leader of Spelthorne borough council, Surrey, in 2016. “I found it laughably easy, to be honest with you,” he said. “There was no real control over it. I’m told it was pretty much a phone call. It took about three days.” Harvey, who was ousted as leader of the council in the summer, went on to borrow millions more from the PWLB, a Treasury agency, to purchase seven other commercial buildings, including £170m on an office in west London and £285m on three offices in the Thames valley. By the end of his four-year reign, the council had borrowed £1.1bn – about 100 times Spelthorne’s core spending power of £11m. “There were other local authorities that did small-scale things before us, but BP broke the mould because it was so much bigger than anything else,” he said. Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spree is just the most dramatic example of how councils have been encouraged to make commercial investments to offset budget cuts during a decade of austerity. Richard Watts, the chair of the Local Government Association’s resources board, said some councils are now faced with mounting losses: “Ten years of massive cuts to local government forced councils to look elsewhere for money, but as a result of the pandemic some of these new sources of income are drying up . “If the government doesn’t step in to make up the shortfall, the losers are going to be ordinary residents because we’re going to see another very deep round of local council austerity.” The latest local authority financial returns to the government – which have not yet been published – show English councils have already lost £372m of income from market investments, including commercial property, since the country went into lockdown in March and expect to lose a total of £541m by March 2021. While many councils have invested within their boundaries to improve local areas, some smaller councils – like Spelthorne – have poured millions of pounds of borrowed public money into speculative property acquisitions much further afield. This has prompted concerns that authorities dependent on rents from largely empty office blocks and struggling shopping centres may find it increasingly difficult to service the huge debts they have built up, and ultimately be forced to cut services. Councils are supposed to base their investment strategies on a statutory code, which prohibits borrowing to invest solely for profit. Don Peebles, the head of policy at the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, which is responsible for the code, said public money is being misused: “It is like somebody going to a building society to borrow money to buy a house, but instead of buying the house they put it on a horse.” Peeebles adds that councils are taking huge risks: “It means public services are exposed to the vagaries of the market. If there is some volatility in the market, then it could impact adversely on their ability to deliver those essential services – and that is what we are seeing at the moment.” The backdrop to Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spending spree was the tight squeeze on local government budgets after 2010. Harvey argues he was forced to look for other sources of revenue because the council’s funding from central government was forecast to sharply fall. “We were basically living on reserves and selling things off. Morale was on the ground because [council officers] couldn’t achieve much,” he said. “It was hugely unfair.” However, nearly 30% the council’s budget for services is now dependent on rent from properties purchased by Harvey, who resigned from the Conservative party after he was deposed. While the financial figures so far released indicate the vast majority of the rent has been collected, the council admits: “Covid poses the most extreme economic stress test for more than two centuries”. Since the beginning of the pandemic it has already agreed £1.27m worth of rent deferrals. Restricted council papers seen by the Observer show that Harvey, in one of his final acts as leader, agreed to another deferral, worth £4.46m, with the troubled workspace firm WeWork to help “absorb the difficulties brought about by the Covid crisis”. Harvey admits this is “not ideal” but insists the council is performing better than other commercial landlords. “There is risk in anything, but it is negligible,” he said . Not everybody in Spelthorne is reassured. Lawrence Nichols, a Liberal Democrat who chairs the council’s audit committee, said Harvey left a “potentially dangerous” legacy for the borough that could unravel in 10 or 15 years when all break points in the contracts come up. “High-value decisions are not getting the scrutiny they need. The financial acumen here is really thin,” he said. “It is a rotten borough.” This month it emerged that KPMG, the council’s auditors throughout most of Harvey’s leadership, warned in August that the investment properties the council purchased in 2017-19 might be unlawful because the authority failed to have regard to the statutory code prohibiting borrowing purely to profit from investments. Spelthorne council said it had complied with all legislation and guidance, including having regard to the prudential code. It said it was completely transparent, with the council’s investments listed on its website. It added that it had assembled an experienced team to manage its commercial investment strategy and had built up a £20m sinking fund to protect services from fluctuations in rental streams: “Even on the worst case modelling, the figures indicated that we have more than sufficient sinking funds to ensure that the revenue budget is not adversely impacted at any point over the next 10 years.” The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government said it had provided councils with £6.4bn worth of support during the pandemic. It added that councils must properly consider the risksand opportunities when they made investment decisions: “We share concerns about a minority of councils that continue to expose themselves and taxpayers to unnecessary risk. We have a set framework which councils must observe and we will continue to monitor this,” said a spokesperson.
1||Chelsea dig in to foil Manchester United in a game that felt out of timeOle Gunnar Solskjær can do one big thing well, and that is sit his side deep and attack on the counter. Frank Lampard has one big thing he has struggled to do well, and that is set his side up to defend well against the counter. That’s why when these sides met at Old Trafford last season, Chelsea had 54% possession, won the shot count 18-10 and lost 4-0. Everything Lampard did on Saturday seemed aimed at avoiding a repeat. And it worked. As in last season’s FA Cup semi-final, Chelsea set up with a back three, left no space behind their defensive line, and successfully thwarted United. At Wembley, individual errors from United players handed Chelsea victory; here the arm Harry Maguire hooked around César Azpilicueta’s neck should at the very least have handed them a penalty. Personnel, of course, helps. Thiago Silva was a calm and authoritative figure at the heart of the back three, while Édouard Mendy made three very good saves. He looked lively, sharp and, crucially, didn’t radiate the sort of panic Kepa Arrizabalaga has recently. But having failed to keep an away clean sheet since December, this was at heart a tactical victory for Lampard. The next stage, as he acknowledged, is to add goals to successive clean sheets; given the quality Chelsea have in the front half of the team, that should come, even if it takes time to forge the sort of coordinated attacking patterns that characterise the very best sides. To which there is one very obvious caveat: Solskjær’s United habitually struggle to break down teams who sit deep against them. It’ll be a long time before a goalless draw at Old Trafford ceases to be a decent result, and in context it has a specific value for Lampard, but it is not the prize it once was. Solskjær’s results fit a pattern. United have won their last 10 away games in all competitions but none of their last five at home. This is why he has beaten Paris Saint-Germain twice at the Parc des Princes, why he has three wins against Pep Guardiola, why United were the only team to take league points off Liverpool last season until the end of February. He can organise the rearguard and United have the speed and talent up front to expose teams who operate high up the pitch. But against teams who drop off, United are far less adept. That’s why home defeats to Crystal Palace feel just as emblematic of Solskjær’s reign as away wins against PSG. It’s why the defeat to Sevilla in the Europa League semi-final was so crushing: it wasn’t just that United had missed out on a European final, it was that they had done so in such a characteristic way, flailing hopelessly like Scrappy Doo meeting a longer-armed opponent able to keep him at bay with a calm hand on the front of his head – and that despite taking the lead. The biggest tactical criticism of José Mourinho at Real Madrid from his own players was the way he left them to improvise in the final third: his refusal to do what Guardiola and Jürgen Klopp do and work relentlessly on attacking cohesion. Over the past decade, the ability to create cohesive attacking patterns has probably been the single biggest factor that distinguishes the very best coaches from the tier below. United have consistently failed to achieve that fluency. In the opening quarter of the game, in particular, there were constant diagonals from Maguire, Fred and Scott McTominay aimed at the space in front of Daniel James. Except there was no space, because Chelsea had a deep-lying back five. Reece James advanced only rarely and when he did, Azpilicueta, as a regular right-back, was perfectly equipped to cover behind him. The barrage did eventually stop, but it was replaced by safety-first sideways passing. Solskjær, never shy of appealing to romantic myth, spoke of how a full Stretford End might have sucked in Marcus Rashford’s late effort; more likely they would have been groaning in frustration at the witlessness of much of what had gone before. United created four meaningful chances: snapshots from Rashford and Juan Mata, a break by Rashford after a Jorginho error and Edinson Cavani’s improvised flick into the side-netting after some sharp movement. None of them were the result of coordinated play. Against diligent opponents, that can happen, but it is happening to United every time they meet a team that sits deep. In that sense, this was a logical fifth step in the sequence. Solskjær had won his first three meetings against Lampard, who in the past two has found a way of correcting what had been going wrong before. Given Chelsea’s continuing defensive problems and the fact United had let in nine in their previous two home games, the caution was understandable. The outcome was a game that felt oddly out of time, like a top-six clash from 15 years ago. But given the wildness that has characterised the start to this season, the obvious risks of operating a high line with a lack of time properly to organise the press, it may be that more sides adopt a more traditional approach. There were specific reasons for the conservatism of both sides but, in a highly unusual environment, it could be a glimpse of a broader immediate future.
17||Police investigating Grenfell Tower fire make first arrestPolice investigating the Grenfell Tower disaster have arrested a man on suspicion of perverting the course of justice. The unnamed 38-year-old was arrested on Saturday in Sussex and taken to a local police station, Scotland Yard said. Detectives released him the same day under investigation. The arrest is the first by police investigating the June 2017 fire that claimed 72 lives. It follows fury among bereaved and survivors at revelations emerging from the public inquiry about the handling of potential evidence. Scotland Yard said in a statement on Saturday the arrest in Sussex did not relate to events heard at the Grenfell Tower inquiry this week. They did not name the arrested man. The inquiry is not scheduled to finish hearing evidence until December 2021 at the earliest, after which the inquiry panel is likely to need several months to produce a report.
23||Joe Trivelli’s recipes for lamb chops, panada, bagna càuda and apples cakeThese are dishes with which to warm up. Hearty, simple, warming food that I like to share. It’s time to stoke the fire, or the bonfire, and treat yourself well. Arrivals from the south of Italy have asked me why there isn’t a friggitoria (fry shop) in London. I pointed them to the chippies, to demonstrate there wasn’t the gap in the market they thought. The fried vegetables and lamb here is something that I am adding to the menu at my fantasy friggitoria. Something to eat with your fingers and worth the bother of disposing of the oil the following day. Panada is also something of a fantasy dish. Pure comfort food, a savoury bread pudding with a Renaissance touch of grapes. It’s a great way to use up some of the extra bread you’ve been baking. It’s also a good one to prepare ahead and then pop in the oven after a march around, if not the countryside, the block. Lucky me, I often find myself in Piedmont for a few days at this time of year. I know of no other place that excels at winter food as much. Bagna càuda is a regional highlight and this recipe is the traditional one. Once you’ve spent a good hour making it, you could be forgiven for thinking that dunking vegetables in this mostly oil sauce has lost its appeal, but the flavour is like nothing else and the experience not half as heavy as you expect. It is the best dipping dish in the world, the variety of the raw and boiled vegetables spicing up each bite. Fried vegetables and lamb chops Frying at home is to be undertaken when you have no distractions. You may like to feed these to your guests “à la minute”, frying in batches, or keep everything warm until all is ready. This recipe makes a lot and takes patience to fry. Serves 6 plain flour 150g olive oil celeriac ½ sprouting broccoli 300g sage a bunch caperberries 40g lamb cutlets 12 thyme a few sprigs eggs 2 semola flour 200g egg whites 2 sunflower oil for frying salt, pepper chilli flakes lemons 2 To make the batter, sieve the flour into a bowl. Add 3 tbsp of olive oil and whisk in 230ml of water until smooth. Cover and set aside for at least 30 minutes. Peel the celeriac and cut into irregular pieces, a few centimetres thick. Blanch these in boiling water for 4 minutes and then the broccoli for 2 minutes. Set aside. Pick the sage leaves. Soak the caperberries in water. Trim the fat from the lamb cutlets and bash them with a rolling pin until they are 1cm thin. Make a couple of incisions into each and insert some thyme leaves and sprinkle with a little salt. Whisk the eggs and, holding by the bone, dip each cutlet into this wash, then dredge in the semola, then back to the egg and once again the semola to make sure it’s well coated. Set aside on a plate ready for frying. Whisk the egg whites until stiff and fold into the batter. Drain the caperberries and dry with kitchen towel. Now you are ready to heat the sunflower oil. Do so in a pan that is at least double the height of the oil – a large, stable wok is ideal. Use a thermometer or a dollop of batter to check the temperature; 180-190C is ideal. In batches, put the lamb straight in and then fry the vegetables and sage leaves dipped first into the batter. Place carefully into the oil so that they don’t splash. Use tongs or a slotted spoon to turn everything over. Please don’t try to cook everything at once, but do so in batches, ending with the caperberries. Drain on a serving plate lined with kitchen paper. Season with salt and pepper and dust all with a sprinkle of dried chilli – I like to pound it very well in a mortar and pestle until it’s like powder – and serve with lemon wedges. Eat with your fingers. Panada with grapes and Gruyère I think that’s what you call this. I’d eat it with a bitter winter green salad for supper in front of the fire. Serves 6 savoy cabbage ½ (about 250g) onion 1 salt fennel seeds 1 tsp Muscat grapes 250g olive oil pepper bread wholegrain, 3 doorstep slices Gruyère, fontina or similar 100g parmesan 1 tbsp grated Shred, wash and blanch the cabbage in salted water for 4 minutes. Don’t throw the water away. Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Slice the onion and fry over a medium heat with a pinch of salt in a pan you can move to the oven. Add the fennel seeds, and add dashes of water if you think the onion may catch. Once the bottom of the pan is browned but not burned, add the grapes. Stir for 2 minutes, scraping the bottom of the pan as you do so, allowing the grapes to burst but not squishing them. Turn off the heat, add the cabbage and combine with another couple of tbsp of oil, and a liberal amount of roughly cracked black pepper. Use several ladles of the cabbage water as stock to loosen. You could use meat stock instead if you prefer. Cut the bread into thick doorstep slices, 3 will probably do. Tear these over the top of the pot and sink into the cabbage and grapes. Make sure some of the grapes and cabbage show through. Cut the cheese into slivers and dot around, following with the parmesan and a drizzle of oil. Bake for 25 minutes until golden. Bagna càuda The way to serve this is to give everyone a small amount of sauce in their own hot bowl and serve the vegetables separately: raw and boiled. Use the vegetables to stir the sauce. Serves 6 garlic 1 head extra virgin olive oil 200ml salted anchovies 125g unsalted butter 80g, softened potatoes 3 large carrots 6 celery 1 head red chicory 3 white chicory 3 fennel bulbs 2 Peel the garlic. Cut it in 2 and remove the central new green growth. In your smallest saucepan, over the lowest heat, add half the oil and the garlic. (On a gas cooker, adding a heat diffuser might be your best bet.) The garlic needs to cook without frying or browning until completely soft – 30 minutes at least. Should the garlic start to fry, take the pan off the heat for a moment. While this is happening, wash and dry the anchovies. If they are under oil, just drain the fillets, but do make sure you have enough actual fish, as they will include the oil as part of the total weight on the tin. Add the anchovies to the oil and continue stirring with your wooden spoon, encouraging them and the garlic to “melt” into the oil. Then add the rest of the oil and continue stirring until a thick sauce is achieved. There is no need to adjust the temperature. Then add the butter and mix in. The sauce needs to be kept warm until served. Boil the potatoes, then cook the carrots and celery as much or as little as you like – with a bit of crunch or a whole lot of give. Cut the potatoes into fat fingers. Wash and slice the chicories and fennel. You’re ready to go! Get dipping! Apples, walnuts and ricotta This simple and delicious pudding is the ideal way to finish a meal. Serves 6 shelled walnuts 100g golden caster sugar 40g, plus extra for sprinkling sea salt olive oil apples 6, medium-eating, not too soft, (about 600g) ricotta 500g, fresh cinnamon ⅛ of a stick brown sugar 2 tbsp Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Blitz the walnuts with the sugar and a good pinch of salt until they are fine crumbs, but not so much that they are paste. Scrunch up a large sheet of baking paper and flatten it out again. Barely oil the centre and then sprinkle with extra sugar. Use it to line a small 20cm loaf tin. Peel the apples and bob in a bowl of cold water so they don’t discolour. Slice the apple into ultra-thin 3mm slices, turning through 90° to avoid the cores. (You can use a Japanese mandolin if you have one and are good at that sort of thing.) Make a layer in the bottom of the tin with some of the apples and sprinkle over some of the walnuts. Add another layer of apples and walnuts and so on, building it up like a lasagna. It takes me 4 layers to come out even – it’s nice if the last layer is apple, but with some walnuts peeping through. Bake for 25 minutes. Remove from the oven, turn the heat down to 160C/gas mark 3. Sprinkle with a little more sugar and return to the oven for an hour. Allow to cool before serving. Reheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Without ceremony, turn the ricotta out on to a nonstick baking sheet. Grind the cinnamon in a mortar and pestle and sprinkle it on to the ricotta with brown sugar and a tiny pinch of salt. Bake for 20 minutes. Slice while still warm and serve with the cold apple flan. Joe Trivelli is co-head chef at the River Café
5||Republicans want to open pristine Alaska wilderness to logging. It's a tragedyForests are the lungs of the Earth. Around the world, every minute of every day, trees perform magic. They inhale vast amounts of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, and exhale oxygen, the stuff of life. They keep things in balance. And no single forest does this better – contains more living plant life per area, or stores more carbon – than the 17m-acre Tongass national forest in coastal Alaska. Take a deep breath. The oxygen you just pulled into your lungs that entered your bloodstream and nourished your mind was once in a tree. The Amazon of North America, the Tongass is mostly a roadless, wilderness kingdom of mosses, lichens, salmon, deer, bald eagles and bears – all beneath ice-capped mountains, ribboned with blue glaciers, blanketed with green, shaggy stands of Sitka spruce, western red cedar and western hemlock. Trees up to 10 feet in diameter, 200 feet tall, and 800 years old. But while the Amazon is a tropical rainforest, the Tongass, found at the mid-latitudes, is a temperate rainforest, one of the rarest biomes on Earth (found only in coastal Alaska and British Columbia, the Pacific north-west, the southern coast of Chile, and the South Island of New Zealand). A true old-growth forest, the Tongass represents a council of ancients. Indigenous Tlingit elders say it is rich with answers – even wisdom – if we ask the right questions and show proper restraint. And what does the Trump administration intend to do with it? Open it up for business. Their plan, more than two years in the making and spearheaded by the Alaska senator Lisa Murkowski, secretary of agriculture, Sonny Perdue, and Alaska governor, Mike Dunleavy – all Republicans bereft of a science education and an ecological conscience – is simple and wrongheaded: put the Tongass back to work as a so-called “healthy” forest, according to Mr Perdue. How? By re-introducing large-scale clearcut logging and extensive road building on 9.3m acres. To do this, they must exempt Alaska from the 2001 US Forest Service “Roadless Rule”, an enlightened conservation initiative that applies to 39 states. In short, the Tongass would no longer be protected. A final decision is likely to be released later this month. Never mind that 96% of thousands of recent public comments say the Tongass should remain roadless to protect clean water, salmon streams, wildlife habitat and old-growth trees. Never mind as well that logging the Tongass would create few jobs while adding to an already bloated federal deficit. Logging in Alaska is heavily subsidized. Back in the 1970s, 80s and 90s, taxpaying Americans anted up an average of $30m a year. One deficit sale offered every 1,000 board feet of timber for less money than the cost of a cheeseburger. All while many of the trees were shipped “in the round” (as whole logs) to Asia to become rayon, cellophane and other throwaway consumer goods. Another sale generated only 2.5 cents on every dollar the Forest Service spent building roads and preparing paperwork. And today? To build roads in the Tongass would cost taxpayers up to $500,000 a mile. Anthropologist and former Alaska writer laureate Richard Nelson, who lived in Sitka, on the edge of the Tongass, once said he wasn’t bothered when he found a stump in the forest. What broke his heart was when he came upon a “forest of stumps”. Entire mountainsides, valleys and islands shorn of trees. Yes, parts of the Tongass can be responsibly cut, and are. Many local Alaska economies use second-growth stands to harvest good building materials. And yes, a ravaged forest will return, but not for a long time. The Alaska department of fish and game estimates that large, industrial-scale Tongass clearcuts need more than 200 years to “acquire the uneven-aged tree structure and understory characteristic of old growth”. That is, to be truly healthy and robust again. This according to scientists, not politicians. The wholesale destruction of our imperiled planet’s most life-sustaining forests has to stop. How? A good first step: vote for politicians who make decisions based on solid science. Between 2001 and 2017, 800m acres of tree cover (an area nearly 50 times larger than the Tongass) disappeared worldwide, all while global temperatures climbed, wild birds and mammals perished by the billions, and fires, hurricanes, tornadoes and droughts intensified. And since 2017? Witness Australia and California. What few large, primal forests remain intact today, such the Tongass, become increasingly valuable for their ability to mitigate climate change. Scientists call this “pro-forestation”: the practice of leaving mature forests intact to reach their full ecological potential. The Tongass alone sequesters 3m tons of C02 annually, the equivalent of removing 650,000 gas-burning cars off the roads of the US every year. The better we understand science and indigenous wisdom, the better we’ll recognize the living Earth as a great teacher that’s fast becoming our ailing dependent. We each get three minutes without oxygen, and we’re not the only ones. It’s a matter of having a deep and abiding regard for all life. Call it respect. “What makes a place special is the way it buries itself inside the heart,” Nelson wrote in his memoir, The Island Within. “[N]ot whether it’s flat or rugged, rich or austere, wet or arid, gentle or harsh, warm or cold, wild or tame. Every place, like every person, is elevated by the love and respect shown toward it, and by the way in which its bounty is received.” Kim Heacox is the author of books including The Only Kayak, a memoir, and Jimmy Bluefeather, the only novel to ever win the National Outdoor Book Award. He lives in Alaska, on the edge of the Tongass
15||The lynx effect: Iberian cat claws its way back from brink of extinctionSpotty of coat, tufty of ear, and teetering on the verge of extinction less than two decades ago, the Iberian lynx is continuing to claw its way back across Spain and Portugal. According to the latest survey, the lynx population on the peninsula has increased ninefold over 18 years, rising from 94 in 2002 to 855 this year. Experts say that if the current conservation and reintroduction efforts can maintain their momentum, the species could be out of danger by 2040. The 2019 census, carried out using camera-traps and large reserves of patience, revealed that more than 80% of the lynx population is in Spain, that 311 kittens were born on the peninsula last year and that there were 188 females of reproductive age. There are populations in the Sierra Morena and Donaña national park. At the end of the last century, however, things looked decidedly bleak for the bearded cats – and for rabbits, which make up 90% of their diet. Government efforts to get rid of creatures considered to be vermin, which lasted until the mid-1970s, took a terrible toll, as did a catastrophic drop in rabbit numbers following the arrival of myxomatosis in the 1950s and then rabbit hemorrhagic disease in the 1980s. Both those factors were compounded by the destruction and isolation of habitats that came with motorway building and a greater human presence. Miguel Ángel Simón, a biologist who spent 22 years conserving and building up lynx numbers before retiring last year, remembers the daunting scale of the task he and his colleagues faced.“When we started back in 2000, we didn’t even know how many lynxes were left,” he says. “We found out from the first census that there were 94 and we thought that they were going to disappear. We just didn’t know if there was any way to save them – they were right on the edge and in critical danger of extinction. Back then, they were the most endangered felines in the world. Our first aim was just to stop them becoming extinct.” Their strategy of seeking money and engagement from politicians, and cooperation from landowners and the public, gradually paid off. A series of projects, coordinated by the Andalucían government in conjunction with other Spanish regions, the Portuguese authorities and conservation NGOs, has arrested the decline, expanded populations and seen lynxes reintroduced to other areas. “Today, the situation is pretty good and I think we can be optimistic and fairly calm because we haven’t just recovered the population in Andalucía, we’ve also built populations in Portugal – where the lynx was extinct – and in Extremadura and Castilla-La Mancha,” says Simón. The latest phase of the programme, the five-year Life Lynxconnect project, has a budget of €18.8m, 60% of which comes from the EU. Javier Salcedo, the project’s new leader, said the main aim was to join up existing populations and increase their genetic diversity. “We need to see an exchange of animals that will give us an exchange of genes,” he says. Ramón Pérez de Ayala, the large carnivores coordinator for WWF Spain – one of 21 partners in the latest project – warns that lynx populations are in danger of developing genetic problems if they remain isolated. “We’re going to do some genetic tracking so we can monitor the situation and see if we need to move individuals artificially.” Pérez de Ayala is also upbeat about the future of the lynx and hopes to see it move from the endangered category of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of threatened species into the vulnerable category. He estimates it will take another 20 years of hard work before Spain and Portugal can claim to have saved the lynx. “If we carry on, if we can maintain the population growth momentum, and if luck stays on our side, we’ll have at least 750 females of reproductive age – which means more than 3,000 lynxes in total – by 2040,” he says. Between now and then, existing populations will have to be blended and increased, and new ones established in rabbit-rich habitats. Equally important will be the mapping and marking of blackspots: in 2019, 34 lynxes died after being run over. For Pérez de Ayala and many others, protecting the lynx is a moral and ecological imperative. “Every species has an intrinsic value that can’t be lost – it would be like demolishing a cathedral,” he says. “And you’re talking about an animal that does a really good job of balancing out the food chain of the Mediterranean ecosystem.” In the absence of lynxes, medium-sized predators that eat rabbits – such as foxes and Egyptian mongooses – put prey species under a lot of pressure. When a lynx comes along, explains Pérez de Ayala, the density of foxes and mongooses goes down and rabbit populations increase. But, he adds, environmental harmony is only one of the many reasons why the peninsula’s unique wild cat must remain well spotted. “On a more emotional level, the lynx is a jewel and a thing of beauty to behold.”
17||Windrush man wrongly classified as illegal immigrant left destitute for a yearAn electrician who was wrongly classified as being an illegal immigrant, despite living in London for more than 45 years, was destitute as he waited a year for the Windrush taskforce to decide on his application to stay in the UK, the parliamentary ombudsman has ruled. Applications to the taskforce were meant to be processed within two weeks. The year-long wait was described as “shocking” by the ombudsman in a detailed report published this week – the latest of a series of highly critical reviews into the performance of the Home Office over the Windrush scandal. The parliamentary ombudsman has ruled that the Home Office should apologise and pay Mr R £5,000 in compensation for “maladministration and delay” in processing his case. Officials wrongly told him that he would be able to claim benefits while he waited for a decision, but he found himself unable to claim any support. “He could not work, had no money and could not buy food,” the report stated. “He said he was destitute and felt ‘worthless, broken, with no hope or prospects’. “He told us everyone slept in the same room at the homeless shelter and he had no privacy. He was not allowed to stay in the building during the day; he spent his time walking the streets or going to the library. All he wanted to do was get his status confirmed so he could work again and begin to rebuild his life.” Mr R arrived in the UK in 1970 from Nigeria aged eight, but had no way of proving that he had arrived at that time. He lost his home and job as a result of being wrongly classified as an illegal immigrant by the Home Office in 2014. When the government apologised in April 2018 for wrongly categorising thousands of legal residents as immigration offenders, he applied for his right to remain in the UK to be formally recognised. His case was complicated because, like many applicants to the scheme, he struggled to find documents proving that he had been in the UK since the early 1970s; staff told him it could take six weeks to come to a decision. Although a decision was made internally on his case after about two months, officials waited 10 months to communicate the decision to him, the report found. Mr R was not granted status under the scheme because of ongoing difficulties finding documents proving his arrival but was eventually advised about how to make a different application to remain on the grounds of long-term residence. The ombudsman’s report found that UK Visas and Immigration was “well aware” of Mr R’s “desperate situation yet it repeatedly refused requests to expedite its decision”, and that “UKVI gave responses on the delay that were not in line with our principles of being ‘open, accountable and truthful’”. The report concludes: “The Windrush scheme was set up to rectify past wrongs and do so with urgency and purpose. It has fallen well short of that in this case.” Emily Thornberry, the Labour MP for Islington South and Mr R’s MP, said: “It is appalling that this man, who was particularly vulnerable, remained homeless for more than a year due to disgraceful delays on the part of the Home Office. The hostile environment has caused enormous hardship, and the Windrush scheme has let so many people down – the Home Office should be ashamed of themselves.” The parliamentary and health service ombudsman provides an independent and impartial complaint handling service for complaints that have not been resolved by the NHS in England and UK government departments. Rob Behrens, the ombudsman, said he was handling a number of other Windrush complaints. “We encourage anyone who has complained about their treatment under the Windrush scheme to come to us via their local MP if they are not happy with the response they have received.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Mr R’s application under the Windrush scheme was refused and the decision has been upheld following independent review. UKVI apologises for the delay in issuing a decision.”
5||Since we’re talking fantasy Brexit deals…In 1981, tarnished by a legacy of nuclear embarrassments, the leaky Cumbrian atomic power plant Windscale was rebranded as Sellafield and the problems of public perception simply melted away, like hot uranium seeping into a water table. Likewise, we are no longer about to embrace a similarly contaminated no-deal Brexit. We are instead welcoming a nice, new Australia-style deal. But Australia doesn’t have a deal with the EU (even though it wants one). We are embracing a no-deal Brexit in all but name. It is, as the secretary of state Alok Sharma admitted to an unusually uncooperative Nick Ferrari on Monday, “just a question of semantics”. Ah yes. The Conservatives’ old enemies! Words! And their actual meanings! On Monday evening, I opened my Anglo-Asian tandoori lamb vindaloo delivery and found a request to contribute to one of Dominics Cumming’s blue-sky, out-of-the-box think-boxes inside it, written on my poppadum in mango chutney. Cumming’s omniscient net-lords knew my every move. As usual, Cumming was looking for hot-ass cyber-freaks and batshit Ballardian head-jobs who could furnish him with shamanic sci-fi solutions. Apparently I was such a person because I had both written a comic book about a ghost and sung in 10th-century Anglo-Saxon on a dance record. Cumming needed a way to avoid identifying the incoming no-deal Brexit, which no one had wanted or expected, as the no-deal Brexit it clearly was. Sharma’s public admission that the Australia-style deal rebrand was linguistic smoke and mirrors had proved potentially problematic and threatened to unravel a number of other flimsy, fictional Conservative constructs, the implausible public persona of Boris Johnson having been deemed the most vulnerable to a moment’s scrutiny. Normally I wouldn’t sell my skills to a Tory brainstorming session, but I am principally a live comedian and I haven’t worked since March. Under lockdown, my principles, like my trousers, inexplicably became elasticated and I was to be offered the usual £25,000-a-day consultancy fee, as long as I worked through a company run by an old schoolfriend of any current cabinet member. I was picked up and taken to the agreed secret location – a boarded-up, underground, art deco gentleman’s convenience on Shepherd’s Bush Green – where I joined four other futurist-warlocks round a socially distanced, circular marble table. One had blue-lensed granny specs and a green parrot on her shoulder; another was dressed as a kind of disco Rudolf Hess; a third wore tracksuit bottoms, espadrilles and a plain brown Primark T-shirt, but his bangle was festooned with runes. All were inscrutable, carried satchels and had produced incendiary content for opaquely funded libertarian blogs. They regarded Laurence Fox as a Trojan horse, Michael Gove as a stink bomb and Boris Johnson as an unpleasant but useful clump of sausage meat that could be animated to mouth whatever words were necessary, within its limited capacity. In the centre of the table, Cumming’s head appeared inside an illuminated glass crystal ball full of pink gas. Initially, I assumed it was a three-dimensional holographic projection, like Laurence Olivier’s head in Dave Clark’s Time musical, Cumming broadcasting his image from elsewhere. He had previous form in being in two places at once, such as Islington and Barnard Castle, for example. But every now and again, Cumming’s face would groan and the head would shift uneasily and I realised the eyesight-anxious political fixer was actually crouching uncomfortably beneath the table with his skull through a hole, gas pumping into the simple goldfish bowl that encased it so it looked mysterious, like a shit Wizard of Oz. If any of my fellow situationist-idea-terraformers realised his ruse, they didn’t let on, fearful of dismissal. “Sharma’s careless breakfast lips have exposed the semantic hollowness of the ‘Australia-style deal’ language virus, immunising some sections of the electorate against its charm,” Cumming’s head began, his voice condensed behind the glass, like someone speaking into a plastic cup to do an impression of Melvyn Bragg. “We must use our sock puppets in the internet, the press and the BBC to obscure it, flood the info-sphere with synonymous ideas, fabricating post-Brexit deals with nonexistent places and creating plausible backstories to stiff any grots that would verify them. Be about it!” And with that Cumming popped down beneath the table again to conceal himself. By Wednesday lunchtime, the airwaves were abuzz with our distractions, expendable loyalist MPs swamping Sharma’s indiscretion with expedient lies. On 5 Live, Banbury MP Victoria Prentis said she was looking forward to an Eternia ™ ® style deal with the planet Eternia, He-Man ™ ® having already promised timber from the Skytree ™ ®; on Talk Radio, Torbay’s Kevin Foster spoke enthusiastically of our Equestria ™ ® style deal and of the untapped financial value of the manure of his magic Little Ponies ™ ®, especially the thick dung of Pinkie Pie ™ ®; and on Sky News, West Suffolk’s Matt Handcock nervously commended a Gor ™ ® style deal to Adam Boulton, while explaining it wasn’t his place to criticise the fantasy kingdom’s human rights violations, most notably the compulsory sexual captivity of all women, when it offered such valuable access to the slave markets of the Insectoids ™ ®. By midnight, I had helped publicise fictional deals with the nonexistent realms of Atlantis, Plutonia, Pellucidar ™ ®, Lemuria ™ ®, Skartaris ™ ®, Etheria ™ ®, Lyonesse and Wakanda ™ ®, whose coveted metal, Vibranium ™ ®, did not exist either. And by the time Cumming spat me out into the Shepherd’s Bush night, I was so disoriented I almost believed it all myself. I drank a few cans of strong cider alone on the darkening green. All-but-empty night buses circled me, masked passengers staring out. “Everything will be OK,” I thought, “we have a Fantasy Island-style trade deal. The Plane! The Plane!” Stewart Lee contributes 10th-century Anglo-Saxon poetry to a track on the new album by Asian Dub Foundation, Access Denied, out now
18||Swing out, sisters: the nuns singing through lockdownSocial distancing and lockdown come naturally to the Poor Clares of Arundel in West Sussex: after all, they’ve been doing it for 800 years. “In our day-to-day life the pandemic has hardly affected us at all,” says Sister Gabriel, who joined the order of enclosed nuns in 1994, aged 23. “The biggest sadness for us is that we’ve not been able to have visitors – we’ve hardly seen any outsiders for months.” Now, though, the outside world is hearing from the Poor Clares, because on the eve of lockdown, back in March, the nuns were in the final stages of recording their debut album. The sisters hope it will bring some of the simple, balanced principles of cloister life to those struggling with the fallout from Covid. “It’s been a time of great anxiety and stress, and people really need to zone out and find a place of peace,” says Sister Gabriel. The Poor Clares – who wear long brown habits, beige-coloured veils and sandals – practise a kind of ancient mindfulness: they focus on the present, and other than visits to the doctor or dentist, they stay within the confines of their monastery. At the height of lockdown, says Sister Leo, who’s in her 60s and entered the community in 1976, people would contact her to ask for advice on how to cope with having to stay in the same place, day after day. “I always said the same thing: pay attention to regularity in your life, and do things by a timetable. That’s how it works for us. And I think it’s helped others when I’ve said, ‘We live like this the whole time, and we have done for many years.’” All the same, the sisters acknowledge there’s a world of difference between choosing to live separately from others and having it forced on you. “We’re very conscious that for many people the last few months have been truly hellish,” says Sister Aelred, who’s in her 70s and entered the community in 1961 aged 18. “I’ve got friends in their 80s who are self-isolating, and I know how lonely and difficult it’s been for them.” We’re talking around a big table in the nuns’ parlour, which, due to Covid restrictions, is the only part of the convent I’m allowed to enter. And though they’re a largely silent order, with speaking restricted during the day other than at recreation, and strictly adhered to from nightfall to dawn, the sisters certainly know how to chat. Assuming them to be meek and mild and reticent is one of the many mistakes people make, says Sister Gabriel. “People expect us to be sombre, whereas there’s a lot of fun and laughter in our lives. They think we’re not in touch with politics – they think we’re not ordinary women, when in fact we very much are.” “People would be surprised to hear we fall out,” says Sister Aelred. “And they would also be surprised that we enjoy a glass of beer or wine, from time to time.” What’s different about life in the community isn’t that nuns are a different species, they explain, but that they’ve bought into a simpler life. In a complex, upside-down world, could it be that their daily routine has wisdom to impart to the rest of us? The sisters rise at 5.30am (5am in summer) to embark on a day that follows more or less the same structure Poor Clares and other monastic orders have followed for hundreds of years. After breakfast and an hour’s meditation (“to centre ourselves”, says Sister Gabriel), the nuns gather in their chapel for prayers and, two days a week, for mass. “Then we have a period for work, which might be anything from cooking to working in the vegetable garden, to doing our paid work, which is spiritual direction – we’ve switched that to Zoom,” she says. Lunch, the main meal of the day, is eaten in silence while one sister reads aloud from a spiritual text; the same happens at supper, but the text is what Gabriel describes as “a lighter book – it might be a biography, for example”. After lunch comes a rest period and more work, before (on three days of the week) “recreation”, where the sisters are free to chat and catch up with one another’s news. “The thing about structure is, it helps you to use your time more wisely,” says Sister Gabriel. “We often waste time: if you’ve got an eight-hour window for work, you dissipate and end up on the phone or computer. But if you’ve only got two hours, it forces you to use the time wisely. Structure creates space, to achieve what you want, and to simply be.” Music is at the heart of the nuns’ worship – but the idea of recording an album, explains Sister Aelred, came about initially as a bit of a joke. Music producer James Morgan got in touch to ask whether he could come to vespers – one of the offices of the day – to hear the sisters sing. “We thought once he’d heard us that would be it, and we’d never hear from him again.” “We were sure we wouldn’t be good enough,” adds Sister Gabriel. “But then he got back in touch and said he wasn’t bothered about the mistakes we’d made – we could be trained not to do that. What he liked was the tone of our singing.” For many singers, the idea of a contract from a record company is a dream come true, but the Poor Clares had a different take on it – as they would on many elements of becoming recording artists. “We said we don’t want auditions. You have to include everyone who wants to be included,” says Sister Gabriel. “The people who hear it will have to accept the ability of all of us – we’re not going to tell any of our sisters, ‘You can’t sing, so you’re not in.’” Of the 23-strong community, all but two sisters eventually took part. “We have sisters who sing tunefully and beautifully, and we have others who sound tone-deaf,” says Sister Leo. “And we’re all on the album.” For their part, the sisters hope the album will allow them to share what matters to them with the outside world. “We certainly didn’t do it to become famous,” says Sister Gabriel. “We want people to know the essence of our lives, what we believe in and what brings us joy.” The music on the album – which includes a traditional Ave Maria, Psalm 27 (O Lord, Hear My Voice) and In Paradisum, sung by the nuns at their funeral liturgies – also features the words set to music of St Francis and St Clare, the order’s founders. “They lived eight centuries ago”, says Sister Gabriel. “But they knew many things we still struggle with today, including how important it is to understand our relationship with the environment. So we live as sustainably as possible. We grow what we can – not everything, but certainly lots of our own vegetables. We’re very careful about waste – anything not eaten at lunch one day will be supper the next.” “And we share with others – we support the local food bank,” says Sister Aelred. “We’ve not felt called to be on Twitter,” says Sister Leo. “We’ve taken a vow of poverty and we don’t own anything. And we believe that’s what needs to happen with the world. We all need to use less, so people with less can have more.” Each sister wears a Tau cross, based on the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet and worn by St Francis. “Of course, we know many people don’t believe in God, but many of them recognise some kind of higher power. I think being connected to something bigger than ourselves stops us being narcissistic.” Do they, I ask, worry about the future? Like most religious communities in the west, numbers of enclosed nuns are falling, and their own convent is top-heavy, with the youngest nun aged 47 and the oldest in her 90s. Surprisingly, Sister Gabriel says she’s not bothered what happens next. “I think we have something to share and something to speak out about, but things happen in waves and if this has reached full circle, that’s OK. We’ve still got our lives to live, and this isn’t just about numbers. The truth is, it’s a wonderful way to live.” Light for the World by the Poor Clares of Arundel is out now on the Decca record label (£12.75 for the CD)
15||'It feels like a nightmare': Sussex villagers aghast at road plan“It’s like they are torturing us. Each step, it just gets worse.” Gilly McCadden is in tears. She has just learned that the route chosen for the £250m dual carriageway around Arundel in West Sussex will bring four lanes of 70mph traffic within metres of her house and garden. The new route of the A27, bypassing a bypass built in the 1960s, has been planned – and resisted – since the 1980s. Now Highways England has unexpectedly chosen the “grey route” – a longer, more expensive plan that slices through three villages but avoids the South Downs national park. For locals in the village of Binsted who fought previous iterations of the plan for destroying ancient woodlands, it means the proposed road will crash through their gardens and peaceful meadows. “We are glad the wildlife is getting saved,” said McCadden, a garden designer. “But you learn a lot about how these roads are constructed. You learn that the one element that doesn’t matter is people.” The new road has been portrayed as a deeply polarising issue, with support in Arundel and opposition from residents of three affected villages – Binsted, Tortington and Walberton. But in Highways England’s latest public consultation, just 7% of the 5,000 respondents chose the grey route, while 64% of people called for no road to be built or for “online” improvements only, closely following the existing route of the 1960s single-carriageway bypass. “That’s an absolutely astonishing result,” said Emma Tristram, a Binsted resident. “Highways England tried to stack the dice in their favour and they failed. They’ve shown the consultation is democratic rubbish.” Mike and Diane Evans bought their dream home – with orchards, paddocks and a small ancient woodland – two years ago after careers in the armed forces. It had been anticipated that the road would pass relatively harmlessly behind their wood, but the grey route cuts across their front garden. They will have to sell up. “I’ve served pretty much everywhere – Northern Ireland, the Falklands, Iran, Afghanistan. I’ve been in some pretty nasty places,” said Mike Evans. “This [house] has been just total heaven. I don’t know what we’ve done to deserve this. It feels like a punishment of some description.” For McCadden, the “punishment” of the new route was compounded when she was informed that Highways England would not purchase her home, which she designed and built 21 years ago, nor consider it blighted. She must now prove she needs to sell for a reason other than escaping the bypass outside her front door, and try to sell the house herself for up to 20% beneath her asking price before the government’s roadbuilding company will consider buying it from her. “It feels like we’re living in a dystopian nightmare now,” she said. “They keep adding layers of horror.” The proposed route avoids the national park but now crosses the edge of an estate in Walberton and close to the village primary school while bypassing a mile and a half of existing dual carriageway. Despite the reprieve for the national park and ancient woodland, environmental groups including the Woodland Trust, the Campaign to Protect Rural England and the Wildlife Trusts continue to oppose the new road, arguing that it will fragment habitat for dormice, endanger bat populations and ruin rare flushed fen habitat. In Binsted, villagers say it will destroy the tight-knit community of 38 homes and pass within metres of Binsted’s 850-year-old church – built on a 2,000-year-old iron age embankment – and the scenic village pub. Mike Tristram said: “This is a place where people can step into a life that was sustainable before industrialisation brought us into the climate and ecological emergency that we’re in.” Maggie Moore Alexander said her ill husband, Christopher, 84, a renowned architect and theorist of human-centred design, chose their Grade II-listed house after observing the peace of its garden, and now faced having the highway cross their land. She said the anti-bypass campaigners had barely heard a familiar charge. “Somebody mentioned ‘nimby’ the other day and I thought: that’s interesting, I haven’t heard that in a while,” she said. “We’ve done a terrible job of protecting the world we live in and the natural systems around us that keep us afloat. One of the Highways England people said they didn’t consider Covid because it was just a blip. But there’s more and more evidence that this bypass is a stupid thing to do. The economic situation says it’s a stupid thing to do. There’s less and less traffic here.” Tony Hunt, the mayor of Arundel, said the town council welcomed Highways England’s plan. “For over 40 years the A27 has run straight through the town, dividing our community into two halves,” he said. “With the growth of traffic, Arundel has become a bottleneck, with 21,000 journeys made each day on the single-lane section of the A27 that bisects the town.” Andrew Griffith, who was one of Boris Johnson’s first appointments as chief business adviser before he became Arundel’s MP in 2019, said he had worked with the government to “secure the necessary support for Highways England to proceed” with the new road. “It will reduce congestion, enhance air quality, improve road safety and support much-needed employment and economic growth,” he said. “Some question whether we need to improve our roads at all. Whilst I support a rapid switch to cleaner and quieter vehicles – and the UK is a leader in this respect – they will still need roads to drive upon and there is nothing environmentally friendly about pollution caused by congestion.”
0||Can California’s top wine region survive the era of megafire?The Silverado Trail, a two-lane road that weaves through the bucolic hillsides in the heart of California’s wine country, is the quintessential vision of Napa Valley. Home to dozens of wineries, it is a destination within a destination – one that welcomes both vacationing imbibers and oenophiles from around the world. But recently the amber hillsides have been laced with the ashen aftermath of wildfires that have torn through the region, leaving behind charred rubble that is fast becoming as much a part of the landscape as the neatly trussed rows of vines. It is a sign of an increasingly uncertain future for the crown jewel of California’s $43bn wine industry – one in which vintners must adapt to a changing climate and increasingly unpredictable fire seasons in order to survive. Devastating wildfires have pummeled Napa and Sonoma over the last five years, most recently this summer’s Glass fire, which torched close to 67,500 acres and destroyed 1,555 structures, including damage to numerous wineries. Annual evacuations, smoke-filled skies and the existential threat posed by higher and drier temperatures have taken a toll. This year Covid-19 has compounded the impact on tourism, restaurants and labor, with losses from the crisis expected to total close to half a billion dollars. Yet even with the risks, California’s wine industry is growing, with the market rising roughly 42% in retail value over the last decade. Napa has attracted a steady flow of newcomers who may not be willing to withstand the obstacles ahead. But many winemakers and growers, some with generational ties to the region and its industry, are counting on research, innovation and sheer determination in a race against the changing climate. “We are resilient,” says Nicole Bacigalupi who runs Bacigalupi Vineyards with her twin sister, Katey. Bacigalupi, the third generation in her family to farm the land, is finding ways to mitigate the threat of fires. Speaking under a giant oak tree, the sound of cow calls ring out from an adjacent pasture. The animals are there to help keep the vegetation down. The vineyard is also building its own fire truck, she says, adding that a friend helped protect them when the Walbridge fire, which morphed into the sprawling LNU Lightning Complex fire, got close last month. Bacigalupi admits that three terrifying fire seasons in a row have prompted tough questions about the future. “You get to a point where you are so overwhelmed that you are not sure if it’s worth fighting for,” she says. Winemaking in the era of wildfires Since 2015, California Alcohol Beverage Control has received roughly 170 new wineries registries a year – up from roughly seven registered annually in the 1990s. Some critics have called for crackdowns on the continuing expansion, and have concerns about how crowding affects safe and sustainable land use practices, especially in the face of faster-moving flames. “It has gotten to the point of absurdity now, there are so many wineries in that little valley,” says James Conaway, the author of Napa: The Story of an American Eden. “Global warming is here and the changes are not going to turn around in anybody’s lifetime,” he adds. “Napa is going to have to alter what it is doing.” He champions the idea that newcomers might move out, and make room for those most dedicated to sustainable winemaking. “Some of the people who have been there a long time are doing it – there are some really nice wines still being made in Napa,” he says. “But, it is not the nice sociable agrarian dream that it was back in the 80s.” Kirk Venge, a third-generation veteran of the wine industry who was born and raised in Napa Valley, is optimistic, and says he’s not going anywhere. “We just have to be patient and not give up,” he says with a smile during a bustling day on his namesake vineyard, Venge, housed on the Silverado Trail. He has faced the dangers of Napa Valley’s new normal up close. On this sunny afternoon in October, it would be hard to tell just how close the Glass fire came to his property, were it not for the surrounding scorched hillsides. Venge describes watching embers rain down from the sky and treetops and explode on the horizon, feeling certain he’d say goodbye to his winery that morning. “The whole valley was starting to go up,” he says, pointing at the blackened landscape. But his vineyard was spared and within hours, Venge and a small crew got back to work. “We have to keep making the wine,” he says. “People depend on us for their livelihood and we can’t just stop, we can’t run away.” Now, he’s better preparing the property by increasing its “defensible space” – areas without debris or vegetation that can serve as a natural fire break. “No more bark around the building!” he laughs. Venge is also dealing with another major challenge – the effects of persistent wildfire smoke, which is dangerous for workers to breathe and can also be absorbed by the grapes, altering the feel and flavor of the wine produced from them. A 2015 study by the Australian Wine Research Institute found that just a half-hour of smoke exposure was enough to have an impact. This year, some areas were cloaked in the grey haze for weeks on end. “Smoke taint” has affected harvests in Napa already after bad fire seasons, and this year’s was no different. Venge says he lost more than two dozen tons of grapes as a result. “We didn’t pick any pinot this year at all,” he says. “Anything picked after the Glass fire is going to have smoke taint.” To make up for the loss, Venge and his team are getting creative, replacing the unusable year with new products from the 2018 and 2019 stock, and hoping they are spared in 2021. Searching for solutions California’s wine country has always been disaster-prone, the land primed for floods, fires and earthquakes. Now, with winemakers around the world facing similar climate-related issues, the region is looking elsewhere for answers. California has already benefited from lessons learned in fire-prone areas such as Australia and Chile. Resources are being shared up and down the west coast – Oregon and Washington are dealing with the same threats – and the winegrowing associations are collaborating on a taskforce to study smoke taint. There are also robust research centers based locally, including UC Davis, where viticulturalists are working to develop more resilient vines, and Sonoma State University, where there are studies into strategies for better sustainability and risk mitigation. “The one thing we know about California farmers and ranchers – and I view the wine sector as a real leader in this – is they are all trying to look around that curve and trying to get ahead of that curve,” says Karen Ross, the secretary of the California department of food and agriculture, who also spent more than a decade serving as the president of the California Association of Winegrape Growers, and helped usher in a sustainable winegrowing program. Ross admits that the effects of the climate crisis have descended on the region sooner than anticipated. “We have always talked about these kinds of impacts as the future – but the future is now,” she says, adding that Golden State growers are relying on research and science to navigate new obstacles. “It may look different but I think it will still be an important and leading part of what California agriculture is all about.” Still, there is a long road ahead, and adjustments will have to be made quickly. Already, winemakers are predicting warming weather will mean the end for some wines in the region in the future, including favorites like pinot and chardonnay. Even cabernet, the valley’s most prized varietal, is under threat from the changing climate. Because vines can take years to cultivate, the wine business is by nature future-facing, but Dr Judith Ford, a sustainability and resilience fellow at Sonoma State University hopes the latest fire season spurs a sense of urgency. “There is a saying to never let a good crisis go to waste,” says Ford, who evaluated the wine industry’s preparedness following 2017 North Bay Fires, which hammered the region, and found that those who were directly affected were more likely to make changes. “Right after 2017 there was a real drive to do some things and then it got back to business as usual,” she says. Speaking at a wine industry conference at the beginning of this year, she was dismayed to see that only a dozen people showed up for a panel on disaster preparedness. “Our region feels like it has been hit with crisis after crisis after crisis – and that can really freeze you,” she says. “But this is escalating and it is important to keep moving forward.” Despite the obstacles, many longtime residents like Bacigalupi are determined to stick it out. She says she could see how less-dedicated hobbyists might be driven away from the crisis-stricken area, “but we will stay”, she says, resolutely. Her 95-year-old grandmother is still alive to see the legacy she built continue to grow. Bacigalupi says that is a big part of what keeps her going. “I feel strongly that you are given a gift in a generational family,” she says. “You are supposed to take the land, make it better, revive it if you need to and continue to make it healthier to pass down to the next generation.”
24||The dementia that can be curedWhen John Abraham began to lose his mind in late 2019, his family immediately feared the worst. Abraham had enjoyed robust health throughout retirement, but now at 80 he suddenly found himself struggling to finish sentences. “I would be talking to people, and all of a sudden the final word wouldn’t come to mind,” he remembers. “I assumed this was simply a feature of ageing, and I was finding ways of getting around it.” But within weeks, further erratic behaviours started to develop. Abraham’s family recall him often falling asleep mid-conversation, he would sometimes shout out bizarre comments in public, and during the night he would wake up every 15 minutes, sometimes hallucinating. To his son Steve, the diagnosis seemed inevitable, one which all families dread. “I was convinced my dad had dementia,” he says. “What I couldn’t believe was the speed at which it was all happening. It was like dementia on steroids.” Dementia is not just one disease – it has more than 200 different subtypes. Over the past decade neurologists have become increasingly interested in one particular subtype, known as autoimmune dementia. In this condition, the symptoms of memory loss and confusion are the result of brain inflammation caused by rogue antibodies – known as autoantibodies – binding to the neuronal tissue, rather than an underlying neurodegenerative disease. Crucially this means that unlike almost all other forms of dementia, in some cases it can be cured, andspecialist neurologists have become increasingly adept at both spotting and treating it. At the John Radcliffe hospital, University of Oxford, neurologist Sarosh Irani is one of the world’s leading experts in treating neurological conditions caused by a malfunctioning immune system. When Abraham was admitted under his care in early January 2020 following a seizure, Irani soon realised that the source of his problems was an autoantibody which targeted a protein in the brain named LGI1. The main telltale clue was the speed of onset, one of the key distinguishing features of autoimmune dementia. “The symptoms usually come on very quickly,” Irani says. “Over a few weeks or months, patients develop memory problems, and change their behaviour and personality. Patients with neurodegenerative forms of dementia can develop movement disorders or seizures, but this typically happens later in the illness once degeneration has set in. In autoimmune dementia, these are early problems.” Abraham underwent a treatment called plasma exchange, which aims to wash the blood of the disease-causing antibodies. The impact was almost instant. “For me it caused a complete transformation, in one or two days,” he says. “My family came in to see me in the hospital, and they just looked at each other in amazement.” Such dramatic improvements are often reported as soon as treatment – which can also include steroids and other immunotherapies – begins. “Patients can go from being in a nursing home, unable to communicate, to returning to work, being able to drive again,” says Eoin Flanagan, a neurologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, one of a handful of centres in the world along with Irani’s research group, that is actively studying autoimmune dementia. This is one reason why the condition, though rare – Mayo Clinic neurologist Sean Pittock estimates that it makes up less than 5% of all dementia cases – is so important to identify. The data available suggests that it is often missed. Among autoimmune dementia patients who were successfully treated at the Mayo Clinic between 2002 and 2009, 35% had been initially misdiagnosed with either Alzheimer’s or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. “A lot of patients over 60 are misdiagnosed,” says Flanagan. “That’s a concern because if you miss these cases, you’re committing them to a presumed neurodegenerative course when they could respond to immunotherapy, and their symptoms resolve.” But autoimmune dementia is also an illustration of a broader trend. Over the past 15 years, treatable diseases have been identified across an entire spectrum of neurological illnesses from epilepsy to multiple sclerosis and psychiatry, all caused by autoantibodies binding to different parts of the brain and central nervous system. “It’s become one of the most exciting areas of neurology,” says Irani. “There are subgroups within all these illness groups that have very treatable diseases. If you’re a dementia doctor, a small percentage of your patients will have this condition, the same if you’re a psychiatrist or a multiple sclerosis doctor. And with these patients you can actually directly treat the underlying cause by suppressing the immune system.” The rise of treatable neurology In October 2019, another patient was admitted to the John Radcliffe hospital.Pippa Carter, aged 19, had just begun an English literature degree at the University of Leeds when she noticed that her vision seemed to be strangely distorted. “I would be in lectures and I was really struggling to focus with my eyesight and with concentration in general,” she says. “I was trying to audition for a university play, and I had to stop because I couldn’t really read at all. Initially, I thought it was just nerves because I was starting a new chapter in life.” Within weeks, she found herself unable to get her words out properly, before she was taken to hospital after suffering a large seizure. Just like Abraham, it was the speed of her decline which alerted doctors to a potential autoimmune cause. “Within a week she was hallucinating, shouting things,” remembers Irani. “In her hospital room, which she was in for several weeks, she drew these bizarre childlike pictures on the wall, like the sorts of things a four-year-old would draw. It was like something was causing her to regress in her behaviour.” Carter was suffering from a neuropsychiatric syndrome caused by an autoantibody binding to the brain’s NMDA receptors, proteins which play a key role in learning and memory formation. Soon after she began treatment, first with steroids, and then an immunotherapy called rituximab, she began to improve. Now more than a year on, she is hoping to resume her university studies soon. Since 2004, scientists have been steadily discovering the autoantibodies behind these various neurological conditions, making it possible for clinics to test for them. Irani says that so far they have discovered approximately 25, with one or two new autoantibodies detected every year. “There are probably many more out there still,” he says. “We’re not at the tip of the iceberg, but I think we’re probably nowhere near the base either.” Precisely what stimulates the body to produce these autoantibodies remains unclear, but it is thought that there can be a variety of environmental triggers ranging from viral infections to tumours, along with an underlying genetic susceptibility. Due to the number of patients who can be successfully treated, specialists are looking to raise awareness of the importance of keeping an eye out for them. “It’s really a not-to-miss set of conditions,” says Irani. “Our clinic runs a diagnostics lab where we receive UK-wide samples for many of these diseases. One in 100 are positive, and these patients clearly get better with steroids and similar medications.” There are signs that the interest is growing. In November 2019, data was published from the first clinical trial looking at the effectiveness of different treatments for patients with a type of epilepsy caused by LGI1 autoantibodies. Two more trials are under way looking at new experimental therapies aimed at trying to stop the body from producing these damaging antibodies. Irani is hoping that this will yield many benefits in years to come. “There’s definitely an under-recognition of these conditions,” he says. “But as the field continues to expand, there will be more and more of these patients who get picked up. I’m sure that if you look hard enough in acute psychiatry wards, and in nursing homes, there are patients out there with treatable conditions who are being missed.”
20||Why China's dramatic economic recovery might not add upBeijing prompted envy, admiration and not a little resentment when it released data last week confirming that it was the first major economy to start growing again after the devastation caused by Covid-19 in the first half of the year. China appeared to have achieved the V-shaped recovery being chased by finance ministers around the world, after pioneering mass lockdowns to contain the virus that had taken hold in Wuhan, then shutting its borders to stop it filtering back in from abroad. With the country largely virus-free, people could return to something like normal life in offices, schools, shops and restaurants, and the government encouraged a splurge in investment across infrastructure and new manufacturing. Government data showed growth of 4.9% between July and September, slightly lower than economists had expected, but still an astonishing achievement. Analysts have warned, however, that apparent data manipulation, and the details of how China returned to growth – relying more on investment than consumption – raise questions about the strength and durability of the economic revival. Nick Marro, lead analyst on global trade at the Economist Intelligence Unit, said the figures appeared to show a shuffling of some data to boost the overall GDP growth rate for the third quarter, although he cautioned there was no direct evidence of any data fabrication. “The Chinese statistical agency is opaque about their methodology, and unless we get more details about their adjustments, we’ll never know the full story. But there does seem to be evidence of a targeted adjustment to help lift that headline figure,” he said. “The September figures were smoothed by quietly altering the historic basis of comparison; basically, some of the numbers from September 2019 were re-apportioned into October of that year, in order to lower the comparison base. That led to a statistical distortion where the September 2020 growth figures might’ve been artificially inflated.” The difference in growth rate was not huge, Marro said, but the manipulation suggested the economy might not be as strong as Beijing would have liked people to think. “The bigger implication is that the investment landscape might be more fragile than the official numbers suggest heading into the last quarter of 2020. That’s perhaps the bigger risk for companies to be aware of.” Leland Miller, chief executive of the China Beige Book consultancy, which tracks the Chinese economy with data it collects itself in addition to government statistics, flagged up what he considered a far more disturbing alteration in the data. China recorded growth of 0.8% in fixed-asset investment for the first three quarters of the year, compared with 2019, but the absolute figures for the same period showed a drop of several trillion yuan. “This is not toying at the margin. This is making 2.5 trillion yuan in fixed asset investment disappear,” he said. The only explanation given by Chinese authorities for the discrepancy was that the data had been adjusted to reflect “results of the fourth national economic census, statistical law enforcement and regulation of statistical programmes”, so economists have no way to assess how accurate the revisions are or compare them to other data. If fixed-asset investment had actually fallen, as the raw data suggested, while consumption was also down, overall GDP growth could be much lower than the headline figure, Miller said. “There are very big lessons here, because people think that China’s back. They’ve done a pretty good job but ... they’re not anywhere near being back to where they were before.” Meanwhile the pandemic has pushed many western companies to reconsider their dependence on Chinese factories. And while Beijing has for several years called for a “rebalancing” of the economy to boost domestic consumption, it has struggled to make it a reality. Other long-term challenges including debt and an ageing population have been overshadowed by coronavirus temporarily, but remain no less problematic. “Even if growth leaps from a low base next year there are still underlying structural problems,” said George Magnus, former chief economist at UBS, and an associate at the China Centre, Oxford University. “These include growing debt, demographics, poor productivity, a much more hostile external environment for trade, commerce and investment. All of these things are going to weigh on China’s potential for expansion and development.”
3||Dread of history repeating itself grows in Italian town as infections rise againThe well-tended graves are neatly lined up one after the other, each with a photo of the dead. The youngest was in his mid-30s, the rest from their 40s to their 90s. What distinguishes the plot from others in Bergamo’s Monumental cemetery is that they all died between March and May. “The dead arrived in force – 50 or 60 a day – they didn’t stop coming for two months,” a cemetery manager, who asked not to be named, told the Observer. “It was horrendous. And now infections are rising again. Young people are infecting older people, and so soon the dead will start arriving again.” When the pandemic struck Bergamo, mortuaries and cemeteries quickly filled up. Haunting images of army trucks carrying coffins away from the same cemetery to be buried or cremated elsewhere in March, when the northern Italian province was at the centre of the unfolding pandemic and funeral services struggled to cope, gave a hint to the rest of the world of what was to come. Now, after Italy took a dramatic turn for the worse following months of relative calm, nowhere is the fear of history repeating itself more palpable than in Bergamo. Covid-19 is estimated to have killed more than 7,000 across the province during the first wave. Speak to Bergamo residents, and everybody knows somebody who either died or was infected. This wasn’t so much the case beyond the surrounding Lombardy region, which accounts for the lion’s share of Italy’s almost 37,000 coronavirus deaths, because the tough two-month national lockdown shielded the south from the ravages of the first wave. “I don’t think people really understood what happened here,” said Luca Remondini, the owner of i-Lounge bar. “My aunt died – she was in her late 60s but otherwise healthy – and my mum, who is recovering from cancer, was infected but survived. Many of my customers became infected or lost loved ones.” Nationally cases rose by 19,644 on Saturday, of which 4,956 were in Lombardy, followed by Veneto, Campania and Lazio. The economic hub of Milan, about 30 miles from Bergamo, is Lombardy’s new epicentre, with caseloads tripling over the past week. Bergamo and other provinces in Lombardy that were hit early on in the pandemic, including Lodi, where Italy’s first locally transmitted case was detected in February, are recording among the lowest daily rates in the region. But knowing how quickly the tide can change, people in Bergamo are absorbing news from Milan with a chilling sense of deja vu – overstretched hospitals, health workers getting sick, outbreaks in care homes. And deaths creeping up. “We’re afraid the nightmare will return,” added Remondini. “Things are calm right now, but we are so close to Milan, and the nearby regions of Piedmont and Liguria are not in great shape either.” Lombardy was the first of Italy’s 20 regions to impose an 11pm to 5am curfew, beginning on 22 October, after scientists warned that without the measure, intensive care admissions would increase sixfold by the end of the month and general hospital admissions would quadruple. Temporary hospitals set up in conference centres during the first wave have reopened in Milan and Bergamo, initially providing Lombardy with an additional 201 intensive care beds. Campania, in the south, and Lazio, the region surrounding Rome, imposed a similar curfew from Friday night amid rapidly increasing infections and hospital admissions. Other regions have introduced a variety of targeted restrictions while the government is mulling tighter national measures. “The second wave is different from the first,” said Giorgio Gori, the mayor of Bergamo. “In March it was concentrated in the north, now it’s everywhere. For some people it’s the first real experience of the pandemic, so they might live the same experience we lived.” A big concern is the ability of hospitals in poorer southern regions, where healthcare cuts have been deep in recent years, to cope. “Lombardy hospitals are superior to those in other regions, so if the same phenomenon happens in Campania, Puglia or Calabria, it would be much worse,” said Gori. However, despite Lombardy’s wealth and expertise, medics say nothing has been done to better prepare hospitals for the expected autumn resurgence. In a recent letter to regional authorities signed by more than 600 health workers, they claimed the same mistakes were being made as in March. “For example, we should have had a plan right from the beginning that separated Covid patients from non-Covid,” said Pietro Brambillasca, an anaesthetist at Bergamo’s Papa Giovanni XXII hospital. “That’s what they did in China, they built Covid hospitals. We should have done the same, and be ready by now to treat all Covid patients outside of main structures to be able to control the contagion within them while being able to treat other illnesses.” One explanation for the relative calm in Bergamo province is that a significant proportion of the population may have built up immunity. “Thirty per cent have been exposed to the virus, either they were symptomatic or asymptomatic,” said Gori. “Together with our heightened awareness, maybe this is why we are better protected than others right now.” Gori and other leaders across Italy have renewed their appeals to people to stick to basic safety rules – wear a mask, maintain distance and frequently wash hands – while encouraging them to stay home as much as possible. “In a few days the government will probably introduce new restrictions,” he said. “But we can’t wait for things to happen, we need to plan ahead.” The sound of ambulance sirens still torments residents of Bergamo province and other badly affected areas. “You would hear 10 ambulances an hour,” said Diego Federici, who is from the town of Martinengo and lost his parents to Covid-19 within days of each other. “You don’t hear as many any more, but the sound is returning, it’s horrible.” Federici is sceptical of Italy’s capacity to face a second wave. “I worry it will end in another massacre, mostly because of ignorance,” he said. Only a few days ago, a man from Milan told him “the virus doesn’t exist”. “I told him I watched my mum struggling to breathe. Only then did he seem to change his mind,” he added. “There are so many virus deniers, only getting their information from social media. I implore them to not be stupid – I wouldn’t wish what happened to us on anyone.”
23||How a canny Kilmarnock grocer took whisky from the glens to the worldJohnnie Walker has come a long way. Two centuries ago bottles of the blended whisky were confined to the shelves of John Walker’s modest grocery store in the little town of Kilmarnock in west Scotland. Today it is the planet’s best selling scotch and is sold in bottles by the billions. It is an extraordinary success story – and it was achieved by a small family firm whose members were notable because they were “stubborn, thrawn and as hard as nails”, according to a newly published study of the Johnnie Walker blend. Written by Nick Morgan, A Long Stride, published by Canongate, reveals the extraordinary pains the Walker family went to in order to ensure bottles of their brand, above all other whiskies, was the one that sold in the greatest numbers. As family diaries and papers reveal, it was a relentless effort to promote and advertise their product and to make technological improvements to its distillation to ensure previous, wildly inconsistent levels of taste and quality were subdued. In this way, the Walker family dragged Scotch “kicking and screaming from illicit bothies in sequestered glens onto the world stage”, says Morgan. Crucially the story reveals how scotch whisky become Scotland’s gift to the world. “And it is a gift that keeps on giving to a remarkable degree today,” adds Morgan, a former historian and head of outreach for Diageo, the current owners of Johnnie Walker. The Walkers took a cottage industry, made massive improvements in its manufacture, launched national promotions and laid the foundations for an industry that today has a massive impact on the Scottish economy. In 2018, the nation’s whisky industry sold the equivalent of more than a billion bottles of scotch – vastly more spirit than is exported by any other nation on Earth. And while Johnnie Walker sells the most, many other leading blends also sell vast quantities abroad. These include Ballantine’s, Chivas Regal, Grant’s, Dewar’s and several other hugely popular whiskies that are drunk in bars from Hong Kong to Manhattan and from Rome to Buenos Aires. This output is now worth £4.7bn a year, representing 70% of Scotland’s food and drink exports and 21% of the United Kingdom’s. (Scotland’s second largest food and drink export is seafood – in particular salmon – and earns about £950 million a year.) Yet the beginnings of the Johnnie Walker enterprise were modest and can be traced to John Walker’s decision to sell the family farm after the death of his father and to set up a shop in Kilmarnock in 1820 to sell tea, sugar, soap and, of course, whisky which he would have blended himself from casks of malt and grain whisky. Most grocery businesses went bust within a couple of years in those days, says Morgan, so Walker – who appears to have led a life of studied reticence – did well merely to thrive as a shopkeeper. One myth even suggests he was a teetotaller. Morgan is unimpressed. “I have found absolutely no evidence for this, and given he ran a thriving grocery business which specialised in blended whisky and other wines and spirits, I am pretty sure he would have taken a dram himself.” Walker died in 1857 and left it to his eldest son Alexander to promote the family business which he did with remarkable, focused energy. “He was driven by an urge to make constant improvements, to make his blends better and better. He also realised he could only do so much in west Scotland to sell whisky. By contrast, London was a shop window for the world. Fashions were made here, he realised.” In London, Alexander Walker launched advertising campaigns and promoted his whisky at international trade fairs, while constantly driving for improvements to his distilleries. And by the 1880s and 1890s, Walker had succeeded in making whisky the most fashionable drink of the day, with the Johnnie Walker blend in the vanguard. In some ways, he was lucky. Brandy had until then had been a hugely popular drink but in the wake of the grapevine pest phylloxera’s arrival in France in the late 19th century, the country’s vineyards were devastated, triggering a collapse in the production of quality French brandy. Scotch filled the void very neatly. On the other hand, there were hard times which the Scotch market managed to survive, from the Boer war to the first world war to the Great Depression. “Johnnie Walker went up and down every time but it always came back stronger. It has been a remarkably resilient brand, if nothing else,” says Morgan. Yet the whisky we drink today is not quite the one that the Walkers would have perfected, he reveals. “Today’s whiskies, and not just the Johnnie Walker blends, are slightly lighter, fresher, and fruitier than they would have been in the 19th century. “We don’t have a bottle of 19th-century whisky to study to prove this point but we know scotch was drunk differently then. It was usually combined with lemon and sugar to make toddies and would have had to have been heavier and oilier for its taste to survive the mixing.” Habits changed, however, and in late Victorian and Edwardian times, soda became popular and whiskies became lighter in responses to being mixed with it. “It was a little thing but the soda syphon had a big impact on whisky,” says Morgan.
3||Tier 2 lockdown rules in England: latest Covid restrictions explainedThe government has announced that in England, areas deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. Places in tier 2 include London, parts of Essex, Elmbridge in Surrey, Barrow-in-Furness, York, North East Derbyshire, Erewash in Derbyshire, Chesterfield, Cheshire West and Chester, Cheshire East, and Warrington. Leicester, Nottingham, the West Midlands and Tees Valley are also in tier 2. The restrictions also cover West Yorkshire including Leeds, Bradford, Kirklees, Calderdale and Wakefield, and the north-east including Newcastle, North and South Tyneside, Gateshead, Sunderland, Durham and Northumberland. Coventry, Stoke and Slough moved into tier 2 restrictions on Saturday 24 October. These local restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart (or 1 metre with a face covering or other precautions). For areas in tier 2, the additional Covid restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody outside their household or support bubble in any indoor setting. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply for socialising outdoors, for instance in a garden or public space like a park or beach. Businesses and venues can continue to operate, but pubs and restaurants must ensure that customers consume food and drink only while seated, and close between 10pm and 5am. Takeaway food can continue to be sold after 10pm if ordered online or by phone. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open, but people may not mingle in groups of more than six. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the numbers attending (15 and 30 respectively). Exercise classes and organised sport can continue to take place outdoors but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with those they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travel is permitted to amenities that are open, for work or to access education, but people are advised to reduce the number of journeys where possible. If you are living in an area that is in tier 2, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in “Local Covid alert – high”. You can also check your area’s alert level by using the government’s postcode-checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
14||The moment that Daddy became ‘Sheemiss’It started last week, amid gales of laughter. ‘Sheemiss!’ my son cried from the stairs. I drew nearer to find my son pointing at me as he said one more time; ‘Sheeeeeemisssss’. He was calling me by my first name, in an adorably sincere little act of rebellion that reduced him to dribbling, full-bellied hysterics. I laughed along, struck by the effect that this, the smallest possible act of defiance, was having on the 3ft-tall comic in front of me. The idea that the man he calls ‘Daddy’ might also be Séamas had broken him so entirely that it broke me, too. At the very least ‘Sheemiss’ is a pretty good attempt at the name by my son, who may know me very well, but is also an English person. I’ve had Same Ass, See-Ya-Mass and Seems. After six years, a guy I played football with admitted he’d been calling me ‘Shameless’ all that time. Worst – or best – of all, however, was the driving instructor who spent the entire six months of our acquaintance referring to me as Semen. But I digress. The root of my son’s joke is that it’s somehow ridiculous for a child to call a parent their own name. I say ‘somehow ridiculous’ when it is, in fact, plainly ridiculous. No matter how you rationalise it, any other way of thinking is just bizarre. Think of someone who addresses their parents by their first name and tell me you wouldn’t go to great lengths to avoid them at a wedding. It started me thinking what I’d actually like to be called, since my wife chose this moment to tell me that she expects ‘Daddy’ will be retired eventually. She’s from Dublin and has called her parents Mum and Dad since she was about seven. I, on the other hand, am from Derry, where we obey different rules, which she claims are confusing. It’s simple really. For as long as you live, your parents are Daddy and Mammy when spoken to directly, or referred to in conversation with your family. They’re ‘me ma’ and ‘me da’ when speaking to Irish people and then ‘mum and dad’ when speaking to those further afield. Moreover, I can comfortably refer to my dad as ‘my dad’ in these columns, because that’s his job title, but his name is Daddy, and addressing him in person as Dad would not just be unusual, but a near psychotic breach of family protocol and basic human decency. I mean, what’s so hard to understand? I suppose the issue is that, in England, ‘Daddy’ is only used by a) small children b) the very posh, or c) those deploying its numerous kinky uses that I won’t be exploring here. I may call my father Daddy and exhibit an unflappable air of faultless cool, but my son is from London and the idea of a grown Londoner calling his father Daddy brings to mind an adult baby, complete with silk bonnet and giant lollipop. It’s one rule for me and quite another for him. Given the choice, maybe Sheemisss would be best, after all. Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeats
17||Asylum seekers sue UK over unlawful detentionA group of asylum seekers, including victims of torture, who were illegally detained in the UK are suing the Home Office. More than 20 people have launched a claim for compensation, which lawyers believe could be owed to thousands held unlawfully between January 2014 and March 2017, a time when concerns about the government’s “hostile environment” policy towards migrants were paramount. The claimants were arrested and detained by the UK Border Force under Home Office guidance and the Dublin III regulation, which states that refugees must claim asylum in the first EU country in which they arrive. The regulation permitted the detention of asylum seekers before they were returned to the country of their arrival in Europe – but only if there was a significant risk of them absconding and if it was proportionate. In November 2019 the supreme court found that the Home Office policy was unlawful and ruled that the claimants were entitled to substantial damages. Among the claimants is a Sudanese national arrested and tortured in Sudan on suspicion of being loyal to an opposition political party. Another is an Iranian national arrested and tortured in an Iranian prison for his political activities. “Many of our clients are vulnerable individuals who were forced to flee their countries not out of choice, but due to the most horrific experiences which most of us in the UK will fortunately never witness, let alone experience,” said Waleed Sheikh, a solicitor at the law firm Leigh Day, who is representing the claimants. “Having made the brave and perilous journey from across the world, in the hope of finding safety and a secure future in a free country, they were instead put into detention centres.” He said it was likely that thousands of other asylum seekers in Britain are also entitled to make a claim. Sheikh added: “But it is difficult to trace them. Some are now abroad and many do not speak English. And there is no obligation for the Home Office to contact those who were held illegally.” It is estimated that the department may have to pay £8,000-£10,000 for each month a claimant was held. Other factors, such as the detention’s contribution to any health problems, could increase the payouts. A Home Office spokeswoman said: “The individuals in question were only detained to facilitate removal to a safe European country. We took immediate corrective action in March 2017 to ensure that we remain able to detain those in a similar position, who we determine are at risk of absconding.” The spokeswoman stressed that the department was committed to fixing a “broken asylum system, to make it firm and fair”. But Sheikh questioned this commitment. “The hostile environment has not just been tolerated but nurtured and championed by successive home secretaries. That it should then foster a culture within the Home Office of dehumanising asylum seekers, of detaining almost by default and without proper checks, should surprise no one.”
22||The week in TV: Roadkill; DNA; The Same Sky; Out of Her Mind and moreRoadkill (BBC One) | iPlayer DNA (BBC Four) | iPlayer The Same Sky (More4) | All 4 Out of Her Mind (BBC Two) | iPlayer Count Basie: Through His Own Eyes (BBC Four) | iPlayer At least Roadkill isn’t as bad as Collateral, David Hare’s last big-budget BBC outing. It doesn’t water-cannon us with message – asylum seekers good, security services bad – or strain so hard to avoid cliched cops that it creates an unbelievable one. And it’s blessed with Hugh Laurie and Helen McCrory, who almost redeem it from itself. And it doesn’t, for once, wear its Tory-hating credentials on its ragged academic sleeve; indeed, Hare has said that he tried, for once, to get to grips with the mindset of a “good” or at least maverick Tory. And Laurie plays Peter Laurence MP with a superb credibility: a corrupt Tory MP, yes, with secret plans to carve up the NHS to benefit American privatisation, but a charmer of a man, too, with the common touch and a genuine zeal to make a difference for the better, particularly in prisons, against the stultifying hand of the civil service. Because of this, the promise of a crusading reformist PM in the making, with a secret (and secretly charming) daughter in one of his own prisons, I could forgive the tick-boxing – the spiky journo, the corrupt prison private-security firm, the haughty plotting between Tory chairman and arms-dealer cartoon villain. But I can’t forgive the many plot impossibilities. Laurence’s own defence lawyer, having won a famous case, getting an anonymous call saying “look into him” and somehow agreeing. The driver to the justice secretary, presumably having signed something or other, being asked who his mistress was and just blurting it out. Laurence himself saying with wicked glee, early on after a prison riot: “Let’s hope there are injuries. Better still, fatalities”, which, after you’ve watched the whole, sits entirely against his character. Collateral was, oddly enough, Hare’s first-ever TV serial after a life of rightly garlanded plays and screenplays. And I’m sadly reminded of little so much as the time Dorothy Parker and pal Robert Benchley decamped from New York to California, to write B-movie plots under that golden sun and make some easy money: surely such talents, such wits, could outwrite formulaic by-numbers stuff? After a slew of rejections and flops, they fled back to the rain and Parker ruefully concluded: “Seems shit has its own integrity.” DNA, in Danish, French and Polish with subtitles, is, I’m convinced, our new The Bridge for double-bill Saturday-night autumn binges. It’s not as if we’ve anywhere else to go, but, quite apart from that, it’s every bit as enthralling as the Saga Norén chiller – indeed, this eight-parter is from the imaginarium of the co-creator of The Killing, Torleif Hoppe. A happy Copenhagen cop gets a ferry, in a rancid storm, to Poland, with his infant daughter, to chase a child abductor. Leaves the pram on deck to be, briefly, seasick. Guess what? Cut five years forward: a once-happy Copenhagen cop chances on a crucial flaw in the Danish DNA database of offenders and curdled hope flutters into life. Four episodes in, I too am truly, appallingly, gripped by hope, and it’s also got Charlotte Rampling as the incroyably chic older French investigator. Barely less captivating is The Same Sky, a Paula Milne creation for German TV, which rather disappeared into the maw of Netflix three years ago. Happily resurrected by C4’s sainted Walter Presents strand, it’s a genuinely exciting 1974 true tale, of a young East German “Romeo agent” sent west to honeytrap and pillow-talk an ageing single mother working for a western listening post atop Teufelsberg (Devil’s Mountain) in Berlin. Talking of Saga, this also has Sofia Helin as you’ve never seen her before: dowdy, lonely, old before her time, vulnerable. It’s hooksomely, toothsomely watchable: how swiftly recent history can become moral anthropology within a generation or so. I was mystified by the new Sara Pascoe thing, Out of Her Mind, and can only conclude that I am of the wrong gender or cultural sensibility to review it. Relentlessly, scattily modernist, with tricks such as meta-references to its own sitcom-ness, the breaking of the fourth wall, the “real” Sara Pascoe commenting on the “fictional” Sara’s disaster of a life, it also felt very dated, just not in a good way. Fictional Sara, who couldn’t seem to decide whether she was bitterly life-cynical about being dumped 15 years ago or childishly, naively, irritatingly self-obsessed and rude, had to cope with the twin outrages of her sister becoming engaged and her best friend being pregnant, apparently events on some manner of end-of-days scale. Cue some stock catty rudeness about rings, dresses, weight, pinkness. The real Sara, meanwhile, got on with making some decent points, albeit while rollerskating in a pink leotard, about, say, how advertising makes women feel inferior in order to sell them stuff or how fairytales offer girls false stereotypes, yet both points agreed on, surely, in the last decades of the last century? The show is almost saved by Juliet Stevenson as the mother, utterly lacking in self-awareness: indeed, the entire supporting cast are strong, though I could have done with more Cash Holland. Yet such things have been done better, in the last couple of years alone, by This Way Up, Catastrophe, I May Destroy You, even Motherland… hence my mystification, because so often Pascoe, a wise author in her own right, is the wittiest thing going on any panel show. Some rather marvellous insights into the life of Billy James “Count” Basie snuck unheralded on to our screens, courtesy of a remarkable little film, Through His Own Eyes, from Jeremy Marre. It told the story of the boy from Red Bank, New Jersey, who went on to become one of the famous people on the planet, yet who managed to keep his private life remarkably unrevealed. With grand access to interviewees and forgotten footage, it related seamlessly how the lad who stood in at 14 for an absent cinema pianist would achieve greatness. Aided only by a quasi-magical gift of understanding every wrinkle and flounce and offbeat and sway of what “swing” is – and it must help, too, when you have Lester “Prez” Young on tenor sax and Quincy Jones as your band arranger – he went on to become the first musician on the moon (Buzz Aldrin took the Basie/Sinatra/Jones ’64 recording of Fly Me to the Moon with him on tape). Unshowy and even-handed, this also related how much he loved his daughter, Diane, born with cerebral palsy; yet she, hardly able to walk, able to speak, would become something of a muse to him. He wrote endless loving letters to her, talking about music, places, weather, blues – and 50 years on the road, on a hired Greyhound bus with the band, 48 weeks a year, that’s a shedload of letters. We heard how deeply he loved his wife, Catherine, yet how he was in the doghouse for much of his early life thanks to on-the-road, um, affiliations. Above all, we got a measure of the man, a bugger for gambling and the ladies yet unfailingly unpompous, controlling the band with a whip hand, yet a subtle and steady one, immensely popular with all his musicians to the end. I could have watched eight hours of this.
3||Tier 3 lockdown rules in England: latest coronavirus restrictions explainedThe government has announced that areas in England deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. South Yorkshire, Greater Manchester, Lancashire and Liverpool City Region including Knowsley, Wirral and St Helens are all at the highest level of restrictions. These local lockdown restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, the use of face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart. For areas in tier 3, the additional restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody they do not live with, or have not formed a support bubble with, in any indoor setting, private garden or at most outdoor hospitality venues and ticketed events. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply to outdoor public spaces, such as parks, beaches, public gardens or sports venues. Pubs and bars are only permitted to remain open to operate as restaurants, in which case alcohol can only be served as part of a substantial meal. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open but household mixing is not permitted. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the number of people attending (15 and 30 respectively), but wedding receptions are not allowed. The rules for exercise classes and organised sport are the same as in tier 2. They can continue to take place outdoors, but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with others they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travelling outside, or entering, a tier 3 area should be avoided unless for work, education or youth services, to meet caring responsibilities, or if travelling through the area as part of a longer journey. Residents of a tier 3 area should avoid staying overnight in another part of the UK, while people who live in a tier 1 or tier 2 area should avoid staying overnight in a tier 3 area. If you are living in an area that is in tier 3, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in Local Covid Alert – Very High. You can also check which level your area is rated at using the government’s own postcode checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
16||Sacha Baron Cohen: After Borat, what’s left for the savage satirist?Thirteen years ago Sacha Baron Cohen announced that he was retiring the character of Borat Sagdiyev, the Kazakh journalist in the ill-fitting grey suit and Saddam moustache. It was a logical step in what is, as Baron Cohen has called it, a “self-defeating” line of work. Borat’s satirical power was dependent on being unknown. But the global success of the 2006 mockumentary feature film Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan, for which Baron Cohen won a Golden Globe, rather blew the fake Kazakh’s cover. Hence his discontinuation. Unlike most celebrity retirements, this one appeared to be permanent. And aside from a brief appearance a couple of years back on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Borat was as good as buried. Now, however, he’s back in Borat Subsequent Moviefilm: Delivery of Prodigious Bribe to American Regime for Make Benefit Once Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan. Borat, his fans will be relieved to know, hasn’t changed much, but the world has. In 2006, when the first film came out, George W Bush was president, Iraq was in flames and North Korea claimed to have conducted its first nuclear test. No garden party but, looking back, it seems almost a golden era of sanity. The thought that Donald Trump would become president would have seemed only slightly less ridiculous than Borat ending up in the White House. Like Shakespeare’s proverbial coward, satire has died many times, but seldom has reality made it look quite so redundant as over the past four years. Baron Cohen is keenly aware of the shift in the political culture. “In 2005,” he recently said, “you needed a character like Borat, who was misogynist, racist, antisemitic to get people to reveal their inner prejudices. Now those inner prejudices are overt. Racists are proud of being racists.” They have been empowered, he explained, by a president who is “an overt racist, and overt fascist”. That president, who walked away from a TV interview with Baron Cohen’s Ali G character after less than a minute in 2003, is no fan. “I don’t find him funny,” Trump said last week. “To me, he’s a creep.” Trump’s America, as it appears in the film, is a familiar one from the Louis Theroux genre of documentary-making, richly peopled with faultlessly polite freaks and likeable rednecks with unpalatable opinions. If making fun of conspiracy theorists and antisemites doesn’t break any new ground, it’s not going to upset anyone, except for conspiracy theorists and antisemites. The watching world, however, has become much more ready to take offence and Baron Cohen’s brand of humour is not ideally suited to modern woke sensibilities. He is from the generation of comedians, including Steve Coogan and Ricky Gervais, who invented winningly grotesque characters to ventriloquise the unsayable. By this method, a shocking racist comment could be transformed into a stinging comment on racism. Some critics saw it as a dishonest transgression, arguing that Ali G, the wannabe black character who brought Baron Cohen’s initial fame, was little more than a postmodern version of The Black and White Minstrel Show. That seems a rather crude reading, but it’s hard to imagine that in an era of righteous cancellation, in which cultural appropriation is a cardinal sin, Baron Cohen would “get away with it” today. That Borat is from Kazakhstan, a country with a tiny expat community in the UK and about which censorious Generation Z’ers know very little, has afforded Baron Cohen some protection from the Twitter mobs. But cracks about the Kazakhs’ backwardness, sexism, homophobia and antisemitism hark back to a more robust understanding of irony. Younger audiences may not bother with any layered interpretations and just decide that it’s racist. There is no doubt that the Kazakhstan government was not amused. It threatened him with legal action in 2005 and removed his Kazakhstan-registered website. In the character of Borat, Baron Cohen replied: “I’d like to state that I have no connection with Mr Cohen and fully support my government decision to sue this Jew.” In any case, this is almost certainly Borat’s last outing. Baron Cohen has plenty of other projects to keep him occupied. The signs are that he is expanding into drama, after sporadic ventures in the past, including Tim Burton’s Sweeney Todd and Tom Hooper’s Les Misérables. While Borat Subsequent Moviefilm is released on Amazon Prime, over on Netflix the big hit of the moment is Aaron Sorkin’s The Trial of the Chicago 7. It’s about the court case involving leading figures of the counterculture arrested after protests at the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago. Baron Cohen is quite brilliant as Abbie Hoffman, an early advocate of flower power. Aware that Hoffman’s provocative style was heavily influenced by Lenny Bruce, Baron Cohen portrays him as a kind of natural standup comedian. Having played the surrealist prankster and buffoon throughout the trial, Hoffman is called on to make a rousing speech on the witness stand. Baron Cohen has to prove his acting chops in this big climactic scene. Sorkin has said that the sense of anticipation around the set before the Londoner filmed the scene reminded him of when Jack Nicholson performed his famous courtroom scene in A Few Good Men. “Everyone wanted to watch. One hundred and twenty extras didn’t care that the camera wasn’t on them, they stayed to watch.” And, despite wrestling with a tricky Boston accent, Baron Cohen nails it. Nor is it the only speech that has brought him attention in recent times. Upset by the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017, he offered his services to the Anti-Defamation League, whose director, Jonathan Greenblatt, asked him to give the keynote speech at last year’s ADL summit. Though wary of celebrities who use their fame to promote their political views, Baron Cohen delivered what he has said was his first “major speech in my own voice”. One of his main targets was Facebook. Had the social media platform been around in the 1930s, he said, “it would have allowed Hitler to post 30-second ads on his ‘solution’ to the ‘Jewish problem’”. The speech led to the Stop Hate for Profit campaign that caused hundreds of companies to temporarily remove their advertising from Facebook. It was a high-profile stance for a star who, when not in character, likes to stay out of the public spotlight. The reticence is a mixture of natural shyness and professional pragmatism – the more he’s seen as himself, the less, he thinks, he’ll be believed as someone else. This reservation has left a slight air of mystery around Baron Cohen. His biography has a credible spine but is lacking in animating flesh. Brought up in Hampstead Garden Suburb by Jewish parents, a dance teacher mother and a journalist father who went into menswear, he attended the Haberdashers’ Aske’s boys’ public school. At Cambridge, where he studied history, he joined the Footlights and appeared in Fiddler on the Roof. Legend has it that on leaving Christ’s College he gave himself five years to make it as a comedian. After a brief stint as a male catalogue model, he began performing at a comedy club in Hampstead, and worked for a couple of small satellite channels. At one of them he created a spoof character based on the hip-hop DJ Tim Westwood, the bishop’s son who speaks like he’s down wiv ver kidz. From there Ali G was born and, as the five-year deadline was closing in, he grasped his opportunity on Channel 4’s The 11 O’Clock Show in 1998. The rest is hysterics. Now ensconced in Los Angeles, Baron Cohen forms half of that most rare of Hollywood entities – a long-lasting joint-celebrity marriage – with the Australian actress Isla Fisher. They have three children. Baron Cohen has been mining excruciating moments of comedy gold for over 20 years. There is another collector’s item in the latest film featuring Rudy Giuliani and Borat dressed as a woman, offering the Trump adviser and former New York mayor anal sex. There are only so many times that he can be the subject of a sentence like the last one. Next year he turns 50. Enjoy him while you can.
11||Legal loophole allows children to get free vape samplesHealth campaigners have expressed alarm after it emerged that a loophole in the law means it is legal for marketing companies to hand out vapes to children for free. British American Tobacco (BAT) is investigating after a 17-year-old was offered a free sample of the company’s Vype brand. The minor was not told that the product contained nicotine and was not asked for proof of age. Vape companies regularly distribute free samples to adults using paid, third-party promotional companies operating in city centres and at festivals and transport hubs. The promotional teams are young, personable and sport the livery of the vape brand they represent. Some use additional free offers – such as soft drinks – to engage with passersby. Action on Smoking and Health (Ash) said teams working for Vype had been recently promoting the brand in Brighton, Bristol and Bath, where a 17-year-old girl working on a market stall was approached and offered a free sample, in return for her email address and with no attempt to establish her age. “The hypocrisy of BAT is staggering,” said Deborah Arnott, chief executive of Ash. “The company’s website piously states: ‘It’s essential that any tobacco or nicotine products are not marketed to youth. Given the nature of our products, we take seriously our commitment to market them responsibly and only to adults.’ “How can they say that doling freebies out like sweets to children counts as responsible marketing?” When it was alerted to claims that minors were being offered free vapes, Ash approached National Trading Standards and was shocked to learn that a loophole in the law means it is not illegal to hand out free e-cigarettes to children. This is because e-cigarettes are not covered by the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act “prohibition of free distribution” rules as they are not considered a tobacco product. And Ash said that the wording of the relevant sections of the Tobacco and Related Products regulations pertaining to e-cigarettes was too vague when it came to prohibiting the distribution of free products to minors. Pushing e-cigarettes on young people is a concern for health experts, who fear that the UK will go the way of the US, where vaping’s popularity among teenagers has reached epidemic proportions. In 2019, a quarter of high-school students in the US reported using electronic nicotine products within the past 30 days and 11.7% reported daily use. But youth takeup in the UK has been much slower. Regular use among teenagers doubled from 2.4% in 2015 to 4.9% last year. “A review of the regulations is required by law and is expected to be launched imminently,” Arnott said. “We have written to the public health minister to make her aware of this gaping hole in the government’s e-cigarette regulations and to urge her to use the review to plug this legal loophole. This is yet another example of Big Tobacco saying one thing and doing another, living up to the letter of the law but not the spirit.”,” Arnott said. BAT said: “We take our responsibility to prevent underage access to vaping products extremely seriously and are clear that they are intended for adult smokers and nicotine users only. “Our one-to-one consumer engagement activities in the UK market are conducted by a third-party supplier who has been extensively trained to ensure that the only people who are engaged are over 18 years old, are an existing smoker, and are informed that the product contains nicotine. We are speaking to our third-party supplier about this alleged incident.”
3||Australia demands answers after women taken from Qatar Airways flight and strip-searchedThe Australian government has registered “serious concerns” with Qatari authorities after women on a flight from Doha to Sydney were ordered to disembark the plane and subjected to a strip search and a medical examination. Flight QR908 to Sydney was due to leave Hamad International airport at Doha at 8.30 on Friday 2 October, but was delayed for four hours, apparently after a newborn infant was found dead in the airport. Among the 34 passengers on board was Dr Wolfgang Babeck, who was returning to Australia after spending a month in Germany with his ailing father. Babeck told Guardian Australia that, after about three hours of waiting on board the plane, the airline requested that all the women on board disembark. They returned some time later, and “most of them were very upset”, he said. “At least one of them was crying, they were discussing what had happened and saying that it was unacceptable and disgusting.” The plane was then allowed to take off. Babeck said he then spoke to some of the female passengers, who said they had been taken off the plane and led into a non-public area of the airport and subject to a medical examination. “They were taken by security personnel into the cellar, not knowing what was going on,” he said. “And then they were presented to a female doctor and they were basically strip searched and had to take everything downwards off, all their clothes, even their underwear. “And then the doctor would try to feel in the uterus and stomach area or lower abdomen to see whether they may have given birth recently. “Someone had been told that a baby had been found in the toilet and they were trying to find out who the mother was.” Channel Seven, which first reported the story on Sunday, said the inspections involved 13 Australian women, and took place in an ambulance on the runway. A spokesperson for the Australian department of foreign affairs and trade told Guardian Australia earlier the department was “aware of concerning reports regarding the treatment, in Qatar, of passengers on a Qatar Airways flight to Sydney”. “DFAT is seeking further information from the Qatari authorities and Qatar Airways.” On Sunday night an updated statement from the department said the Australian government had “formally registered our serious concerns regarding the incident with Qatari authorities and have been assured that detailed and transparent information on the event will be provided soon”. Qatar Airways told Guardian Australia it had not been contacted by any of the passengers on the flight and said it could not comment. “We appreciate the concerns and distress expressed to you by the Australian passengers who you have spoken to, and will be investigating these matters with the relevant authorities and officials,” a spokesperson said.
23||Chocolate meets liquorice in a Danish treatWhen I was growing up, Sainsbury’s bonbons were coveted. We rarely had sweets, except when we went back to Italy where every aunt south of Rome had a crystal bowlful of boiled choking hazards. So bonbons were special. Though I loved them, two was the limit, because pure sugar, unless it’s mixed with fat – yum – has never really done much for me. But it was the shape of them that appealed: the imperfect sphere, the self-containment, the dusting of icing sugar. This is what attracted me to chocolate-coated liquorice balls by Lakrids by Bülow (£8/125g, lakridsbybulow.co.uk). Lakrids means liquorice in Danish, whence these babies come. As I’ve said before, I don’t mind liquorice in small quantities, but I don’t go mad for it like some. I’m sure many of us have read the terrible news about a man dying due to excessive liquorice consumption – and you should be careful not to eat too much of it – but that’s hard to do with these. Not because they aren’t delicious, but because they are incredibly satisfying and also not cheap. They come in core flavours: the original is just a liquorice piece at its heart, liquorice powder and coated in 35% cocoa milk chocolate. But there’s also salt-caramel, some fruit flavours and coffee. Specials appear seasonally, in limited edition, such as the newly arrived cinnamon-sugar coated Christmas cookie. For those who really love liquorice there’s the Christmas Advent calendar (£36), which counts you down to Christmas Eve in liquorice treats. Just as the baby Jesus would have wanted.
25||Arctic: Culture and Climate review – visions of a vanishing worldThere is a vision, in this magnificent show, of the strange hinterland where Arctic ice melts into the snow-covered ocean. There is no obvious distinction, indeed the water’s edge is all but invisible. What you see is a series of dark boats drawn on sledges across a white plane dotted with walruses and long-legged birds. All the images are inky black, exquisitely carved into the tusk of one such walrus, caught on exactly this kind of boat. Its ivory is beautifully used to stand in for the all-encompassing Arctic whiteout. Carved around 1900 by a celebrated Iñupiat artist known as Happy Jack, this is not just a graceful engraving-cum-sculpture. It shows life as it was lived on Alaska’s freezing Seward Peninsula, long lines of huskies pulling kayaks, tents and vessels across the gliding ice. Children learned from these images, elders discussed them and now here we are in the future looking back at this body of knowledge carved into the tusk of a long-dead walrus that once swam in those dark seas. Man and beast, life and art: all are fused in this object. The British Museum’s new exhibition plunges deep into the mysterious icescapes of the Arctic, where 4 million people still live in a culture shaped by the climate. There are fragments of ancient bone jewellery, discovered in newly thawed ice; sculpted figures of reindeer and caribou so sinuously streamlined as to be almost abstract. There are needles made of walrus bone and monuments of balanced stones, a kind of ancestral land art that abides for centuries, marking memories or indicating reindeer paths through the wilds. The monument in this show, made by Piita Irniq in 2019, is titled Silent Messenger. Enthralling period films show summer festivals, where thousands of Inuit gather in immense circles that revolve like wheels in the continuous daylight. Contemporary video celebrates the stupendous skill of an artist who scrapes seal skins into ultra-fine fabric for the pleating of shoes. Watercolours imagine seals beneath the ice-bores, prints depict human beings inside walruses, like Jonah in the whale. A pair of 19th-century Russian snow goggles takes the form of an eerie face, described in glass and uranium beads. The people of the Arctic live in the circumpolar regions of Greenland, Canada, Alaska, Russia and parts of Scandinavia. There are more than 40 ethnic groups. This is made marvellously apparent in the opening gallery, which is nothing less than a catwalk of spectacular costumes from the different groups, including a navy and scarlet Sami coat with a four-cornered hat (representing the four winds that blow across the ice) and an Alaskan child’s parka of brilliant blue, embroidered in red, its hood lined with soft wolverine that never freezes outside. A team of huskies appears to be drawing you onwards into the snowbound landscape, the dogs’ fierce beauty a marvel projected into infinite white space. This illusion is orchestrated by the brilliant Opera Amsterdam, who have designed something akin to the experience of Arctic light in the old London museum. Walk out of one gallery and you are confronted by a lone figure rising against a pink-tinged twilight: the only surviving sealskin suit for hunting whales, waterproof, inflatable and made centuries ago, standing stark and upright as the hunter. Everything is used and in every way. Seal skins, worked upon with fine blades for many months and stitched together with seal gut, become sails so strong yet diaphanous that it is easy to imagine moonlight shining through them as mariners crossed dark waters. And sure enough, there is a drawing of just such a scene, made by a Victorian explorer. The seal’s meat is made into a hundred different dishes. Its bone becomes the embodiment of itself: finely carved into captivating silkies. The art has a characteristic combination of delicacy and strength that seems to reflect the whole society. It runs all the way from 17th-century engravings of fur-clad drivers merrily bowling across the snow in reindeer-drawn sleds to the terrific photographs of the Alaskan artist Brian Adams, large as life and presented on lightboxes. Who could not love the powerful portrait of an Inuit woman surrounded by what might almost be fallen leaves, in glowing colours, but are in fact chunks of whale meat: a worker shown in her professional element? Knowledge of snow is lightly scattered throughout. Here is an ancient Sami sled, shaped like a boat so that it can float, almost, through the deep powdery snows of Scandinavia. Here are snowshoes made from wood to distribute the wearer’s weight so that they do not sink into the grainy snowdrifts of western Alaska. Boots fitted with walrus-ivory crampons give vital stability on snow that has thawed and then frozen again into a luminous but frightening slipperiness. The reindeer-fur soles of Sami boots were sewn with the fur ends pointing towards the toe to create a friction that stops the wearer from slithering. A breathtaking film of a woman making such boots shows her powerful hands forcing a needle through two layers of reindeer pelt as if it were thin as silk. Her white boots, embroidered with stars, are wondrous to behold. The soundtrack stealing through the galleries takes you straight to the Arctic – the cracking of ice, wind blowing across water, the barking of huskies and, occasionally, the singing of historical roundelays. And there are stories everywhere you look. A wooden visor, made around 1778 to block out the sun’s blinding glare, doubled as a seal’s head, acting as an ingenious decoy. A strange soapstone sculpture condenses a whole narrative in one semi-abstract medallion, telling of a family who became stranded on pack ice. They hunted seals for food and then used the skins to build the kayak on which they eventually paddled to safety. You might think of the Arctic as a barren, white expanse. But summer brings sea algae and plants spring into life, spreading their greenness. A wonderful wall hanging is embroidered all over with the multicoloured leaves that bud forth in the tundra. Sami men appear in a silent movie, leaping and wrestling in a meadow like some gleeful Arctic Olympics. But there will come a time when the ice no longer forms. The Arctic is heating more rapidly than anywhere else. A devastating projection of the north pole and its great white landmass is shown vanishing fast on the floor beneath your feet. Arctic peoples are literally on the shoreline of the climate crisis. Nothing could give a greater sense of the threat to their society than this exhibition, so revelatory of their art and their lives. And the show ends at the very edge of that ice, fading away on film, as dark figures moving about in the dusk try to haul in a fish from the rising waters. You watch with your heart in your mouth, as they stand upon this curious line – water lapping away at the ice, something solid returning to its liquid self. Arctic: Culture and Climate is at the British Museum, London, until 21 February
18||Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review – playful and potent collaborationThe Now Now (2018) was one of those Gorillaz albums that dispensed with the hip hop-led collaborations that have often defined this band of ink and flesh. Guests are in full effect, though, on its follow-up: what’s billed as Season One of the band’s Song Machine concept, compiling the tracks Gorillaz have released monthly via their YouTube channel since January, plus extra helpings. Everything that has ever been engaging about Gorillaz is present in spades here. Playfulness and conceptual ambition are all anchored by Damon Albarn’s melodic melancholy and his side-eye at the suboptimal state of things. His Bowie fixation waxes hard on unreleased tracks – such as The Lost Chord – as well those already in the public domain (Aries). Lifers might miss the very old school flows of the band’s earlier hook-ups, but the dizzying array of present voices – from 6lack to Octavian via US producer Mike Will Made It – renews Gorillaz’ relevance as beat merchants, while the assured application of other talents (from Robert Smith to Fatoumata Diawara, Peter Hook to St Vincent) ensures textural breadth. A strangely cogent album for wildly unstable times.
12||That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry review – wild, witty storiesKevin Barry’s darkly glimmering third collection of short stories arrives prefaced with a quote from the film-maker Jane Campion, all about the romantic impulse. “It’s a heroic path and it generally ends dangerously,” she cautions. That isn’t always the case for the protagonists of these 11 tales. One character, himself a writer, steps back just in time. Another’s lot turns out to be happiness – the single outcome he professes himself unable to handle. But by and large, passion proves hazardous for the loners and oddballs who drift through Barry’s forceful landscape. This is the west of Ireland, its wild emptiness teeming with lore and legend. As a publican says of his 10-streetlight town: “the winter bleeds us out here”. Come fairer weather, there’s the billowing whitethorn blossom to worry about, laden with doomy superstition. And what of the romance of the place? That gets short shrift, too. “The silly, silly moonlight,” sighs one man, rueing the calamity that comes from its enchantment. He is Sergeant Brown, whose forebears all “drank themselves into the clay of the place”. He appears in Ox Mountain Death Song, a story whose steady momentum carries it to an unexpected climax as he pursues a felon named Canavan, himself one of long line of ferret-grinned good-for-nothings. As Brown notes of the Canavans: “they had for decades and centuries brought to the Ox elements that were by turn very complicated and very simple: occult nous and racy semen”. And there it is, that canny laughter – vital, knockabout and unpredictable, it grounds in earthy reality the folksongs and fables that flit through the gloom here. Elsewhere, it adds a soulful complexity, enabling truths to disguise themselves as throwaway lines. Here’s the heroine of the title story, for instance, 17 years old and pregnant by her mother’s shiftless lover, gazing at herself in a car mirror: “She had a face on her like a scorched budgie. She detested herself.” Written over the course of eight years, these stories aren’t quite of equal strength, but throughout, their language is exhilarating, its verve evoking the very best of Barry’s compatriots while further carving out a territory that’s all his own. • That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry is published by Canongate (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
26||Would you trust your teenager with an online bank account?Cash is far from king for teenagers. And as society moves away from paper and coins, banks and tech companies are ramping up the competition to get children aged between 13 and 17 to manage their spending online. Last week saw the launch of an account aimed at teenagers from gohenry, a pre-paid card provider that lets kids manage their money within controls set by parents. The online account tells parents when, where and how much their offspring are spending, and sets tasks to earn pocket money. It’s the latest product in a busy market – and there are other apps offering similar features to gohenry. How to spend it Along with gohenry, other companies such as RoosterMoney, nimbl and Osper operate apps and prepaid cards. They all work in a similar way: money is loaded on the cards and both parents and the child can monitor how much they spend via the app. Money can be divided into various “pots” to allow for saving; limits on spending can be applied, and blocks put on places, such as where there is alcohol or cigarettes on sale, or on gambling sites. Parents can restrict spending and ATM use, and limit exactly where the cards can be used – online, on the high street and at cash machines, for example. There’s a monthly fee, up to about £3 per child. Gohenry says 720,000 children use its existing app – which is aimed at six- to 18-year-olds – mostly in the UK, with some in the US. The new account, specifically for teenagers, offers the same features as the existing account but lets employers pay wages on to the card. The banks have their own range of current accounts for children, although they typically start later than the apps at age 11. Some, such as Barclays Young Person’s Account, start at 16. Usually parents will have to open the account for those under that age and there are no overdraft facilities, so they cannot go into the red. But if the card is used aboard, they may be liable for withdrawal fees. A review of the accounts on the market by consumer group Which? named Nationwide, Metro Bank and the Co-Operative Bank the best performers of the high street banks. When is too young? Many parents may be concerned that the new-found independence of a teenager having their own bank card, even one with limits, could lead to the child burning through their money quickly on online games or impulse spending. Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk, says contactless cards can result in teenagers spending without realising how much is leaving their account. “We never see or psychologically feel the money leave us, and this can easily lead to uncontrolled spending on short-term whims,” he says. “This is a problem for all of us, but likely to be exacerbated in teenagers, for whom impulsivity is often higher, and focus on long-term habits lower.” However, the various limits and monitoring that the apps can offer can teach children how to spend, adds Davies. “If there is sufficient functionality over and above what you’d get from a bank account with regard to education, spending management tools, nudges and prompts on overspending, etc, then there is certainly a case to be made for them,” he says. Educating without paying MoneySavingExpert’s Martin Lewis has said that financial education has a huge impact on the future wellbeing of young people. In 2018, he donated £325,000 so that all 3,400 state-funded secondary schools could get 100 free copies each of a financial equation textbook. A survey from the Money &amp; Pensions Service showed that children from low-income families were much less likely to receive education on their finances at home. But providing a financial education does not necessarily mean parents have to spend almost £3 a month per child on an app. The Money Advice Service suggests one way to start children’s education on budgeting is to use three containers – one for immediate expenses, one for savings and one for a fund for rainy days. As the child gets older, this idea can be transferred to the bank, where they can have a few accounts for the same needs. As children start to use cards for their spending, they should be keenly aware of limits. From April of this year, the spending limit for contactless went from £30 to £45. Monzo and Starling Bank have contactless debit cards for 16- and 17-year olds. “It’s vital that when kids tap their cards they realise that the money they’re spending can drop quicker than they realise. Also, if a card is pinched, or leant to a mate, it can be maxed out very quickly by people spending just under the limit on contactless,” says Martyn James of complaints website Resolver. A key part of a financial education for a teenager is to allow them to develop maturely with money, says Davies. “The key is a safe environment – limits on the available amounts to spend, the size of individual purchases and the spend within given time frames,” he advises. “And making sure there are trade-offs and that these are visible and that they need to choose between things: If you buy this now, you can’t also buy that other thing; or if you buy this smaller thing now, you won’t be able to save for the larger, more important thing you will otherwise be able to get later.”
5||Mayors are a force for good. And it's time Johnson recognised thatLike so many around the world, the people of Greater Manchester and London have suffered terribly as a result of Covid-19. Thousands have died and years of hard-won economic progress has been undone in a matter of months – with businesses closed, jobs lost and unemployment predicted by some to hit 1980s levels. We must be honest that things are likely to get worse before they get better. The nations and regions of the UK should have been the government’s biggest ally in the battle to control the spread of this virus and to protect jobs and livelihoods. We are uniquely well placed to help. As mayors, our focus is exclusively on the city regions we run. But the Westminster Punch and Judy show struggles to relate to this more grown-up and pragmatic “place before party” approach. Proof of this is the cross-party coalition that stood up for Greater Manchester over recent days; the joint decision by the mayor and council leaders from all parties in London to go into tier 2; and the genuine collaboration and support shown by metro mayors, whatever their political colour, throughout the crisis. Mayors work hand in glove with local NHS leaders and regional public health experts. We have a deep understanding of the complexity and diversity of our communities. We have strong links with local business leaders and understand the strengths of our local economies. Crucially, we have shown ourselves capable of reacting to events more quickly and devising more innovative solutions than national government. However, instead of treating us as part of the solution to the pandemic, the government has at times treated us as the enemy. Westminster has sadly shown it is not mature enough to deal with devolution. The government may have all the money and power, but ministers simply cannot cope with differences, disagreements or compromise. Rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation. The prime minister has taken decisions with huge consequences for our regions. Offers of help on everything from the still-failing test and trace system to supporting vulnerable residents have been ignored. Increasingly desperate appeals for the funding we need have been rebuffed – and not just from us, but from Conservative mayors too. Now in London, meanwhile, the government must urgently come up with a deal that keeps TfL services running and doesn’t punish Londoners. While the government acted too late in March to save thousands of lives in London, it began lifting the national lockdown in the summer too early for the people of Greater Manchester – while the virus was still spreading too quickly. The region was then left languishing in restrictions similar to tier 2 from late July – with catastrophic consequences for local businesses, but no additional support for employers and workers facing those restrictions. Having underfunded places to deal with tier 2, they are now doing the same with tier 3. Though Greater Manchester succeeded in getting backdated support from the government, it won’t be enough to deal with the consequences of a crude tier 3 formula that penalises cities. The chancellor takes no account of the number of businesses in an area and the fact that busy city centres like ours have more hospitality enterprises. But there is a class issue here too: the businesses being forced to close are concentrated in the poorest communities. They will be hurt most by tier 3. This isn’t about wanting preferential treatment. It’s about basic fairness. It’s about treating cities fairly – wherever they are – given they are hit harder by lockdowns. The problem with money and power being concentrated in Westminster is that Whitehall doesn’t see the direct impact of policies in Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield or even parts of London. Ministers want us to bite our tongues. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London. It doesn’t have to be like this. Other countries have shown that with strong co-operation between regional and national authorities, it’s possible to get the virus under control and protect the economy. As we approach a difficult winter, we invite the prime minister, as a former mayor himself, to sit down with us to chart a better way forward. Levelling up will fail if it’s dictated top-down. So let’s now draw a line over the arguments of recent days, work together to control the virus and lay plans for a recovery led by the regions. Mayors are here to stay. It’s time for Westminster to grow up and work with us, not against us.
3||Coronavirus symptoms: how to tell if you have a common cold, flu or CovidWith winter approaching, the UK is entering the traditional seasons for colds and flu, with the additional complication this year that symptoms of those two illnesses can be broadly similar to those experienced by people who have caught the coronavirus and may be at risk of spreading it. The NHS in England has produced online Covid-19 advice and a guide to differentiate between the three types of illnesses, which health experts hope will make it clearer to people whether they have an illness they would have most likely brushed aside last year, but which this year might lead them to think they need to self-isolate or seek to have a coronavirus test. • If you are in any doubt and are concerned about your wellbeing or the health of someone you are caring for, you should seek medical assistance in the UK by dialling 111 or by following the Covid-19 advice on the NHS website. The NHS says that if you have any of the main symptoms of Covid-19 you should obtain a test as soon as possible and self-isolate. Coronavirus or Covid-19 The most common symptoms of coronavirus or Covid-19 are a fever – a temperature of 37.8C (100F) – a new persistent cough (usually dry), and a loss of their sense of taste and/or smell. Patients may also sometimes suffer from fatigue, aches and pains, sore throat, headaches and shortness of breath. Diarrhoea and a runny or stuffy nose are rare. The NHS says symptoms can range from mild to severe. Colds The most common symptoms of a cold are sneezing, aches and pains, a runny or stuffy nose and sore throat. A mild cough can be experienced. There is sometimes fatigue, and it is rare to experience a fever or headaches. Colds do not cause diarrhoea. The NHS states that with a cold there is usually a gradual onset of symptoms. Flu Flu most commonly consists of a fever, fatigue, a dry cough, aches and pains and headaches. Patients will sometimes experience a runny or stuffy nose or a sore throat. Diarrhoea can sometimes occur in children. There is usually no sneezing with flu, but a severe shortness of breath can develop, and the NHS notes there is usually a rapid onset of symptoms. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy. • This article was amended on 19 September 2020 to include a loss of taste and/or smell as a common symptom of people with coronavirus.
3||Covid world map: which countries have the most coronavirus cases and deaths?Since first being recorded late last year in China, the Covid-19 coronavirus has spread around the world, and been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. However, differences in testing mean that the number of cases may be understated for some countries. Obviously, larger countries tend to have higher numbers both of cases and of deaths. But there are many other factors in play, such as the demographic profiles of the countries; countries with ageing populations may be hit harder because the disease is more dangerous to older people. The number of deaths is a more dependable indicator. The disease has hit certain countries, including the US, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK with particular cruelty. Johns Hopkins University publishes cases and deaths data for most countries in the world (a notable exception being North Korea, which claims to have had none). But JHU concedes that it collects data from many sources, some of which disagree with each other. Even where the collection is less contentious there are significant differences in the ways countries test, and in the way they report cases and deaths. Belgium, for instance, attributes deaths to Covid-19 if the disease is a suspected cause, even if no test has been carried out. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
3||Fighting tyranny with milk tea: the young rebels joining forces in AsiaThe language, the demands and the backdrop were different, but the protests across central Bangkok last week would have looked familiar to anyone who followed the mass demonstrations that roiled Hong Kong for a year from June 2019. Crowds of young protesters, dressed in black and wearing hard hats, poured through the streets to locations announced at the last minute on social media. As the police closed in and the protesters prepared for confrontation, hand gestures and human chains ensured supplies including protective masks and water reached the front lines. Tactics adopted from Hong Kong demonstrations have helped the movement survive both the jailing of most of its leaders and direct attempts by the prime minister Prayuth Chan-ocha to ban the demonstrations. But Hong Kong has not only provided inspiration in Bangkok. In recent months an unexpected solidarity has developed between young protesters and activists across Thailand, Taiwan and Hong Kong, at first online but increasingly now in protests on the streets, in law courts and in the corridors of power. Their fights are serious ones, against governments with a ruthless track record of crushing dissent. But the symbol of east Asia’s informal coalition is playful, a simple beverage enjoyed in all three places, leading protesters to dub their unlikely cross-border support the “Milk Tea Alliance”. Milk tea is drunk differently in each place, just as their individual battles vary. Cold with tapioca bubbles in Taiwan, hot and strong in Hong Kong, iced and sweetened with condensed milk in Thailand. But the basic ingredients are the same, just as the protesters’ basic aim – democracy – is shared. “When you have to go against a big power you have to be creative,” said Netiwit Chotiphatphaisal, a prominent student activist in Bangkok. “The name is very cute – it’s appealing and people [see] it’s not aggressive.” Protest art posted online shows three teas raised together in a toast. Other images depict the drinks as sweet cartoon figures holding hands in solidarity, with love hearts floating above. Alliance supporters are keen not to overstate what the different members can do for each other, or minimise the differences between their struggles. Thai students are battling a powerful monarchy, demanding greater democracy and accountability. In Hong Kong, protesters are fighting the Beijing-backed government for rights and freedoms they were promised during the handover from British colonial rule. They were abruptly curtailed this year by a draconian national security law imposed from the mainland. And in Taiwan politicians and activists are engaged in an existential struggle with China, which considers the self-ruled island part of its territory and has not ruled out using force to bring it under Beijing’s control. But supporters of the unlikely coalition say protesters and politicians across the disparate milk-tea territories share practical challenges, ideological values, and increasing concern about the power of China – a key ally of Bangkok’s military-backed government. Thai protesters inspired by the Hong Kong movement see direct parallels between their own political experiences and that of activists opposing China’s authoritarianism, said Janjira Sombatpoonsiri, assistant professor of political science at Thammasat University. “When you look at Hong Kong as a Thai citizen, what you see is a repetition of another autocratic rule – repression, doublespeak, lies and propaganda, disinformation and abuse of power,” said Janjira. More than 80 protesters in Thailand have now been arrested after taking part in protests, and key leaders remain in detention. Three were charged under an obscure law banning “violence against the queen” after her motorcade was heckled, and could face a death sentence if her life is thought to have been in danger. Some Thai protesters see not only a shared goal of democracy but a shared enemy in Beijing, including Thachaporn Supparatanapinyo, a Thai student activist living in Taiwan, who describes the alliance as a “perfect example” of a regional movement. “For the CCP [Chinese Communist party], there will always be the next and the next,” she said. “If not territorial expansion then they will seek to commodify our sovereignty by buying off (Thai) leaders like they have already done in Cambodia and Laos.” Jerry Liu, director of international affairs for Taiwan’s New Power party, which grew out of the student-led Sunflower protest movement of 2014, admits that for many in Taiwan the Milk Tea Alliance is just a “vague and fancy slogan”. But the island’s own relatively recent history of democratisation and its perpetual fight to preserve self-rule should make pro-democracy activists elsewhere natural allies, he says. “If we think about this issue from the perspective of human rights, liberty and democracy, then we should find many things in common,” he said at a press conference organised by the Taiwan Alliance for Thai Democracy – a practical incarnation of the alliance. The origin of this modern alliance of young pro-democracy activists is almost as unlikely as its symbol. It began in the spring after a Thai celebrity and his girlfriend shared pictures on their social media accounts that – apparently unintentionally – could be read as backing independence for Hong Kong and Taiwan. China’s army of hyper-vigilant nationalist trolls responded by attacking Thailand, trying to dent nationalist pride with slurs on the monarchy and economy, but they misjudged their target. Thai Twitter users are known for their outspoken criticism of their country’s establishment, and the attacks came after months of anti-government protests. Rather than being offended, many embraced the attacks, and deflected them back with sarcasm and dark humour in an escalating online battle that gradually drew in peers in Hong Kong and Taiwan. A volley of memes ricocheted around the internet, but an “alliance” that began as a joke also began to take real form on the ground. A protester facing charges in Hong Kong flashed a Thai protest symbol to a packed courtroom this summer. Thai students looked to the experienced, effective Hong Kong organisers for examples of how to more effectively defy and protest against their government, copying graphics and advice about staying safe at protests and keeping digital data private. “Online users in Asia are realising there is strength in numbers and in the shared experiences of resisting and fighting back against authoritarian governments,” said Tracy Beattie, a researcher at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, who has closely followed online political activism in Thailand. In Taiwan, the milk tea hashtag even popped up on the vice-president’s Twitter feed on National Day, 10 October, although a government spokesman had previously claimed Taipei took “no position” on the alliance. Over the past six months, online activists aligned with the group helped drive a boycott of Disney’s live-action remake of Mulan, drawing attention to human rights abuses by Chinese authorities in Xinjiang, where some filming took place, and to the lead actor’s controversial support for police in Hong Kong. It has also been used to share anything from reports of China’s exploitation of the Mekong, a river relied upon by tens of millions of people, to petitions calling for states to stand up to China over its persecution of Uighur Muslims. Sitthiphon Kruarattikan, director of the Institute of East Asian Studies, at Thammasat University, said that although there is no expectation of the alliance driving political change, it reflects and amplifies growing concern about Beijing’s political agenda and its regional projection of power. “China is still unsuccessful in cultivating soft power or winning hearts and minds of their ‘Taiwanese compatriots’ and people in neighbouring countries,” he added.
3||Covid cases and deaths today: coronavirus UK mapPlease note: 3 and 4 October totals include cases from previous days published late owing to a technical fault on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Cases from between 24 September and 1 October have been added to the totals for 3 and 4 October. Please note: these are government figures on numbers of confirmed cases – some people who report symptoms are not being tested, and are not included in these counts. Coronavirus has hit the UK hard, with the country recording hundreds of thousands of cases and over 40,000 deaths linked to the disease. England faced Europe’s highest excess death levels during the first wave of the pandemic. Where are the UK’s current coronavirus hotspots? At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact. Since then, however, the centre of the virus has shifted northwards and to areas in Northern Ireland. England now operates a three-tier system, with different areas facing different restrictions. Details of the English lockdowns are listed here, Scottish lockdowns here, Welsh here and Northern Irish here. How is the disease progressing in the UK? Cases in the UK first peaked in early April, before beginning to fall from May to early July. Since August, however, daily cases have once again and the UK is now in the grips of a second wave. Numbers passed the earlier peak in September and have continued to rise in October – although some of this can be attributed to increased testing and targeted testing in coronavirus outbreak areas. The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March, peaking in April. That figure has now been rising again in September and October. Deaths were at their highest during the first peak of cases, with over 1,000 daily deaths seen on some days in April. They started to once again increase in October, following the earlier rise in cases. How much of the second wave is due to more testing? Some of the sharp rise in cases in September and October can be attributed to increased testing. Many more tests were done in autumn than during the first wave in the spring. In March and April, there were relatively few tests available and these were given to people with severe symptoms – mainly in hospitals. Most people with milder symptoms were not tested, so these cases were not recorded, meaning the actual number is likely to have been much higher. Sir Patrick Vallance has said the daily case number may have been over 100,000 on some days in the first wave. During the start of the second wave in September, more tests were available and the majority of people took tests in the community. This means that people with milder symptoms were being tested and recorded in the official figures. The real number of cases will still be higher than the recorded count, but the testing will be picking up a greater proportion of the total. However, given Covid-19’s potential for exponential growth, the shape of the cases curve is critically important, and the effect of increased cases can be seen in the hospitalisation and mortality curves above. Find coronavirus cases near you The chart below shows the areas that have had the highest daily peaks of new Covid-19 cases. Many parts of the UK now have a number of cases that surpasses the first peak of the pandemic. Other areas have had less dramatic peaks of infection. Find the cases curve in your own area by typing into the search bar below. In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic. About this data This data comes from a variety of sources: the headline figures come from Public Health England, working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Local authority data for England and Wales also comes from Public Health England. Historic data for Scottish regions is only available by health board and comes from Public Health Scotland. We exclude 15 June for Scottish data owing to the fact that new historic data was added on that day. The most recent Northern Irish data used in the maps and table comes from the NI Department of Health, but for the line charts above it comes from Public Health England, which has historic data for Northern Ireland. There are differences in the data collection practices and publishing schedules of the sources that may lead to temporary inconsistencies. About Covid-19 Since first being identified as a new coronavirus strain in Wuhan, China, late last year, Covid-19 has spread around the globe. The virus can cause pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. You can find out more about the symptoms here. There are things you can do, such as wearing a face mask, to protect yourself and slow the spread of the virus. Chief among them are regularly washing your hands for at least 20 seconds with soap and water, and catching coughs and sneezes in tissues. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
17||Priti Patel kept up anti-lawyer rhetoric after Met warning on terrorThe UK home secretary, Priti Patel, is under fresh pressure after it emerged that she appeared to have dismissed intelligence briefings from counter- terrorism police to the Home Office over an alleged far-right terror attack. Officers from S015, the Metropolitan police counter terrorism command (CTC), notified the Home Office in mid-September that it was suspected that a far-right extremist had attempted to carry out a terror attack at a solicitors’ firm in London. Weeks later, on 4 October at the Conservative party conference, the home secretary intensified her criticism of “do gooders” and “lefty lawyers.” On Saturday night, Nick Thomas-Symonds MP, the shadow home secretary, said: “The home secretary has fallen short of the high standards that the role demands. The use of such reprehensible and inflammatory language undermines the most important part of her job, which is to keep people safe.” Officers from SO15 were drafted in to investigate the attack on law firm Duncan Lewis, which occurred on 7 September after it became evident that extremism might be involved. Accounts from the firm, including eyewitness statements, formed part of the investigation. On Friday, alleged far-right extremist Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow in north-west London, was charged with attempting to launch a terror attack at the law firm last month. The Old Bailey heard that Medlock arrived at Duncan Lewis’s offices armed with a knife, handcuffs, a Nazi flag and a US Confederate flag with prosecutors saying he appeared to target the firm because of its involvement with immigration cases. Previously, the Observer has revealed that Patel ignored warnings from senior colleagues including the lord chancellor and attorney general as well as officials from the Bar Council and Law Society to stop targeting immigration lawyers following the incident. Sources say the Met notified MI5 and the Home Office last month of the incident and its far-right links. Separately, senior Home Office officials involved in its counter-extremism portfolio have said they were made aware of a suspected far-right attack before Patel resumed her attacks on immigration lawyers at the Tory party conference. A spokesperson for the Met confirmed that it was protocol to share intelligence and details following a suspected terrorist incident with the Home Office: “Counter terrorism policing works closely with colleagues from MI5 and the Home Office in the course of our investigative activity. This includes sharing, as and where appropriate, certain information and intelligence relating to our work with these partners.”They added: “There are well established protocols in place to brief government on the police response following major incidents, including terrorist attacks.” The chronology of events raises questions as to why Patel chose to keep attacking the legal profession. According to government documents, her remit is being “responsible for making sure our communities, in all [police] force areas, are kept safe and secure”. An online Home Office fact sheet on rightwing terrorism pledges that the department is committed to tackling far-right attacks, stating: “The threat from rightwing terrorism has evolved in recent years and is growing. That is why this government is taking urgent action to tackle it.” In addition, Patel has oversight of the security service MI5, which last year was given responsibility to take the lead in tackling rightwing terrorism, officially designated as a major threat to national security. This month, the new head of MI5 warned of its growing threat. Out of 27 terrorist plots disrupted in the past four years, eight have involved rightwing extremists. In addition, Patel’s department presides over the government’s counter extremism strategy, Prevent, which aims to help vulnerable individuals people from being radicalised to supporting terrorism. “With any case of domestic terrorism you need to look at the reasons behind it, its inspiration. This is why this is so serious,” said a source with knowledge of the case. They added: “If you had a dubious politician abroad inciting hatred and then a UK terror incident was traced back to what this politician had said then you can only imagine the measures that would be taken.”
3||How CBBC's 'Dr Xand' learned surviving Covid isn't child's playBest known as half of the twin-presenter duo of CBBC’s Operation Ouch!, Dr Xand van Tulleken’s impeccable credentials – a medical degree and qualifications in public health and tropical medicine – have also seen him front documentaries on everything from male suicide to the science of dating. But earlier this year he found the tables turned when he caught Covid while he and his brother Chris were making a programme on the pandemic. Being a doctor didn’t stop him panicking. “I was properly anxious, and frightened at the prospect of spending two weeks completely on my own when I was ill,” he told me. “I was quite tearful speaking to my twin about it all.” By the end of week one, he thought he was out of the woods. Then, on day 12, he woke with his heart racing: a condition called “atrial fibrillation”. He went into hospital, where doctors stopped and started his heart to regularise its rhythm. He has had this done three times since, once while cameras were rolling as his brother looked on during filming for their BBC documentary Surviving the Virus. How did it feel to go so publicly from presenter to patient? “I had all the anxieties you’d expect – I didn’t want to look frail or vulnerable on the telly,” he admits. But he’s glad he did it, and not just because it might reduce the stigma around illness: “My favourite thing was seeing people replying to things on social media about Covid being made up with ‘why don’t you ask Dr Xand?’ Because even as someone quite young, I had a relatively severe experience of it.” The producer sent over a rough cut, warning it was tough viewing. “We didn’t believe him, we thought we’re both doctors, we’ve seen this stuff before, so we had Mum and Dad over and put it on, and everyone was in tears. I found it hard to watch, mainly because I didn’t like seeing Chris upset.” It also can’t have been easy doing lockdown while living alone and recovering from Covid, with a tough work schedule thrown into the mix: he filmed a whole series of Operation Ouch from his kitchen, and co-presented BBC1’s Health Check Live. He survived it by getting to know his neighbours better – including the squirrels in his garden, whose appearance during our interview prompts him to jump up and feed them (“I can’t have a cat or a dog, so they’re my pets!”). But the hardest thing was not seeing his 11-year-old son, Julian, who lives in Canada, as much as usual. “At this point we’d normally be talking about Christmas but it’s possible this year I won’t get to spend it with him.” His own experience of Covid has reminded him how vulnerable adults can be to new viruses. Children’s immune systems are designed to respond vigorously to viruses, but by the time we reach adulthood most of us have been exposed to the common ones so there’s less need for an all-out response; it’s why adults get chickenpox so much worse. “Some long-Covid symptoms will be specific to coronavirus but it is possible that some of what we’re talking about is the effect of new virus exposure in adults, something we’ve been aware of for a long time but which has been neglected by medicine,” he explains. He stresses the need for greater investment in rehab services where people might spend weeks recovering after leaving intensive care. What aspects of the pandemic response does he think have gone well? “The British public have done an extraordinary job in doing their best to slow the spread of the virus,” he says. Less so the government. “My work in overseas aid taught me that so much of public health is good information, but the government has got it so wrong,” he says. Blaming the public for rising infection rates after encouraging everyone to go into the office “felt like gaslighting”, and he says the hypocrisy of government adviser Dominic Cummings in failing to apologise when caught breaking the rules undermined the sense we were all in it together. He rails against the government’s dogmatic approach to science, for example the early insistence that hand-shaking was safe. When he was on Question Time in early March, he was taken aback when fellow panellist Matt Hancock reached out his hand. “I said ‘I’m not really shaking hands at the moment.’” He says Hancock was adamant it didn’t spread through handshakes. “I know how these sorts of viruses spread, but I don’t like social awkwardness so ended up shaking his hand!” He finds ministers’ claims they are “following the science” deeply problematic: “No scientist in the world can tell you whether it’s worth closing down parts of the entertainment industry; that’s an inherently political decision.” He is also scathing about the three scientists who penned the “Great Barrington declaration”, which argued we should shield the vulnerable but that life for everyone else should go back to normal. “I’m genuinely interested in the question of at what point we’ve gone too far with social restrictions; whether it’s isolation or poverty, there are terrible trade-offs. But I felt so frustrated that those scientists turned the most important question of a generation – how we respond to respiratory virus pandemics – into the most poorly thought through, unkind document, launched by a thinktank funded by the Koch brothers.” If a Covid vaccine comes, it will be important to encourage uptake; how can scientists address fake news from anti-vaxxers? Xand says that after he and Dr Chris noticed one or two people occasionally getting up and leaving the Operation Ouch! live show during their segment about vaccines, they changed their approach. “The thing society normally does is say ‘you’re so stupid’ to parents who believe the conspiracy theories. But, actually, large pharmaceutical companies, western governments and the medical profession have all given some communities in particular reasons not to trust them over the years.” He believes medics need to communicate better with sceptical parents. “If you are in the situation where the only way of saving children was compulsory vaccination, then I guess I’d be in favour of it. But to get to that point, you’ve screwed up so badly.” There’ll be no shortage of opportunities for Xand to talk directly to the public: he’s the resident doctor on BBC1’s new show Morning Live, which starts tomorrow. “I want the medical bits to feel reassuring and optimistic rather than gloomy,” he says. A tough ask during a pandemic perhaps, but having just spent an hour in Xand’s bubbly company, I reckon we’re in safe hands.
19||His House review – palpable terrorBritish writer-director Remi Weekes’s arresting first feature smartly utilises the horror genre to explore the hostile environment experienced by Sudanese refugees Bol (Sope Dirisu) and Rial (Wunmi Mosaku). Case worker Mark (Matt Smith) places the married couple in a grotty house with peeling wallpaper (“a palace”), urging them to “get along”, “fit in” and “make it easy for people”. Outside, an unfriendly neighbour observes Bol from her window, while three schoolboys taunt a disoriented Rial, telling her to “go back to Africa”. At home, Bol is haunted by voices in his head and noises from within the walls, echoes of grief, guilt and shame that assume bodily forms. Genuine jump scares are bolstered by the film’s spooky sound design, as well as terrific performances from Dirisu and Mosaku, whose terror is palpable.
13||Instagram row over plus-size model forces change to nudity policyAs campaigning victories go, forcing Mark Zuckerberg’s social media empire to admit a discriminatory flaw in its policy is no small feat. But following a campaign launched in this paper, the Observer can exclusively reveal that Instagram and its parent company Facebook will be updating its policy on nudity in order to help end discrimination of plus-size black women on its platforms and ensure all body types are treated fairly. In August, Instagram was accused of censoring and silencing the plus-size model Nyome Nicholas-Williams. A wave of content creators then confirmed the platform was repeatedly discriminating against black people, plus-size users and other marginalised communities, by deleting their photos or failing to promote them in the same way it did for its white users. Speaking to the Observer over the summer, Nicholas-Williams and photographer Alexandra Cameron told of how photos from their “confidence shoot” were repeatedly deleted and taken down, with warnings that their accounts – which have more than 115,000 followers between them – could be closed down. The controversy caused fans to protest and post pictures of the model en masse under the hashtag #IWantToSeeNyome. The photo-sharing app owned by Facebook was accused of hypocrisy and racism in allowing an abundance of photos of semi-naked skinny white women on its feeds but deleting those posted by black women in similar poses. Nicholas-Williams said she was shocked that “a fat black woman celebrating her body is banned … I want to promote self-love and inclusivity because that’s how I feel and how I want other women like me to feel”. The photos in question showed Nicholas-Williams with her eyes closed and wrapping an arm around her breasts. While the pose is a common trope across social media, in this instance it was deemed to violate Instagram’s guidance on pornography. As well as sophisticated artificial intelligence, Facebook and Instagram employ 15,000 content reviewers across the world. These workers individually sift through thousands of photos that are reported as offensive by users to the app everyday. Human bias – unconscious or otherwise – might be expected to occur in content deletion and account bans but Facebook and Instagram have exhaustive rules that must be applied to allow either to happen. The company denied Nicholas-Williams had been racially discriminated against, but confirmed that its former policy on “boob squeezing” had caused her photos to be removed. Campaigner Gina Martin, who had also lobbied Instagram and who previously got the law changed to criminalise “upskirting” in 2018,said: “This policy change is an example of what happens when you recognise an issue, get organised, form a relationship with big platforms and make yourself difficult to ignore.” Nicholas-Williams said she was delighted with the outcome. “This is a huge step and I am glad a dialogue has now been opened,” she said. “I want to ensure that I am respected and allowed to use spaces like Instagram, as many other creators do, without the worry of being censored and silenced.” Instagram’s influence on trends and popular culture cannot be underestimated. The social media site has over a billion users worldwide and millions of pictures are uploaded online everyday by individuals, small businesses, major brands and politicians keen to be part of the conversation. A spokesperson from Instagram confirmed that pictures of Nicholas-Williams were originally taken down as “we do not allow breast squeezing because it can be most commonly associated with pornography”. Cameron, the photographer, said: “There is more flesh to hold or place your arm around if you have bigger boobs. There was no suggestion of pornographic squeezing – my photos are explicitly about the female gaze and about empowering women.” Instagram acknowledged that the shoot showed the model “holding her breasts … [in] images intended to demonstrate self-love and body acceptance.” A spokesperson for Instagram said: “As we looked into this more closely, we realised it was an instance where our policy on breast squeezing wasn’t being correctly applied. Hearing Nyome’s feedback helped us understand where this policy was falling short, and how we could refine it.” The new policy on nudity will apply across Instagram and Facebook and come into effect this week.
17||PM on the ropes as London Tories rail against extension of congestion chargeBoris Johnson is facing mounting pressure from Tory MPs in London to comprehensively rule out a massive extension of the congestion charge in the capital, amid emergency talks over a new bailout for its struggling transport system. Conservative figures warned there would be “blood on the walls” if the government allowed the extension of the charge, which would hit a series of so-called “London doughnut” Tory seats on the outskirts of the city. They are also demanding there must be no threat to subsidised travel for the young or older people, also proposed as an option by the government as a condition of a further bailout. The idea of extending the congestion charge was among a series of measures suggested in a leaked letter from the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, earlier this month. It would apparently see the £15 charge extend to the North and South Circular roads by October 2021 – an 18-fold increase in the size of the area covered. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, is demanding £4.9bn for the next 18 months to rescue Transport for London (TfL), which has been severely hit by the Covid-19 crisis. However, even raising the idea has outraged Tory MPs. London Tories have held two emergency meetings with Shapps in the last fortnight, warning him an extension of the charge will “not be tolerated”. Shapps has attempted to calm concerns but Tories remain uneasy after Johnson failed to rule out a congestion charge extension when confronted with the issue at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. “Extending the congestion charge, taking away concessionary fares to the elderly and young, are completely unacceptable to us – we were not going to accept it,” said one figure involved. “If this was even suggested then there’d be real complaints and blood on the walls.” There is deep frustration among Tories in the capital, who believe the government has allowed itself to be outflanked by Khan. They warn that ministers have allowed him to blame them for imposing cuts without having to draw any up himself. Another Conservative MP said: “Khan has now been allowed to basically hide problems of his own making behind Covid. We’re letting him get away with blaming everything on the government. There’s a real frustration that [Johnson] hasn’t been as adept as he might have been with how to deal with this man.” The latest row comes as Khan and Greater Manchester mayor Andy Burnham accuse the government of treating local leaders “as the enemy” during the pandemic. Writing jointly in the Observer, they state that “rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation from ministers”. Ministers want us to bite our tongues and bend the knee. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London.” They are now calling for a meeting with the prime minister to improve relations. The dispute is the latest to highlight the growing question of No 10’s influence over London and claims that Khan’s powers have been diminished across the board. There is now just a week to go until the deadline by which the government must agree a financial support package for TfL. Khan’s team has made clear it cannot accept a deal that would force through higher fares, higher council tax, a hugely increased congestion charge zone and concessions for children and over-60s being scrapped in return for the financial support. Khan’s team has warned the government of the potentially “catastrophic” effect of forcing TfL into issuing a “section 114” notice if it cannot balance its books. In theory, that could see the winding down of all services apart from the Woolwich ferry and some school bus services – the only services TfL is legally obliged to provide. On Friday, Khan wrote to Shapps demanding a meeting to sort out the deal. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “We have agreed an extension to the support period and to roll over unspent funding from the TfL extraordinary funding agreement, allowing further time for negotiations for a new settlement. These discussions will ensure London has a safe, reliable network. It would be inappropriate to disclose further details at this stage.”
14||Don’t worry about Latin names or Victorian rulesTo the uninitiated, the world of horticulture can seem like a daunting place, full of unpronounceable Latin names, unfathomably complex pruning rules and the constant fear of killing everything in your care if you deviate even slightly from them. These doubts can serve as a really effective barrier to would-be newbies from experiencing one of the most rewarding, uplifting and therapeutic of arts. But trust me as a botanist when I tell you it simply doesn’t have to be this way. First things first – what about all those strict Victorian rules? Well, here’s a simple truth. When actually tested scientifically, many of the most long-held gardening “rules” are either based on limited evidence that is not applicable to modern, domestic gardens or, frankly, may even give you worse results. For example, religiously adding a layer of crocks to the bottom of pots actually impedes drainage. Laboriously “double digging” your flower beds each autumn has been shown to degrade soil structure, and following meticulous Victorian rose-pruning rules gives you fewer flowers the next year than simply whacking new growth back with electric hedge clippers. Now, I am absolutely not saying that all gardening advice should be disregarded – far from it. But it should be reframed as “tips and tricks”, which could potentially give you better results, not hard and fast “rules” that must be followed to the letter or risk catastrophe. Secondly: Latin is a dead language. There are no ancient Romans around to correct you and, even if there were, the empire was so enormous, encompassing such a vast diversity of cultures, the chances are that however you pronounce them, there would have been a Roman who would have said them just like you. I mean, frankly, botanical Latin isn’t even really “true” Latin, but a random hodgepodge of ancient Greek and Latin, plus a hefty dose of a myriad of other languages from Russian and German to Chinese and Indonesian. So I promise you there is categorically no “correct” way to pronounce these “Latin” names. However, using the accurate scientific name, however you say it, is often the only way to get the correct ID on the plant you are looking for, so giving it a go can save you a lot of time, money and confusion. Nursery growers will thank you. Finally, and this is probably the most important one: do not be afraid of killing plants! Over millions of years plants have evolved all sorts of ingenious strategies to overcome even the harshest environmental conditions, with zero help from horticulturists. In most cases, given light and water levels even very roughly similar to their native habitat, they will be perfectly happy to get on with it. If they do die, then just try something else. I’d go further, in fact. I’d say killing plants is the only way you’ll really learn what works and what doesn’t. I’ve killed hundreds, perhaps thousands in my time. The only secret of a green thumb is to dust yourself off and try again. In gardening there are no mistakes, only experiments. So go out there and start experimenting. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek
5||A Joe Biden White House will have little time and less love for ‘Britain’s Trump’When the long race for the White House ends, another begins: the sprint to be the first European leader to be granted an audience by the new US president. In 2016, Theresa May was distraught to have got a wooden spoon in the competition to put in an early congratulatory telephone call to Trump Tower. That made her even more neuralgic about beating a path to Washington ahead of her European rivals. Mrs May had to throw in the promise of a Trump state visit to the UK – I rather rudely called it “pimping out the Queen” – to ensure that she got to the White House first. This desperation can make British prime ministers look pathetically needy, but there is a reason why they set so much store by displays of proximity with the Oval Office. How important a prime minister is to the United States, the planet’s largest economy and most potent military force, sends a message about how much influence the UK wields in the world. So it is telling that Number 10 is resigned to the prospect that Boris Johnson will not be the first name on Joe Biden’s call sheet if he becomes the 46th president. Nor is there any expectation that Mr Johnson will be first in line when they hand out invitations to the White House. He has already quit a race UK prime ministers are usually pretty good at winning. “There is an intrinsic problem for Boris,” observes Sir Christopher Meyer, the UK’s ambassador in Washington during the presidencies of Bill Clinton and George W Bush. “The Democrats think Boris is a pea from the same pod as Trump.” Being “Britain’s Trump” goes down almost as poisonously as being Trump himself among many in Team Biden. They are bracketed together in the minds of Democrats not just because both are rule-breaking populists who have polarised their countries and trashed historic alliances. Likely members of a Biden administration remember examples of the Tory leader’s insultingly Trumpian behaviour. Ben Rhodes, who was deputy national security adviser when Mr Biden was vice-president to Barack Obama, has remarked: “I’m old enough to remember when Boris Johnson said Obama opposed Brexit because he was Kenyan.” A more recent inflammatory episode exposed a complete absence of thought in Number 10 about the man whom the polls suggest will be the next US president. One of the most essential things to know about Mr Biden – it would be on the first page if anyone wrote a book called Biden for Beginners – is that he is a Catholic who is extremely proud of his Irish ancestry. Mr Johnson was either blithe or ignorant about that when he declared that he was ready to break international law by dishonouring clauses concerning Ireland in the withdrawal agreement with the EU. Mr Biden was one of the voices in the chorus of American condemnation that the Johnson government was jeopardising the Good Friday agreement. “That was profoundly clumsy and stupid,” says Sir Chris. “It immediately ignited the Irish-American lobby in Washington, which is second in power only to the pro-Israeli lobby.” Mr Johnson can be quite adept at shape-shifting when he thinks it suits his interests. He was a liberal mayor of London before he became the face of the anti-immigrant Brexit campaign. Confronted with a Democrat in the White House, he may try to slough off his Trumpian skin and offer himself as a useful partner for an internationalist president. For his part, Mr Biden will say that America’s ties with the UK are important to him, if only because that is what all American presidents say. It is nevertheless set to start out as one of the frostiest relationships between Number 10 and the White House since Harold Wilson and Lyndon Johnson in the 1960s. Though Mr Biden has been a large figure in US politics for decades, one well-placed observer says that Number 10 is “absolutely clueless” about him and his key people. In the past, it has been usual for the Washington embassy to attach a diplomat to the campaigns of presidential candidates, the better to get to know their teams and likely priorities in office. Wary of any suggestion of outside interference in the US election, the Biden team banned meetings with foreign diplomats. Downing Street has found it hard to find other ways to establish connections. Previous Tory governments had good lines of communication to both parties in the US. This Brexiter-dominated cabinet has cultivated ties solely with Republicans. It was only very recently and very belatedly that Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, managed to get some time with Biden allies on Capitol Hill. If they were smarter, the Johnson government would also have paid a lot of attention to Mr Biden’s running mate, Kamala Harris, because she will be a 77-year-old’s heartbeat away from the presidency. Even if a Biden administration decides to let bygones be bygones, the Johnson government will still struggle to make itself relevant in Washington. After a Trump presidency that has massively strained America’s historic alliances while often fawning to authoritarians, a Biden presidency will try to reassert US leadership of the world’s democracies. A critical feature of that will be detraumatising the transatlantic relationship. At a recent Ditchley conference of foreign policy experts from America, Britain and elsewhere, one question that preoccupied the gathering was who would become Mr Biden’s “special friend” in Europe. Emmanuel Macron is very eager to secure that status, though others familiar with thinking among the Biden team believe that their highest priority will be re-establishing strong relations with Germany. Almost no one expects the UK to have preferred partnership status. After the huge distress to European leaders of enduring a US president who willed the breakup of the European Union, a Biden administration will revert to something much closer to America’s traditional post-1945 policy. Namely that US interests are best served by Europe being stable and cohesive. Having severed its central bond with its neighbours, the UK can no longer hope to offer itself to Washington as America’s bridge across the Atlantic. Searching for areas where the relationship could still be close, some emphasise “the hard security issues” – military co-operation, counter-terrorism and intelligence – where there are mutual interests that have historically transcended the personalities of leaders. “When the Americans are looking for military help, they ask who are our allies and what have they got?” says one senior Tory who thinks this still matters. But Johnson government officials sound rather desperate when they try to talk up the importance of the UK’s much-reduced military heft. Mr Biden is not planning any wars and, even if he were, the United States can act without the help of Britain. The biggest foreign policy challenge of the Biden presidency will be managing his country’s tense strategic competition with China while avoiding a deterioration into armed confrontation. Britain’s ability to be of use to Washington in that sphere is limited because our capacity to apply meaningful pressure on China is not high. The UK government has protested in vain about China’s treatment of Hong Kong. Downing Street also sounds as if it is clutching at very feeble straws when it suggests that there will be an opportunity to win favour next year when Britain hosts the UN climate change conference. Mr Biden is not exactly a summit novice and his team have clocked that Britain was mealymouthed when Mr Trump ripped up American commitments to tackling the climate crisis. There are compelling reasons why a change at the White House ought to unnerve Mr Johnson. The Trump presidency emboldens populist nationalists around the world by encouraging them to believe that they are part of an irresistibly triumphant global trend. Defeat for him will give his one term in office more the character of a freakish spasm and leave imitators looking like purveyors of an ideological style that is going out of fashion. During the Trump period, Mr Johnson has tried to lever influence with other leaders by presenting himself as the man who has the ear of, and can help to interpret, the White House wild man. “Boris Johnson sold himself as the Trump whisperer,” says Jonathan Powell, a diplomat in Washington before he became Tony Blair’s chief of staff. “Without Trump, what is the point of Johnson?” More existentially, the British may ask themselves where his policies have left this country other than looking alone in a dangerous world. Brexit has fractured the relationship with Europe, one pillar of the postwar foreign policy. Now it looks highly likely that the other pillar, a close relationship with the US, will be shuddering. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the Observer
14||What happened when me and Kim Kardashian both turned 40?My bottom is as flat as Norfolk. It’s basically a back, slightly folded. As a seat it’s acceptable, though after 45 minutes I am grateful for a padded chair. In a tight dress in dim light the effect is MC Escher-like – a leering eye is unfortunately drawn down and around a virtual staircase somehow ending up back at the shoulders again without a hint of arousal, which is sad. And yet despite my gluteous failings, Kim Kardashian and I have much in common. Both she and I turn 40 this month, and nobody can believe it of either of us. Forty! I know! A bizarre age to turn when all your parents are still basically 40; a crazy age to be presented with when you’re still not quite sure about historical wars or the spelling of, say, “embarrass”, nor can you confidently work the second TV remote. A mad age to be when, if asked how old you were, quickly and after a bracing swim, would reply, “19” without a quiver. But here it is, in black and white and shades of sparkling bronze; she and I enter the autumn of our youths and, well, also autumn, as middle-aged suburban mums. Yes, her and Kanye’s house is significantly cleaner than mine, and her arse potentially more influential. Sure, I am not yet responsible for the felling of an entire forest’s worth of paper to host debates on whether I am the overlooked face of feminism, and sure, too, she is unlikely to be found in her Twitter DMs debating taste and class consciousness vis-à-vis the return of Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen’s Changing Rooms, but this month Kim and I share an important thing: both of us have been robbed of a party. Instead of her planned celebration, a “Wild, Wild Miss West”-themed ball, for which she’d commissioned Thierry Mugler to make her a “metal cowgirl costume”, she is marking her birthday with the launch of a new makeup palette. I had also looked into launching a new makeup palette for my 40th. Well, less a palette, more a plate with a face painted wetly on to it that one can keep beside the bed and flatten upon themselves every morning to save time, but the red tape was a nightmare so, instead, I spent the day eating well and complaining loudly. Never have I needed a party more. The month-long lead-up, the quiet texts from friends asking politely if I’ve invited their exes, the gorgeous anxiety of worrying absolutely nobody will come. And then the day, with its perfunctory hoovering and rearranging of shelves – the walking into an empty room again and again attempting to see it as others might, the ceremonial bowling up of crisps. Evening, the noisy hairdryer over the noisy record player, the lover-like laying of dress on bed. Lamplighting, a candle that threatens to burn down the bunting, and just when doubt kicks in about the very fine threads of friendship you have sewn across years and postcodes, the best music in the world – a doorbell, right on time. It gets dark and someone’s smoking inside. You lose control of the music around the time the hummus runs out, and soon a girl will be shouting in your ear about love or buses. Because age is real, someone will mournfully leave then to pay a babysitter, and their face will disappear ghostlike in an Uber window. At some point there are no more photos taken, and two people are slow dancing in the kitchen to Kermit’s Rainbow Connection, and the hem of your dress is wet so you tuck it into your tights. It’s no surprise who’s still there at dawn, or who is part-dead on the sofa when you’re quietly decanting old drinks in the morning, or who texts for your sister’s number the following day, or who orders a pizza with you when evening rudely returns. Ah, to know again the sweet ignorance of eating cake someone has blown on. The carefree joy of trying a stranger’s cocktail, the casual hello hug of some you barely care for. Never have I needed a party more. It’s comforting to know that right now at least one person is feeling exactly the same. Perhaps, when “all this” is “over”, Kim and I could sort out a joint party. I’m up for it if she is. I could supply the Ikea fairy lights, she could be in charge of going-home bags containing £30,000-worth of spangly iPhones and a voucher for a knee-lift. She could call in a queen-sized chocolate sculpture of our auras, I could make sure everyone knew how to do the tricky lock on the loo. She could ask Disney to create a Frozen-themed sleepover for the children, I could see if my mum could sort out some pasta for them around six. She could get her husband to whip up the dancefloor, I could get my husband to mop it up later. A piñata in the shape of Kim’s body, a truncheon to hit it with in the shape of mine. The more I think about it the more I know it could work. It is becoming clear that the real tragedy of Covid is the fact that Kim and I have been unable to properly celebrate our ascent into middle age. Which means, of course, that all important birthdays must regretfully be postponed. I will not turn 40 until the vaccine is ready, and only then, when I finally receive the kall. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWiseman
16||Simone Lia: Scary films – cartoon
1||'What we do isn't rocket science': how Midtjylland started football's data revolutionThink of it as the Moneyball derby. Not so long ago, the idea a club could gain a vital edge using mathematical models – let alone employ a theoretical physicist or track key performance indicators (KPI) – would have left real football men choking on their meat pies and Bovril. But when Liverpool host Midtjylland in the Champions League on Tuesday, it will not only be a meeting between the champions of England and Denmark, but one between the twin vanguards of the sport’s analytics revolution. Midtjylland became the movement’s poster child in 2014 when they started using deeper metrics – such as expected goals and pre-assists to an assist – to better evaluate player performances, find undervalued bargains and to shatter myths and easy narratives. Many sneered when the unfashionable club from the centre of the Danish mainland – literally the middle of Jutland – also hired dedicated ball-striking and throw-in coaches and when their chairman, Rasmus Ankersen, promised to exploit inefficiencies in football. Winning three Danish Superliga titles in six years and qualifying for the Champions League for the first time this autumn have proved an effective riposte. More recently, Liverpool have become Midtjylland’s big-budget half-brother. Their highly regarded research department, which includes an analyst with a doctorate in high-energy physics from Harvard, has earned significant credit for its recruitment of a string of top-quality players. The bonds between the teams go further still, however. Two years ago, Jürgen Klopp headhunted Midtjylland’s throwing coach, Thomas Grønnemark. Since then, Liverpool’s statistics for retaining possession from throw-ins under pressure has shot up from 45.4% to 68.4% – taking them from one of the worst in the Premier League to the second-best in Europe. The team ahead of them? Midtjylland. “We also scored a lot of goals on long throws, then he went to Liverpool,” says Ankersen. Midtjylland were thrashed 4-0 at home to Atalanta in their opening Champions League game and the bookies make them huge underdogs against Liverpool. But if they have a chance of making their hosts uncomfortable, it will probably come at set pieces, where they consistently ranked among the most successful teams in Europe. It is the result – the club’s amiable captain, Erik Sviatchenko, explains – of analysts scrutinising thousands of free-kicks and corners and distilling them into an American football-style set-piece playbook of 20-25 routines. “Other clubs do this,” he says. “But when you see the data, 49% of all our goals last season were scored on set pieces. They are something our club and our owner, Matthew Benham, sees as a clear point for winning or changing games.” Benham is the key figure in the Midtjylland story. Since taking a controlling stake in 2014 – two years after he did so in England at Brentford – he has used similar methods and models to those that helped him win millions as a professional gambler. His company, Smartodds, which analyses matches and players in dozens of leagues around the world, is also used by the club. It all amounts, says Ankersen, to a different way of thinking. “A professional gambler seeks an edge over the market. He is not getting it right all the time. He’s looking for value. However, in football there are a lot of emotional mechanics that lead to people not making rational decisions – that sets them back.” Ankersen says data is key because it helps Midtjylland get closer to the truth. “In football the stories we tell ourselves are often wrong,” he says. “Look what happens when a team goes through a bad set of results. The fans and the media search for a narrative to explain it. It’s the same when a team does well. “Last season, for instance, we won the league by 14 points. People were saying we were doing fantastically well. But when you looked at the underlying data, we didn’t actually improve. Our closest competitors got worse. And once you’ve seen regression to the mean, again and again, you build up a big belief that this is the right way of doing things.” The club even have a league table that shows where each team would be in the standings based on its underlying numbers, calculated by Benham’s team at Smartodds. “Even if I were allowed, I couldn’t tell you the precise algorithm involved,” says the head performance analyst, Søren Bjerg. “But expected goals is in there, as well as how opponents have been doing and whether a team has changed its coach and so on. There are a lot of variables.” These days almost every club has an analytics department. So how does a club stay ahead in a world where expected goals is now on Match of the Day and the easiest analytical advantages have already been exploited? Ankersen, understandably, does not want to give every secret away. But he says there are still inefficiencies – if a club knows where to find them. “The Brazilian transfer market is really chaotic, for instance,” he says. “The value of a player can change by a few hundred percent over a couple of months. It’s a highly irrational and emotional market. If you can pick up players when they are on a low, there’s a lot of value.” The signings of Paulinho, “an outstanding left back”, as well as Evander, who “on his day is the best player in the Danish league” after he lost his way at Vasco De Gama, shows Midtjylland practice what they preach. Ankersen also believes that some clubs are still doing “simple things” wrong, like taking too many shots from locations where the probability of scoring is too low - and points to the growth of three-point shooting in basketball as an example of a sport that’s become more efficient. Meanwhile Sviatchenko says another edge comes through using sports psychologist BS Christiansen, a former elite soldier from the Danish Huntsmen Corps, who is “especially good when we need to get together and talk through things”. “I don’t think a lot of what we do is rocket science,” says Ankersen. “But where we may be ahead still is that this is driven from the top. It’s not two interns in the basement working with data. The belief system comes from Matthew, from me and it filters down.” Ankersen says one KPI coaches have been given this season is to increase the team’s Smartodds rating up by 0.5 goals. “So between us we are asking: ‘Where’s that improvement going to come from? Is it going to come from set pieces? Where are the low-hanging fruits defensively and offensively? In which phases of the game?’” A knock-on effect is that Midtjylland keep chasing a second and third goal when they are 1-0 up, says Bjerg. Is that because your experts have worked out it is better not to sit on a lead? “Exactly,” he says. “But it also suits our style of play. Our mindset isn’t to sit back. The whole club DNA is about achieving things rather than protecting the stuff you have already got.” Those watching on Tuesday will see Midtjylland play a 4-2-3-1 formation and like to press – much like Liverpool. “We also have a little bit of X-Factor on our day, especially with Pione Sisto and Evander,” says Ankersen. Four years ago, Sisto was also a scorer when Midtjylland stunned Manchester United in the first leg of a Europa League last-32 tie. Toppling Liverpool, Ankersen says, would be another level again, but he is not entirely ruling it out. “It’s going to be very difficult,” he says. “We will need to play to our best, and have a bit of luck. But bigger miracles have happened in football.”
12||John Gray: 'What can we learn from cats? Don't live in an imagined future'What’s it like to be a cat? John Gray has spent a lifetime half-wondering. The philosopher – to his many fans the intellectual cat’s pyjamas, to his critics the least palatable of furballs – has had feline companions at home since he was a boy in South Shields. In adult life – he now lives in Bath with his wife Mieko, a dealer in Japanese antiquities – this has principally been two pairs of cats: “Two Burmese sisters, Sophie and Sarah, and two Birman brothers, Jamie and Julian.” The last of them, Julian, died earlier this year, aged 23. Gray, currently catless, is by no means a sentimental writer, but his new book, Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life, is written in memory of their shared wisdom. Other philosophers have been enthralled by cats over the years. There was Schrödinger and his box, of course. And Michel de Montaigne, who famously asked: “When I am playing with my cat, how do I know she is not playing with me?” The rationalist René Descartes, Gray notes, once “hurled a cat out of the window in order to demonstrate the absence of conscious awareness in non-human animals; its terrified screams were mechanical reactions, he concluded.” One impulse for this book was a conversation with a fellow philosopher, who assured Gray that he “had taught his cat to be vegan”. (Gray had only one question: “Did the cat ever go out?” It did.) When he informed another philosopher that he was writing about what we can learn from cats, that man replied: “But cats have no history.” “And,” Gray wondered, “is that necessarily a disadvantage?” Elsewhere, Gray has written how Ludwig Wittgenstein once observed “if lions could talk we would not understand”, to which the zookeeper John Aspinall responded: “He hasn’t spent long enough with lions.” If cats could talk, I ask Gray, do you think we would understand? “Well, the book is in some ways an experiment in that respect,” he says. “Of course, it’s not a scientific inquiry. But if you live with a cat very closely for a long time – and it takes a long time, because they’re slow to trust, slow to really enter into communication with you – then you can probably imagine how they might philosophise.” Gray believes that humans turned to philosophy principally out of anxiety, looking for some tranquillity in a chaotic and frightening world, telling themselves stories that might provide the illusion of calm. Cats, he suggests, wouldn’t recognise that need because they naturally revert to equilibrium whenever they’re not hungry or threatened. If cats were to give advice, it would be for their own amusement. Readers of Gray will recognise this book as a postscript or coda to Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Other Animals, the 2002 bestseller in which he elegantly dismantled the history of western philosophy – with its illusory faith in our species living somehow “above” evolving life and outside the constraints of nature. That book aimed its fire particularly at the prevailing belief of our time: that of the inevitably steady forward progress of humankind brought about by liberal democracy. When the book came out, as George W Bush was demanding “regime change” in Iraq, it struck a particular nerve. In the two decades since, its argument that the advance of rational enlightened thought might not offer any kind of lasting protection against baser tribal instincts or environmental destruction or human folly has felt like prophecy. Gray never bought the idea that his book was a handbook for despair. His subject was humility; his target any ideology that believed it possessed anything more than doubtful and piecemeal answers to vast and changing questions. The cat book is written in that spirit. If like me you read with a pencil to hand, you will be underlining constantly with a mix of purring enjoyment and frequent exclamation marks. “Consciousness has been overrated,” Gray will write, coolly. Or “the flaw in rationalism is the belief that human beings can live by applying a theory”. Or “human beings quickly lose their humanity but cats never stop being cats”. He concludes with a 10-point list of how cats might give their anxious, unhappy, self-conscious human companions hints “to live less awkwardly”. These range from “never try to persuade human beings to be reasonable”, to “do not look for meaning in your suffering” to “sleep for the joy of sleeping”. Does he see that 10-point plan, offered half in earnest (“as a cat would offer it”) as an answer to those people who criticised Straw Dogs for offering little in place of what it debunked? “Yes, yes,” Gray says, in his engaged and friendly voice, that still carries a north-east inflection (he chose the theme of When the Boat Comes In as one of his desert island discs). “Many people didn’t like Straw Dogs. The criticism was that I swept the board of philosophy and left nothing standing. I should say that I got some wonderful responses from people who weren’t philosophers. For example, three over the years, from war correspondents who said that adapting to what they’d witnessed, the trauma, had been one of the great struggles of their lives. And somehow my book helped them.” It helped them because it removed the pressure to make terrible and tragic things meaningful? “Exactly. I would say that a lot of torment in our lives comes from that pressure for finding meaning. Unless you adopt a transcendental faith which imagines a wholly other world where meaning is secure from any accident, most of the things that happen to us are pure chance. We struggle with the idea that there is no hidden meaning to find. We can’t become cats in that sense – we probably will need to always have the disposition to tell ourselves stories about our lives – but I would suggest a library of short stories is better than a novel.” In these three-tiered times our original plan for this interview was to meet and sit outside a cafe in Bath – Gray, 72, is wary of inside – but the forecast suggested we’d have got soaked, so we have retreated, catlike, indoors, and to Zoom. In some ways, I suggest, Gray’s is the perfect book for the estranging oddness of the pandemic. How has he coped? “I’ve tried to emulate what I recall of my wonderful cat Julian,” he says. “Which is, not to live in an imagined future. We simply don’t know how this is going to develop. And of course, the political response in most places, and certainly here, has been shambolic. But that inability to come up with a clear response reflects, I think, something deep: that even the most well-developed systems of knowledge always leave an enormous amount of uncertainty.” Alarm bells must have gone off for Gray when Dominic Cummings started promoting the powers of “super-forecasting”, while the government appeared unable to predict what was likely to happen the following day? “Yes, they did. I think “super-forecasting” is possible only in a very few limited fields. Hardly anyone has forecasted the biggest events in my lifetime. And, more importantly, most of the really big events were not considered even to be within the range of reasonable possibilities. I remember back in the early 2000s, asking various economists and bigwigs if there could be a global banking crisis and the idea was universally dismissed. Only one even said: ‘I don’t think so, but you never know.’” If we are hopeless at imagining the future, we are, I suggest, brilliant at recasting the suddenly weird present to make it seem normal? “That has happened, although I think it’s partly on the assumption that many people still have that there will be a ‘normal’ to go back to. I don’t think that’s at all plausible. I think some of the changes that have occurred in the course of this six months might usually take six years or 60 years. Some of these may prove benign in a rich country, which Britain still is, but not so much for the more marginal populations in Brazil or India, say.” Take HS2, Gray suggests. “Always a mistake for cost and environmental reasons, but now it’s surreal, because huge numbers are never going to travel for work again, not in the way that they did. There is kind of a lag built into politics – in which adapting to a radically changed circumstance is easier to do in practice for individuals than for governments.” Cats, he says, returning to our theme, don’t have stories to which they get deeply attached. “Of course, you may say that’s because they haven’t got the intellectual capacity, but I think it’s just as likely they’re not interested.” That lack of interest in holding on to particular stories has led Gray over the years to some curious places politically. He grew up in a strong old Labour house on Tyneside, where his father worked on the docks as a carpenter and his mother kept the home. Witnessing that close community being broken up in the 1960s – Victorian streets bulldozed, and residents moved into brutal “utopian” housing schemes built under the criminal Labour council leader T Dan Smith – gave Gray a lasting distrust of all grandiose projects selling the idea of progress. He has formed the belief since then that “politics is a succession of temporary and partial remedies for permanent and recurring human evil”. His two central intellectual friendships were with the Oxford philosopher Isaiah Berlin, whose family had fled Soviet Russia, and with the novelist JG Ballard, who spent his childhood in a Japanese prison facility. Both helped to convince Gray that any political movement that believed it possessed a monopoly of wisdom, had gulags or concentration camps priced in. (In his most famous provocation, aping Jonathan Swift, Gray wrote a satirical “modest proposal” that called for the urgent reintroduction of torture to protect human rights in western democracies; Abu Ghraib and extraordinary rendition quickly followed.) Gray has consistently voted flexibly, for what he sees as the lesser of two political evils at any political moment. “Had I been around, I would have strongly supported the Attlee government in 1945,” he says, but by the 1970s, he believed that postwar Labour settlement had become unwieldy and corrupt. Setting himself against most of the university academy, he supported Thatcher as a necessary corrective in British political history. “But then it turned into another ‘universal project’, certainly by 1989. And I would say I started jumping off in about 1987.” He was in favour of New Labour for a while, before abandoning the idea of that project for the same reasons. In the last election he voted Conservative, persuaded in part, he says, by that need to get Brexit done, and laughing now at the delusional hypocrisy of “democrats”, who wanted a second referendum “without the option that people had voted for the first time even on the paper!” That was never going to end well, in his eyes – and neither too was the European Union itself, with its grand schemes and projects. “I was interviewed in the early 90s, by a Polish newspaper,” Gray says. “They asked, ‘What do you think will come after the new [Thatcherite] right that had emerged after the fall of communism in eastern Europe?’ And I said, ‘Probably the old right’. The idea of a Europe-wide economic space was from day one a very capitalist project. And given that communism had imploded, where was the backlash against the European Union going to come from? It would have to come from the right – and that is what has happened.” Gray predicted the election victory of Trump in 2016 for something like the same reasons – “the feeling of abandonment, and disrespect in large parts of the working population” had to go somewhere – and suggests that even in the event of a Biden victory next month, those forces will not be silenced. Human beings, particularly in extremis, should never be expected to make rational choices. “As Bertrand Russell pointed out, the first world war, when it started, was welcomed largely as an interruption of boredom.” Cats don’t appear to get bored, because in Gray’s terms it would never occur to them to struggle to be happy. Humans, on the other hand, “are self-divided creatures whose lives are mostly spent on displacement activity”. Much of this displacement activity is a product of that other disabling difference to their feline companions, the certain knowledge of death. Gray is, typically, both irreligious and anti-atheist, reserving genial contempt for the likes of Richard Dawkins, and their censorious belief “that religion can be simply erased”. Gray believes that our innate need to explain mortality and suffering with imagination and myth is far too fundamental. “I don’t have an idea of God or anything but I find the idea that you could wipe the slate clean of that impulse to be ridiculous. I once met in America a Christian fundamentalist, who told me in all seriousness that if young people were brought up in a completely chaste environment, they wouldn’t experience sexual urges until they got married.” He laughs loudly. “That’s exactly what Dawkins thinks about religion. Myth-making has been a part of every single human culture in history, why would we imagine that it is disappearing from our own?” Gray writes with great amusement in this book and elsewhere of the stubborn gap between philosophers’ higher ideals and the more animal instincts of their lives, but he genially resists any autobiographical reading of his own life or thinking. He has a few catch-all defences to more personal questions – “I tend to think my life is not that interesting,” and so on. (To which one’s cynical instinct is to think: “The philosopher does not reflect much on his own life? Yeah, right.”) I ask him at one point if he thinks that being childless has had any bearing on his thinking, but he shuts down that line of inquiry, with his only vaguely curt reply in two hours of wide-ranging cat chat: “I tend not to talk about that aspect of my life.” I wonder if he chose to live in Bath for the same reasons he suggests Schopenhauer chose to live in Frankfurt for the last decades of his life: “no floods, better cafes and good dentists”? He laughs. “Well the dentists seem pretty good.” He came to Bath after leaving academic life – having been a professor of politics at Oxford, he was for a decade professor of European thought at the London School of Economics – to become “a freelance writer”. “I was looking for a walking city,” he says. “And I like the fact here that if you look up you can see trees.” The liberation from academia has given him more liberty, he suggests, to write exactly as he pleases, cat-like. “If you’re an academic, before you say anything at all, you have to give about 20 caveats,” he says. “And when I was a professional academic, I used to do that. But now I take a different view. I just say I’m just putting this out for you to consider. Don’t throw it away – or if you do at least give it to Oxfam.” He loves the lightness of those writers who construct fabulous thought-experiments, Montaigne, Borges. “The English-speaking world associates aphorism with arrogance,” he says. “But I’m not sure other ways of writing are more likely to change minds. I don’t want followers. I don’t even expect many people to understand what I say. The whole point of the voice I have in the books is to trigger a process of thought in some readers whose outcome is uncertain.” And what does he say to those critics who argue that his writing dwells on the reductive, brutish side of humanity, as opposed to its great collective achievements? “If you think, as I do, that civilised life is like a spider’s web, easy to destroy, but hard to construct, then what I write is perhaps a caution, a warning. I’m anti-hubris.” In the last sentence of Straw Dogs, Gray asked a question, almost plaintively: “Can we not think of the aim of life as being simply to see?” Has writing the current book helped him to understand what such a life of experience might look like? “Cats live for the sensation of life, not for something they might achieve or not achieve,” he says. “If we attach ourselves too heavily to some overarching purpose we’re losing the joy of life. Leave all those ideologies and religions to one side and what’s left? What’s left is a sensation of life – which is a wonderful thing.” Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life is published by Allen Lane on 29 October (£20). To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
17||Chilling find shows how Henry VIII planned every detail of Boleyn beheadingIt is a Tudor warrant book, one of many in the National Archives, filled with bureaucratic minutiae relating to 16th-century crimes. But this one has an extraordinary passage, overlooked until now, which bears instructions from Henry VIII explaining precisely how he wanted his second wife, Anne Boleyn, to be executed. In this document, the king stipulated that, although his queen had been “adjudged to death… by burning of fire… or decapitation”, he had been “moved by pity” to spare her the more painful death of being “burned by fire”. But he continued: “We, however, command that… the head of the same Anne shall be… cut off.” Tracy Borman, a leading Tudor historian, described the warrant book as an astonishing discovery, reinforcing the image of Henry VIII as a “pathological monster”. She told the Observer: “As a previously unknown document about one of the most famous events in history, it really is golddust, one of the most exciting finds in recent years. What it shows is Henry’s premeditated, calculating manner. He knows exactly how and where he wants it to happen.” The instructions laid out by Henry are for Sir William Kingston, constable of the Tower, detailing how the king would rid himself of the “late queen of England, lately our wife, lately attainted and convicted of high treason”. Boleyn was incarcerated in the Tower of London on 2 May 1536 for adultery. At her trial, she was depicted as unable to control her “carnal lusts”. She refuted the charges but was found guilty of treason and condemned to be burned or beheaded at “the King’s pleasure”. Most historians agree the charges were bogus – her only crime had been her failure to give Henry a son. The most famous king in English history married six times in his relentless quest for a male heir. He divorced his first wife, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Boleyn – the marriage led him to break with the Catholic church and brought about the English Reformation. Boleyn did bear him a daughter, who became Elizabeth I. In recent years, the story of Boleyn’s life and death have reached a new audience thanks to Hilary Mantel’s bestselling saga tracing the life of Thomas Cromwell, a blacksmith’s son who became one of Henry VIII’s most trusted advisers. In the Booker-prize-winning Bring Up the Bodies, she explored the destruction of Boleyn, writing of her execution: “Three years ago when she went to be crowned, she walked on a blue cloth that stretched the length of the abbey… Now she must shift over the rough ground… with her body hollow and light and just as many hands around her, ready to retrieve her from any stumble and deliver her safely to death.” The warrant book reveals that Henry worked out details such as the exact spot for the execution (“upon the Green within our Tower of London”), making clear Kingston should “omit nothing” from his orders. Borman is joint chief curator for Historic Royal Palaces, the charity that manages the Tower of London, among other sites. She will include the discovery in her forthcoming Channel 5 series, The Fall of Anne Boleyn, which begins in December. She had visited the National Archives to study the Anne Boleyn trial papers when archivist Sean Cunningham, a Tudor expert, drew her attention to a passage he had discovered in a warrant book. Most of these warrants are “just the minutiae of Tudor government”, she said. “They’re pretty dull. The Tudors were great bureaucrats, and there are an awful lot of these warrant books and account books within the National Archives… It’s thanks to Sean’s eye for detail that it was uncovered.” Borman argues that, despite the coldness of the instructions, the fact Henry spared Boleyn from being burned – a slow, agonising death – was a real kindness by the standards of the day. A beheading with an axe could also involve several blows, and Henry had specified that Boleyn’s head should be “cut off’, which meant by sword, a more reliable form of execution, but not used in England, which is why he had Cromwell send to Calais for a swordsman. Henry’s instructions were not followed to the letter, though, partly due to a series of blunders, Borman said. “The execution didn’t take place on Tower Green, which is actually where we still mark it at the Tower today. More recent research has proved that… it was moved to opposite what is today the Waterloo Block, home of the crown jewels.” She added: “Because we know the story so well, we forget how deeply shocking it was to execute a queen. They could well have got the collywobbles and thought we’re not going to do this. So this is Henry making really sure of it. For years, his trusty adviser Thomas Cromwell has got the blame. But this shows, actually, it’s Henry pulling the strings.”
19||Summer of 85 review – François Ozon's bittersweet teen romanceThis latest from François Ozon, director of such wildly diverse offerings as Sitcom, Under the Sand, 8 Women and The New Girlfriend is a bittersweet saga of love and death, a coming-of-age tale based on Aidan Chambers’s 1982 novel Dance on My Grave. Shifting the setting from Southend-on-Sea to Le Tréport in 1985, it centres on Alex (Félix Lefebvre), a death-obsessed teen in the throes of doomed first love, whose morbidly romantic story plays out with the sensual artfulness of classic Ozon, combined with the accessible vigour of an 80s American teen pic. We first meet David (Benjamin Voisin) at sea, a beautiful vision riding the waves to rescue the hapless Alex after his little boat capsizes. David takes Alex home to his widowed mum, played with nervy energy by Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, who undresses and bathes the new arrival (“All David’s capsized friends go in the tub!”) and tells Alex that “my David needs a real friend”. Yet with his flick-knife comb and razor-cut smile, David is clearly much more than a friend, taking Alex’s breath away as he weaves through oncoming traffic on his motorbike, chasing an elusive moment of speeding ecstasy that is always just out of reach, like the green light in The Great Gatsby. All this thrilling young love unfolds in flashback, intercut with later scenes in which an apparently traumatised Alex faces questions about a terrible event for which he is being held accountable. Is Alex somehow responsible for the dreadful fate awaiting David? The only person able to reach Alex is Mr Lefèvre (Melvil Poupaud), the caring but slightly creepy teacher who tells him to try to write about what happened, seemingly prompting the self-questioning memoir narrative. Ozon first read Chambers’s novel as a teenager and his adaptation blends the prickly joy of that first encounter with the stylistic confidence of a film-maker revisiting an old flame. Gorgeously shot on super-16 by cinematographer Hichame Alaouie, this has the tangible texture of its retro setting, filtered through a nostalgic lens that seems to supersaturate the image, amplifying emotions. Pop music plays a key role, with the Cure’s In Between Days bookending jukebox selections that trip from the melancholia of Bananarama’s Cruel Summer to the jump-around sounds of Movie Music’s Stars De La Pub. In one key scene, recalling a memorable moment from the 1980 film La boum, Alex finds himself in a nightclub, swaying slowly to the headphone sounds of Rod Stewart’s Sailing while those around him (including David) cavort to more frenetic disco beats. But whereas in La boum, Richard Sanderson’s Reality created a momentary bubble of intimacy for Sophie Marceau and Alexandre Sterling’s characters, here Alex is alone is his reverie, highlighting not only the differing paths that he and David are on, but also the sense that this “friend of my dreams” may be just that – an invention, a projection, reminding us that we do indeed live as we dream, alone. Well-observed background details add weight to the story, from David’s Jewish heritage and suppressed bereavement about his father to the subtly sympathetic figures of Alex’s parents, who seem to understand more than he imagines. There’s also a strong thread of black comedy, not least in a cross-dressing sequence that somehow manages to intertwine agonising anguish with near-slapstick absurdity – just one example of the tonal balancing act that Ozon so deftly maintains.
3||Who in Europe is getting it right on Covid?A second coronavirus wave is sweeping continental Europe, with new infection records broken daily in many countries. There are wide variations, but almost no country has been left untouched – even those that fared well in the first wave. Across the 31 countries from which the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control collects national data, the average 14-day case incidence rate per 100,000 inhabitants has multiplied from just 13 in mid-July to almost 250 last week. While hospitalisations, ICU admissions and deaths are not so far following the same steep upward curve and generally remain far below levels this spring, they are rising steadily – and already causing severe problems for health services in some countries. France reported more than 40,000 new cases on two days this week, bringing its 14-day incidence rate to 521. Strict measures including a 9pm-6am curfew now cover two-thirds of the population. Germany, whose infection rate was far lower than most EU countries this spring, is also seeing new daily cases surge alarmingly: from 5,250 a day to 13,500 this week for an incidence rate of 319 – a “very serious” rise, a senior official warned. Spain, one of the worst affected during the first wave, is again facing crisis, becoming the first western European country to pass 1 million cases this week after recording 20,000 new infections on two consecutive days. Italy, another country hit hard this spring, hit a new case record on Friday with 19,000 infections amid fears the pandemic is again spiralling out of control. With a 14-day incidence rate of 240 per 100,000, the situation is “dramatic”. The epidemic in Belgium, which suffered one of Europe’s highest per-capita death tolls this spring, is “out of control” and “the most dangerous in Europe”, the health minister has said, with a 14-day incidence rate of a startling 1,115. The Czech Republic, lauded as a first wave success with infection rates among the lowest on the continent, is now among the highest with an even higher incidence rate of 1,210. Like Belgium, it seems headed for a new lockdown. Sweden, an international outlier with its anti-lockdown strategy, has introduced mandatory regional measures to combat a sudden surge that last week saw the number of new daily infections exceed 1,000 from barely 150 in early September. Finland, with one of Europe’s lowest infection and death rates first time round, is one of few EU countries to be fighting this second wave effectively. Tough regional measures have reversed a surge in new cases over the past week, leaving the country’s 14-day incidence rate at 52 per 100,000 inhabitants.
0||Whether Trump or Biden wins, US-China relations look set to worsenTies between China and the US have reached their lowest point in decades ahead of the election in November, signalling what experts in both countries believe is the clear direction for one of the most important bilateral relationships in the world. Under the Trump administration, the US has put sanctions on Chinese officials over human rights issues in Xinjiang and Hong Kong while also increasing engagement with Taiwan, including arms sales. A trade deal to end a protracted tariff war has stalled and the US has placed more restrictions on Chinese state media. Biden, who in a presidential debate referred to the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, as one of several “thugs” Trump has cosied up to, has also promised to take a strong stance against China. “The China-US relationship will not go back to where it was before,” said Cheng Xiaohe, an associate professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing. “The relationship is so bad.” It is a view shared in the US. “Regardless of who wins the US presidential election, we should expect to see increasing US-China tensions across a broad range of economic, political, geo-strategic, human rights and people-to people issues for the years to come,” said Wendy Cutler, former acting deputy at the Office of the US Trade Representative, focusing on Asia. Hong Kong and Taiwan are particular flash points. In response to Beijing imposing a controversial national security law in Hong Kong, the Trump administration placed sanctions on officials connected to the crackdown, downgraded the city’s special customs status and warned financial institutions against conducting “significant” transactions with anyone deemed to have undermined Hong Kong’s autonomy. In Taiwan the US has sent high-level government visitors, drawing recrimination from Beijing, increased military exercises in the region and launched a new economic dialogue with Taipei. There have been calls for the US to end its policy of “strategic ambiguity”, a way of discouraging both Beijing and Taipei from making a military move by refusing to say if the US would come to Taiwan’s aid. “The mutual distrust has never been higher,” said Bonnie Glaser, director of the China Power Project at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies. “I think many in China think the US has basically abandoned its one-China policy,” she said, referring to Beijing’s view that Taiwan is part of China. While tensions will persist under a Biden administration, the key difference, observers expect, will be in approach. Biden has pledged to work with allies to pressure China through the multilateral organisations that Trump has eschewed. Analysts expect the Democratic candidate, if elected, to work with China on issues such as climate change and response to the pandemic. “We need to be having the rest of our friends with us, saying to China: ‘We play by the rules. You play by them or you are going to pay the price for not playing by them, economically’,” Biden said in Thursday’s debate against Trump. In contrast, Trump is expected to continue a more confrontational, unilateral strategy that is likely to raise tensions. While Trump’s approach is likely to place more immediate pressure on China, Biden’s is seen by others as more predictable and comprehensive. A second term for Trump heralds unpredictability in a number of ways. During the initial years of his presidency, Trump spoke admiringly of Xi and was seen by experts in China as “a businessman ready to make deals and not focused on human rights,” according to Jacques deLisle, director of the Center for the Study of Contemporary China at the University of Pennsylvania. A trade deal, previously seen as his top priority in relation to China, could take precedent over human rights. Last year Trump described pro-democracy protests as “riots”. According to his former national security adviser John Bolton, Trump told Xi to “go ahead building the camps” in Xinjiang, describing the mass internment campaign as “exactly the right thing to do”. Some optimists in China believe another four years of Trump would give both countries time to negotiate a trade deal. Still, others believe there is potential for ties to dramatically worsen. “The current situation couldn’t be any worse. If it does get worse, military conflict is near,” said Cheng. Beijing has so far responded to the Trump administration’s various moves with reciprocal measures that limit escalating tensions. Four more years of Trump coinciding with an increasingly aggressive Chinese leadership could end that restraint. “It is possible that China has been gritting its teeth and not reacting to Trump provocations during what may be the final months of the administration. With a reelection, all bets would be off on that front,” said deLisle. For hawks in China another term for Trump is ideal. In China, state media have portrayed the pandemic in the US, Black Lives Matter protests and the chaos of the first presidential debate as yet more examples of the failing American democratic experiment. “While China is worried about Trump’s aggressiveness over the short-term, it also believes that over the long-term he is accelerating American decline,” said Rush Doshi, director of the Brookings China Strategy Initiative. Few in China however saw much difference between the two candidates as they met for their final debate. Under a clip posted on Weibo, one commentator observed: “These two should be enjoying their twilight years, not exposing their flaws in public.” Another wrote: “US comedians have taken the stage.” As that debate got underway, Xi gave a lengthy speech to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the war to “resist US aggression and aid Korea” between 1950 and 1953. Speaking in the Great Hall of the People, Xi said Chinese people had learned to “speak to invaders in a language they understand.” He declared: “The Chinese people will not create trouble but nor are we afraid of them, and no matter the difficulties or challenges we face, our legs will not shake and our backs will not bend.” Additional reporting by Helen Davidson and Lillian Yang.
5||The north-south divide is as old as England itself. Unity is only ever fleetingDivide England? Who could seriously propose that? With all that mighty history behind us? Well, it didn’t seem crazy to Winston Churchill in 1912. He said that if we wanted to preserve the UK we “would have to face the task of dividing England into several great self-governing areas”. Southern England was just too Tory – and too big. Churchill saw that in the democratic era an England dominated by this Tory south could not coexist with the Celts. If anyone thinks he was wrong, just look at what has happened over the past year. By the autumn of 2019, clear majorities of Conservative voters were ready to jettison the UK, and even the Conservative party itself, in pursuit of Brexit. Our very modern, music-hall merry monarch, Boris Johnson, and his tacticians saw the way the wind was blowing. A purged Conservative and Unionist party became the English National party in all but name. Nationalism did what nationalism does, persuading people whose lives are very different that they have mysterious interests in common and many northerners were persuaded to vote, often for the first time, the same way as southerners. It looked like an epochal triumph, but the Tories were forgetting the monster from the English id. Scarcely 10 months after Johnson was enshrined, scientific discussions about how best to fight a pandemic somehow mutated into a political north-south battle. It is as if English history is on autopilot. For this cry has assailed southern leaders from the death of Athelstan (the first Englishman to rule all of England) in 939AD. The struggle adopted many ethnic/religious/political masks, starting with part-Scandinavian northerners v would-be southern rulers. It was this split that in 1066 doomed England to conquest. For three centuries, a French-speaking elite gave England a faux unity, but as they anglicised, the old divide reopened, climaxing in the apocalyptic north v south bloodshed of Towton in 1461. The north became the fortress of Catholicism in the Pilgrimage of Grace (1536) and the Northern Rebellion (1569). Even the civil war had a north-south element. So is geography fate? It looks like it, in England. Or, more accurately, a unique conspiracy of geography and geology. We are divided by the faultline between the rich lands of the south and the rugged, igneous uplands beyond the Trent. By coincidence, the naturally better farmland also has a kinder climate for agriculture and is closer to the great markets and new ideas of the continent: the entire set-up of England conspires in favour of the south. The Venerable Bede, himself a northerner, thought it worthwhile mentioning nine times in his History that the English are divided into northerners and southerners. By high medieval times, the Trent had become thoroughly fixed as the border. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the chivalric heralds of England and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge both used it as an official demarcation. When Daniel Defoe wrote the first guidebook to the brand-new Great Britain in 1727, he compared crossing the Trent to crossing the Rubicon and simply lumped everything “North by Trent” together. This, not the old border between England and Scotland, was what mattered in the new state. The Industrial Revolution could have changed everything: for once, geology, principally, King Coal, was on the side of the north. By 1848, its latest cultural-political expression, the Chartist movement, was ready to mount a challenge to the south and (with the delighted support of Karl Marx) even to try setting up an alternative parliament in Manchester, in 1854. The southern English elite responded with their signature masterstroke: new blood was allowed in on strictly controlled terms through a great new wave of Anglican public schools. Northern thinkers were soon complaining that, as one MP put it in 1897, English manufacturers should “do as the Germans do and bring their sons up to be better manufacturers than themselves, instead of bringing them up to be gentlemen who do nothing but hunt and shoot”. But the cultural pull of the south was too strong and, by 1900, the industrial north was falling off the international pace while the gentleman capitalists of the south played development bankers to the world. How could something so deep and powerful have gone unnoticed by so many English people today, if asked, would probably say that the north-south divide started in the 1980s? Well, that is what happens when something is right in front of our noses, be it in politics or relationships: we can focus it out precisely because it is so close, until, one day, something changes and there it is, waiting where it has always been. It’s back in focus now and it’s not going away. We are all essentially “valence voters”, who will generally go for politicians who, in some nebulous way, we feel to be like us. When George Orwell went north researching The Road to Wigan Pier, he found that the yawning class divide between him (Eton and Oxford) and a sharp-nosed, dark-haired little cockney melted away in face of the cultural otherness of the northerners: “He suddenly divined that I was a fellow-southerner. ‘The filthy bloody bastards!’ he said, feelingly.” That was why Peter Mandelson, in 1994, confident that he could rely on a desperate north to back almost anyone, saw that Tony Blair’s vague “southern appeal” was so vital. Keir Starmer (southern accent, Knight of the Bath, QC) is well placed to repeat that trick, but can anyone ever really appeal for long to both north and south in England? (Blair himself, lest we forget, was under heavy fire from the north by 1999.) Johnson thought he had cracked it, but that now seems risible. It may be time to recognise what voting maps show quite clearly: the English have always voted as much on tribal lines as any of the Celts. “We” are not a single people at all and never really have been. Or we can insist, against all the historical evidence, that we are one nation, a nation that, as Churchill saw in 1912, will almost always be ruled by the party of the south. •James Hawes’ latest book is The Shortest History of England. His novels include Speak For England
19||Dorset's art deco cinema jewel returns to its 1930s splendourIt was the year of the abdication crisis, the Jarrow marches, the Battle of Cable Street and the launch of the BBC’s television service. Beyond Britain’s shores, the world was edging closer to war. In Christchurch, then in Hampshire but now in Dorset, people were flocking to the Regent Centre in 1936 to watch movies such as Charlie Chaplin’s Modern Times and Mr Deeds Goes to Town, starring Gary Cooper. The Regent had been built five years earlier by a local entrepreneur at a cost of £25,000. In the middle of the decade, new owners gave it a plush makeover, featuring a deep rose, gold and silver colour scheme and art deco signage. The cinema thrived. But in 1973 the march of the Rank Organisation reached the south coast town, and the movie theatre became a Mecca bingo hall. Thankfully not for long: Christchurch council bought the property in 1983, and leased it to a charitable trust to run it as an independent. Now, as cinemas across the country are shutting their doors or curtailing their opening hours as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Regent is bucking the trend. Next month it will reopen after the completion of a £350,000 restoration project funded by the local community. “It is a bit of a gamble, to be honest,” Gary Trinder, chair of the trust and a cinema historian, told the Observer. “None of us knows quite what’s coming next. But people were desperate for us to reopen.” Trinder, who oversaw the 2009 restoration of the Grade II*-listed Plaza cinema in Stockport, had a clear vision for the Regent. “We wanted to recreate the way the cinema looked in the mid-1930s. Converting an idea into reality is always a bit worrying, but we’re extremely pleased with the result.” Fourteen different paint colours on the cinema’s walls – “a bit too vibrant, left over from the bingo days,” said Trinder – were replaced with a classic palette of deep rose with features picked out in gold, silver, black and dark brown. A bespoke carpet was ordered from a specialist firm, which consulted its historical files to create a pattern of silver leaves on a mulberry background. New seating, made to a traditional design and upholstered in deep red moquette, was supplied by another specialist company. “They look like period cinema seats, but they’re vastly more comfortable,” said Trinder. The restoration was planned long before Covid-19 disrupted the world. Funds had been raised by a £1 levy on ticket sales, donations and the sale of seat plaques. By the time the cinema closed at the start of lockdown, contractors had been appointed and orders placed with specialist suppliers. “We were committed by then,” said general manager Matthew Vass-White. “We’d planned for a five-week refurbishment. If there was a very slight silver lining to lockdown it was that it gave us more time to do the job.” The Regent had been riding the crest of a wave, with record-breaking years in 2018 and 2019. “Last year, we had 155,000 admissions and were named top independent cinema. We went into lockdown from a better position than some independents, but we can’t sustain zero income forever,” Vass-White said. When the cinema reopens on 12 November, with a screening of a Michael Ball and Alfie Boe performance that was cancelled during lockdown, a maximum of 170 seats out of 509 will be occupied because of Covid-19 restrictions. The cinema’s cafe – usually run by the trust’s 200 volunteers – will remain closed but people will be able to buy a drink from the bar. The pandemic means the cinema will be operating at a loss for the foreseeable future. “Reopening is a way of reducing our losses, rather than making money,” said Trinder. “Every person who comes through our doors helps. If we ever get back to break-even point, I’ll be absolutely delighted. “This is a critical moment for cinemas. Forty per cent of cinemas in this country are run by independent operators. Those with small reserves will be pushed under, but the big multiplexes will rebound.” He reserved particular fury for the distributors of the new James Bond film, No Time to Die, who pulled its release for the second time this month. “We were just about to show the Bond film when we closed in March. We were going to reopen with it in November. It would have been a shot in the arm for struggling cinemas.” As well as reducing its capacity by two-thirds, the Regent has invested £10,000 in Covid-19 compliance equipment and has doubled its cleaning operation. But Vass-White said he was constantly – and anxiously – awaiting further changes to Covid-19 regulations. “The future is unknown for all independent cinema operators. We have fantastic community support, so we’re hopeful. And at the moment, we’re all good to go.”
5||Carry On Coronavirus: why a vaccine trial has saucy potentialLove in a cold climate The news that the government is to fund “human challenge studies” into Covid-19, in which young, healthy volunteers will be infected with the safest possible dose and paid to be quarantined to test the efficacy of vaccines, was a reminder that this country has a unique history in such trials. The Common Cold Unit in Salisbury was set up just after the war at a former Red Cross hospital. By the time it closed in 1990, 20,000 people had taken up its offer to be dosed with cold and flu viruses and monitored for reactions. The camps were advertised as vacations: “How would you like a cheap and comfortable holiday, everything free and no expense, and even 35p a day pocket money?” one typical advert ran in 1974. “It’s true there’s a risk of catching a cold – but in a very good cause!” Much of what is known of the way coronaviruses are transmitted is a direct result of the unit’s scientific work. David Tyrrell, who ran it for 30 years, identified more than 100 strains of the common cold virus, which had been thought to be a single type of infection. Though a cure was never found, there were occasional beneficial side effects for those involved. Information given to new arrivals seemed keen to play up the Carry On potential, advising that “chatting up other volunteers in a different flat can only be by telephone or at a very long range outside”. Despite these restrictions, romances apparently blossomed; at least one viral couple returned to the cold clinic for their honeymoon. Roll of honour In the new British Library exhibition devoted to feminist protest, even the three-foot-long, sequin-encrusted tampon created by the artist Sam Dawood for the charity Bloody Good Period is upstaged by the prison poems of Sylvia Pankhurst. For nearly a century, it has remained a mystery how the suffragette managed to write a volume of poems and a five-act play in solitary confinement in Holloway with only a single slate and a piece of chalk. That mystery has been solved by her biographer, Rachel Holmes, who has catalogued and collated hundreds of perforated sheets of lavatory paper on which Pankhurst wrote with a blunted pencil. The sheets were hidden in the underwear of her prison uniform and passed to other prisoners on release. Subsequently, the papers, bundled in envelopes, travelled with Pankhurst to her final home in Ethiopia, before being archived by the British Library among a cache of her correspondence. Their preserved presence in the exhibition, Unfinished Business: The Fight for Women’s Rights, is not only testament to the extraordinary spirit and fortitude of the suffragette, but also to the disturbing resilience of rough, beige, HM prison-issue loo roll. Bard of Salford It may have been watching the political stand-off in Manchester, or the fact that I’d just booked optimistic tickets for the London leg of his tour next spring, but over the past week I’ve had some lines from John Cooper Clarke knocking around persistently in my head. It’s the refrain from his epic meditation on mortality that goes: “Things are going to get worse, nurse, things are going to get rotten…” Delivered with full Manc relish, I’ve found that the lines seem cheerfully suited to almost any current situation. Every cloud Overheard in a pub garden on Tuesday with Storm Barbara gathering: “In the circumstances, you’d think Rishi Sunak could stump up for some fookin’ gazebos…”
5||We French love our history teachers – Samuel Paty made us remember whySince that fateful morning of 7 January 2015, and the Charlie Hebdo massacre, it sometimes feels as if we French are living our lives between terrorist assaults, each as vile as the previous but each more poignant in its viciousness and symbolism. When we think this can’t get any worse, a new attack proves us wrong. In the past five years, Islamists in France have targeted and murdered journalists, cartoonists, policemen and women, soldiers, Jews, young people at a concert, football fans, families at a Bastille Day fireworks show, an 86-year-old priest celebrating mass in his little Normandy church, tourists at a Christmas market... the list goes on. Last week, a history teacher was beheaded while walking back home from his school, in the quiet town of Conflans-Sainte-Honorine, halfway between Paris and Giverny. The speed with which we learned the facts sharpened the blow, deepened our emotions and focused our minds. The teacher called Samuel Paty was murdered by an 18-year-old refugee of Chechen origin for having shown satirical cartoons, some of them caricatures of the prophet Muhammad, during a history lesson about freedom of speech and freedom of conscience. We tried to process the facts we were given. We had to read and hear the words several times; they just did not add up. In 2020, a history teacher had just been beheaded in France for teaching his pupils tolerance and the use of a critical mind? Worse was to come: his murder was the result of a campaign of hatred and misinformation led by a few bigoted parents and relayed on social networks by a well-known Salafist imam. Children could see the shock on adults’ faces, they could feel their seething anger. They asked what had happened, but how to tell them? We gritted our teeth, swallowed hard and gave them the news. And a country went to bed thinking about its history and its teachers. There are very few countries where the figure of the history teacher is more symbolic and powerful than in France. Since the Third Republic firmly took education from the hands of the church in the early 1880s and made it free, mandatory and secular, its peaceful infantry of teachers has been the bedrock of the French republic. Their task was clear: to spread the values of the Enlightenment to the remotest parts of France – in other words, to open young minds to the world around them in all its complexity. Young, devoted teachers were thus trained by the state not only to educate children but to root out superstition from the classroom. State schools became the places where the French entered as infants and left as citizens. The church was still free to teach children in its schools but those were closely monitored by the state and had to scrupulously follow the national curriculum. These first generations of teachers were nicknamed the “Black Hussars of the Republic” because they wore a black uniform during their training years and looked decidedly solemn in pictures. They had to. After all, everywhere they were posted, they had to gain ground opposite the local priest who continued to exert a powerful influence. Wholly dedicated to their civilising mission, those Black Hussars and their heirs, such as Samuel Paty, succeeded in emancipating minds. They did it with a heightened sense of duty and sacrifice. Thanks to them, religion was eventually relegated to the spiritual realm. They had successfully destroyed the church’s aspirations to weigh in on France’s political life and choices. Like many of my compatriots this past week, I have thought about what I owe my teachers and my history teachers in particular. I looked back with tenderness at their many quirks. One was always dressed in red or green, from head to toe. We thought he was either a communist or a green, only that he couldn’t quite make up his mind. There was another, called Pierre de Panafieu. I was 13 and, just as for Paty’s pupils, this was the year I learned about Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot and the French Revolution. Of all disciplines, history is the one telling us that the people of France have the power to change our destiny, whether we’re sons of peasants or daughters of the bourgeoisie. Powerful stuff for young minds. It was like being struck by lightning. I would go to his class with the elation of an explorer about to discover a continent. I remember where I sat, the colour of my fountain pen and the south-eastern light from the window. I remember every detail vividly, as you do when something momentous is taking place in your life. He was softly spoken, with a kind smile, a man of quiet passion and quick wit. And all the while he was, effortlessly, making us free thinkers and citizens. We just didn’t know it yet. A century after they helped tame religion’s interference in our public life, France’s teachers find themselves again at the vanguard of a new fight against obscurantism. They will need energy, courage and determination, just like the Black Hussars before them. They will also need the whole country behind them. That’s the least we can do, for we now know what we owe them: free thinking. •Agnès Poirier is a Paris-based political commentator, writer and critic
13||How TikTok is proving beauty is more than skin deepHe grew up on a cattle ranch in Arizona before moving to New York to work on a department store makeup counter. Now at just 24, despite having no formal dermatology qualifications, Hyram Yarbro is a skincare guru to millions worldwide. Yarbro is one of a new breed of superstar social media “skinfluencers” who have gained popularity during lockdown – especially on TikTok – and are changing what we buy and why. Lockdown affected grooming routines, with a shift to skincare from make-up and perfume. It will come as no surprise to anyone who’s tried to book a salon appointment since March that home-treatment sales are up, with teeth-whitening products up 180% and hair-dye sales six times higher than last year. But it also affected how we discover new products. “There was an uptick in people accessing social media,” says Samantha Dover, senior beauty and personal-care analyst at Mintel, “but the real impact was among existing social-media users, who spent more time on these platforms and visited them more frequently. This meant they were exposed to more grooming content.” Social media already has an established effect on product sales. “Half of beauty consumers look for reviews online, before making a purchase,” says lifestyle and skincare blogger Lesley Buckle, aka @freshlengths. “There’s also a lot of satisfying videos out there. Dramatic before-and-after visuals go viral.” But in 2020, one platform emerged as the winner: TikTok. “Facebook and YouTube are important for beauty brands, but TikTok users are the most likely to get grooming advice from social media,” says Dover. Influencer marketing firm Traackr found that TikTok users’ engagement with skincare videos has increased by more than 1,000% since last year. In March, Skincare by Hyram had 100,000 followers on TikTok. During lockdown that surpassed six million. “I feel gratitude for the connection I have with my followers on TikTok – I’m not able to replicate that on any other platform. Personally, however, the growth has felt surprisingly normal,” he says. Yarbro’s knowledge about skincare ingredients, and funny, honest reviews have impressed beauty brands and followers alike. In January 2019 he made $50 from affiliate sales. By July 2020, he’d made $265,000 from online ads, brand partnerships and affiliate links. What many of these biggest new names in skincare lack in formal qualifications, they make up for in enthusiasm and humour – and vast audiences across YouTube, Instagram and TikTok. Many skinfluencers are just about the fun of skincare such as Young-Seok Yuh – whose @yayayayoung TikTok account has gathered 1.2m followers since launching in March, and Vi Lai, who often talks about using skincare as a coping mechanism to deal with anxiety and depression. There are also qualified dermatologists such as Dr Dustin Portela, whose @208skindoc has just under 1m followers and aesthetic therapists such as Nayamka Roberts-Smith. Popularity on TikTok does seem to affect sales. CeraVe is a high street skincare brand for dry and problem skin that launched in the UK in 2018. But a 67% increase in influencer posts about CeraVe in 2020, according to influencer marketing firm Traackr, coincides with a run on sales. UK chemist Superdrug reported a 65% week on week increase in sales this summer and CeraVe sold out in the US. The Ordinary was a hit skincare brand long before TikTok, but skinfluencers have affected sales, says Nicola Kilne, co-founder and CEO of Deciem, The Ordinary’s parent company. “The TikTok audience is truly global in a way that we haven’t seen before,” she says. The brand is a skinfluencer favourite, and only started its own TikTok account in February. “Our first video had almost one million views – #TheOrdinary alone has 229.1 million views.” The Ordinary sold a bottle of its Niacinamide 10% + Zinc 1% – a serum for acne – every three seconds at the start of lockdown. Kilne thinks that time at home gave people more time to experiment. “I believe honesty has built our fan base,” says Kilne. “Word of mouth is important for us, but this wouldn’t work if we didn’t produce quality products.” Buckle agrees that quality is the key to the hit products of TikTok. “CeraVe’s mentioned by lots of influencers, but it’s successful because it’s affordable and the formulas are gentle. It’s exactly the sort of brand I reach for if my skin’s had a reaction.” The skinfluencers of TikTok are also hits because of their honesty. “Traditional marketing fails to establish trust,” says Yarbro, who now lives in Honolulu. “People gravitate towards online creators who have real, honest opinions. When a creator establishes trust with their audience, its reach exceeds any marketing budget or exposure strategy. People are drawn to people.”
2||NRLW grand final 2020: Brisbane Broncos beat Sydney Roosters – as it happenedHere is a match report if you’d like an easily digestible recount: And that concludes our live coverage this afternoon. We’ll be back (at another link) to take you through the men’s grand final. Broncos captain Ali Brigginshaw pays tribute to the Roosters, who she says set the standard in rounds one and two. She also thanks the referees, especially grand final referee Belinda Sharpe. McGregor, as the losing captain, makes an eloquent speech, beginning by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land and going on to congratulate Brisbane for “setting the standard for the last three years”. “My Roosters girls,” she continues, “I’m really proud of you. We’re building towards better things.” Amber Hall, unsurprisingly, has won the Karyn Murphy Medal as recognition of her outstanding, ubiquitous display. She does the obligatory thanks to the NRL , sponsors, her team and fans, and family in New Zealand. Brigginshaw (see below) is praising her side for reigning in what she described as “by far the toughest” of the Broncos’ three grand final wins. “The Roosters showed great character out there. The weather didn’t suit both of us but we dug deep.” Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: The three-peat is complete! Brisbane have gone back to back to back, continuing to write themselves into history as the only team to have won the NRLW. The Broncos were tremendous defensively throughout a first half during which the Roosters had their fair share of possession and territory but became somewhat wasteful with the ball. Second half (1 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Everyone is coughing up the ball now. Nobody wants it. The Broncos need merely complete their sets and should have this one wrapped up. Mel Howard is the latest to depart with what looks like an arm injury. Second half (4 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Now Ward is down injured and leaves the field for a concussion assessment having lost the ball in a tackle. Roosters get the scrum 20m from the try line but the Broncos have forced a knock-on. Second half (7 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Shenae Ciesiolka is quick to take care of business when Temara kicks behind the Broncos’ defensive line. The Roosters have possession and, then another set, as they chase this game. They have had plenty of chances in this half but have lacked the composure of their opponents. The crowd is a tick over 9000 for this decider, with another 30,000 or so expected to come through the turnstiles in time for the NRL finale between the Penrith Panthers and Melbourne Storm. Second half (13 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: A hair pull! Vette-Welsh gets a tug on the ponytail as she looks for a breakthrough down the right side. It’s a penalty, but the Roosters are struggling to get organised enough to make good of field position and McGregor knocks on at dummy half. Second half (16 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! The Broncos have made this look oh so straightforward, again capitalising on a Roosters error after they missed a repeat set. The Broncos have a seven-tackle set and Dally M medallist Brigginshaw plays a short ball to Tallisha Harden and the latter beats two and scores her first NRLW try untouched from five metres out. Special mention to Hall, who has been superb. Could this be the game? The Roosters have to score soon because this is quickly running away from them. Meanwhile, Brown has left the field. Second half (19 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: Millie Boyle makes an error as she carries with one arm straight into Hannah Southwell. Never a good idea. She loses the ball and the Roosters get the scrum 40 metres from their own line. Second half (21 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: The game has been halted for an injury concern after Lauren Brown came out worse for wear in a head clash with Temara. But she is back up, passes a head injury assessment and ready to play again. Have a look for yourself ... Second half (25 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! Brown darts from dummy half, dummies, goes inside to Lenarduzzi and she scores her second. The Australian shot put champion came off the bench for her first, and Meakes tries to stop her second with the low tackle around the legs from the line. But her effort is in vain. No conversion but the Broncos have a nice little buffer again. Quick word on Roosters forward Vanessa Foliaki, who is 10kg lighter than this time last year and says she feels in the best shape of her career. The former Jillaroo was not confident she would keep a spot under new coach Jamie Feeney, but has proven herself and been a regular on the edge. The Broncos thus far have completed all their sets for a near-perfect first half. Here’s Amber Hall’s try ... And Yasmin Meakes’s effort ... Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters: Well the Broncos piled on two early tries to race to a 12-0 lead, but the Roosters kept their cool under pressure, matched the double defending champions and raised them one with two of their own. Big second half coming. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters (3 minutes): Fullback Botille Vette-Welsh, on her return to the field, dummies and makes her dash. through Raecene McGregor and Jayme Fressard for a much-needed break. Melanie Howard kicks into space another repeat set. And here’s another try! Quincy Dodd charges over the line after help from the forwards. Dodd, played the ball on the tryline, literally barges through the Broncos defence. Temara converts and the Roosters are right back in this coming into the breakAnd just like that, it’s 12-10 and the Roosters are right back in it. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (7 minutes): McGregor has challenged another knock-on as Togatuki tries to play through again, but she’s incorrect this time. The final minutes of this half are turning into an arm wrestle. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (9 minutes): The rain is starting to come down now as the Broncos pass their fifth tackle and Ali Brigginshaw kicks on the outside of her boot. It’s an awkward landing but the Roosters have it under control. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (13 minutes): Temara cannot make her conversion but the Roosters are on the board. Meakes did very well to hold off opposing centre Julia Robinson. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (14 minutes): The Roosters, to their credit, have stayed composed and have a repeat set. And here’s the first captain’s challenge of the match, as Roosters skipper Corban McGregor appeals against a knock-on. Sarah Togatuki was adamant she hadn’t despite Ali Brigginshaw’s appeals and is vindicated. The Roosters use the momentum superbly and go over for their first try. Pass, pass, pass and Yasmin Meakes backs herself to skip over the line. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-0 Sydney Roosters (21 minutes): Amber Hall the Wrecking Ball has practically fallen over the try line after sending Tricolours counterparts this way and that with her pace and power. Yasmin Meakes makes a last-ditch effort to take her out from behind. Hall converts and this is already looking a little worrying for the Roosters, who will have to start putting pressure on the Broncos’ line instead of inviting them in. First half - Brisbane Broncos 6-0 Sydney Roosters (25 minutes): Peep! And we’re off. The Broncos have possession and the Roosters are hitting them hard, making an early statement. The underdogs are winning the early field position. The two wingers, Brydie and Shanice Parker are heavily involved. The Broncos’ strength is taking advantage of mistakes and it is a simple error that gifts Tarryn Aiken a break. She beats two defenders then passes to Tamika Upton for her sixth try in seven games. Pre-game interview with Broncos coach Kelvin Wright. After last round’s defeat of the Roosters he felt his side had “played inside themselves”. Here he says there were a “couple of areas we really need to tidy up, especially around the ruck”. On the Roosters: “The way they’ve been playing, they look like they’re playing for each other and really enjoying themselves.” Here are the teams ... Good afternoon and welcome to our live coverage of the NRLW grand final. And what a splendid day for it. Mother Nature has put on a wet, windy one. Which way will she blow at ANZ Stadium? Is this a Brisbane three-peat in the making, or will the Roosters exact 2018 grand final revenge over the competition’s dominant force. As the only team to have lifted the NRLW trophy, the Broncos have lost one of 11 games to date and won their two previous deciders against the Roosters and Dragons by a combined margin of 64-18. Kelvin Wright’s team saw off Jamie Feeney’s Roosters 24-16 in round three last week, though star Tricolours forwards Hannah Southwell and Simaima Taufa were rested and there were some positive signs. The Roosters have never beaten the Broncos, and are seeking to remedy this short historical shortcoming without star rugby sevens recruit Charlotte Caslick, who sustained two fractures in her spine during their second match against the Warriors. Kick-off is at 4.05pm AEDT, stay tuned.
13||The US has a good record on fighting monopolies. Now it's Google's turnSundar Pichai, chief executive of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, is a mild-mannered software engineer who is not good at games of verbal fisticuffs with US politicians. He received a drubbing last month during the “big tech” congressional hearing. Pichai can, however, summon lawyers and lobbyists galore as soon as the game gets more serious, which it definitely has. The US Department of Justice (DoJ) last week launched a huge and historic antitrust case against Google, accusing the tech company of abusing its position to maintain an illegal monopoly over internet searches and search advertising. In response, Kent Walker, Google’s chief lawyer, published an indignant blogpost that signalled how the firm will fight this. Google will claim it – and not the DoJ – is on the side of the American people and, by extension, people across the world. “People use Google because they choose to, not because they’re forced to, or because they can’t find alternatives,” wrote Walker. “This lawsuit would do nothing to help consumers. To the contrary, it would artificially prop up lower-quality search alternatives, raise phone prices, and make it harder for people to get the search services they want to use”. This argument has superficial appeal. Google doesn’t charge users and can’t stop them using rivals’ products. In a neat touch, Walker included instructions on how to load Microsoft’s Bing search engine on an Android phone. As for those multibillion payments to Apple to get Google pre-loaded on iPhones and iPads – one of the DoJ’s main complaints – Walker said they are like the promotional fees a cereal brand might pay a supermarket to stock its products at eye level. Other search engines are free to negotiate space on the digital shelf or home screen, he argued, and this is how software has always been distributed. Convinced? You shouldn’t be. There are four reasons, at least, why the DoJ is right to fight this case. First, a product that is free (or free at the point of use) can still cause harm to consumers. The process is just indirect. An overly dominant search engine can, for example, raise its prices to advertisers, who then recoup the extra expense by charging more for hotels, flights, electronic gadgets, books, insurance, and so on. Second, Google’s cereal comparison doesn’t work. A key point about a dominant search engine is that it can gather more data to enhance the offer and thereby achieve greater competitive clout. It has a self-reinforcing aspect that doesn’t apply in the non-data world of cornflakes and Coco Pops. Third, most users don’t change their default settings. Yes, it’s technically simple to do, but most people don’t. That is why Google is happy to pay Apple a fortune every year for default status – it can be extremely confident of a return on that investment, knowing no rival can match its spending power. Fourth, there is the deep problem of Google’s sheer size and effective control of 80% of the search market. How could new ideas and approaches ever get a look-in? “If we let Google continue its anti-competitive ways, we will lose the next wave of innovators and Americans may never get to benefit from the ‘next Google’,” said William Barr, the US attorney-general. In that final respect, this case is similar to celebrated antitrust challenges of the past – Standard Oil, AT&amp;T and Microsoft. It’s about confronting corporate power when it becomes the gatekeeper to an industry, the lawsuit’s description of Google’s position in search. Pichai’s usual plea on that point is that “Google’s continued success is not guaranteed”. And that can be rubbished for a simple reason: it is easy to see how the gates would clang shut on any competitor that became truly threatening. Good luck to the DoJ – this is an important 21st-century case. Johnson’s plans for British industry are full of wind Next week, Boris Johnson is expected to deliver a 10-point plan outlining the government’s green industrial strategy before it publishes a long-delayed energy white paper, possibly in November. A fresh strategy paper is a chance for the PM to persuade the electorate that while his character may not be well suited to fighting a pandemic, he knows how to strike an upbeat note when the subject turns to major building projects. It might have taken him six years as London mayor before he could see cycle superhighways being built across London, but they did happen, and they played a part in transforming the infrastructure of the capital. When he wanted a cable car across the Thames, it arrived and worked, to many people’s amazement. Unfortunately what you cannot say is that any of the prime minister’s achievements so far are glued together as part of a strategy. They can at best be described as ad hoc, and sit alongside schemes that detract from the central message, if that message is about the climate emergency and carbon emissions. At this year’s Conservative party conference, Johnson said a green industrial revolution would repair the economy following the pandemic. This month, he repeated a pledge that every home in the UK would be powered by wind energy within 10 years, at a cost of £160bn. These are laudable aims and show Johnson has been gathering his thoughts. But the manufacturing industry that might have played a big part in building wind turbines was destroyed by previous Tory governments. Now Johnson wants to add a no-deal or limited-deal Brexit that will undermine the rest of the UK’s industrial base. Britain needs a strategy in many areas. Let’s hope the PM has coordinated a plan across all departments that can rightfully be called a green industrial strategy. The ticket king’s bid for Viagogo could be about to stall The $4bn (£3bn) takeover of ticket resale website StubHub by its rival Viagogo had already been dubbed the “worst deal in history”, having been finalised weeks before the pandemic shut down live events indefinitely. Viagogo boss Eric Baker founded both firms and his dream is to preside as ticket king over a reunited empire. Perhaps blinded by that ambition, he dismissed Covid-19 as a flash in the pan and pressed on with the deal, spending some of his own considerable resources – together with those of financial backers including the mega-rich Waltons, the family behind Walmart. As ill-timed as the takeover looked a few weeks ago, it looks even worse now that the UK competition watchdog has signalled its intention to block it. The CMA understandably balked at the idea of a tie-up that would give the combined company 90% of the UK ticket resale market. What now for Viagogo? It’s main target in buying StubHub is the US market, where its rival dominates. Yet the British regulator threatens to scupper everything. If Baker offers to shut down StubHub UK, Viagogo would hoover up its rival’s business anyway, creating a monopoly via a different route. The CMA surely could not allow that. A partial sale of StubHub, a web-based company whose strength is its platform, is impractical to the point of impossibility. The CMA may ultimately force Viagogo to sell StubHub, appointing a divestiture trustee to seek a buyer. That trustee would have no obligation to recoup Baker’s $4bn. That’s not the most remarkable thing, though. Part of the CMA’s remit will be, unwittingly, to look out for the interests of professional resellers, the touts who dominate resale listings. As the Observer has shown, many “resellers” use the same methods that saw super-touts Peter Hunter and David Smith jailed last year for fraud. So the CMA may find itself accidentally defending the interests of fraudsters who make a living scamming the public. It seems anything is possible in 2020.
5||Money fosters the cosmopolitan joy of our football but also its soullessnessIf you want to see the dilemmas of globalisation playing out, forget Brexit or the US elections. Watch a game of football (though in Britain, of course, you can’t actually watch a game in a stadium these days). For it’s in the beautiful game that the many faces of globalisation reveal themselves. Last week, news broke of talks between top European clubs about creating a breakaway lucrative European Premier League. A week earlier, two of the teams reportedly involved in these talks, Liverpool and Manchester United, had attempted a power grab in the English game, offering more money to the sides in the lower leagues in return for a handful of top clubs having control. Liverpool and Man United had to retreat in the face of fierce criticism. It’s unlikely, though, that either plan has been buried. What they reveal is the tension between the needs of commerce and those of supporters, between the demands of elite sides and the burdens on those at bottom of football’s pyramid. Over the past 30 years, football has metamorphosed from being what the Sunday Times called, in the wake of the 1985 Heysel tragedy, “a slum game played by slum people in slum stadiums” into “an optimistic, upwardly mobile, aspirational business”, in the words of Richard Scudamore, former CEO of the Premier League, speaking to MPs in 2011. From unrestrained contempt for the “working-class game” to adoration in management-speak in the space of three decades. When the Premier League launched in 1992, revenue in its first season was £170m; last year, it was €5.16bn. The new wealth has allowed the league to attract some of the world’s best players and managers. On the opening day of that first season, 13 foreign players graced the Premier League. This year, 244 have already stepped on to the pitch. And all this has made it attractive for everyone from Russian oligarchs to Middle Eastern autocrats to buy English clubs. In football, as in politics, globalisation has created a tension between the benefits of a more cosmopolitan game and the erosion of local attachments and the creation of huge inequalities. Football is not just about watching 22 people kick the ball around for an hour and a half. What gives football its heart, its soul and its drama, is that every game, every fan, is part of a wider story. Part of a collective memory, an identity, an imagined community. In many small towns, football clubs are among the most important social institutions, providing both a sense of civic pride and a form of collective hope and aspiration. All this, however, slams against the imperatives of football as a business. That’s why we need to be clear about what exactly is wrong with the globalisation of football. It’s not the creation of a more cosmopolitan game. Few would moan about being able to watch some of the world’s great players (Mohamed Salah, Kevin de Bruyne, James Rodriguez). Or the fact that such players are coached by some of the best managers in the world (Jürgen Klopp, Pep Guardiola, Carlo Ancelotti). Some worry that the influx of foreign players has squeezed out English players. Yet one could argue that it’s improved them, that they have benefited from both playing with and being coached by the world’s best. And foreign players and coaches can have as great an attachment to their clubs as British-born ones. German Klopp is as much part of Liverpool folklore as Bill Shankly. Arsenal fans worship French former forward Thierry Henry as “one of ours” as much as they do Londoner Ian Wright. What grates is the other side of the equation: the commercialisation, the creation of monstrous inequalities. The plans for a European Premier League envisage games between the European top teams as a money-spinning exercise detached from any organic connection to a history of competition or rivalry. It also evinces a desire to corner the market, as if Liverpool and Leeds were like Amazon and Google. The question facing football is about how to foster the one without encouraging the other, how to nurture the openness and cosmopolitanism without cultivating also the soullessness and the inequalities. It’s the question confronting us in politics, too. We can only begin to answer it if we stop thinking about globalisation as a single phenomenon, about which we have to be for or against, but start unpicking its different threads, good and bad. “There is more politics in football,” the former England manager, the Swede Sven-Göran Eriksson, once quipped, “than in politics.” He spoke more truth than he probably realised. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
9||Freshwater Five: radar casts doubt on guilty verdict for £53m cocaine haulIt began like most other fishing trips for the crew of the Galwad. The sea was choppier than they’d have liked but the four men on board were hopeful of rich pickings in the spring tides off the Isle of Wight. They had no idea that the same stretch of the English Channel was that night the focus of a sophisticated policing operation centred on a container ship from Brazil. Around midnight on 30 May 2010 the Galwad came to the attention of the police surveillance teams. When its crew arrived on shore hours later, lugging baskets of lobster, they were arrested. The following day a fisherman found 250kg of cocaine worth £53m floating in holdalls in the island’s Freshwater Bay. Jamie Green and his Galwad crew – Scott Birtwistle, Daniel Payne and Zoran Dresic, along with local scaffolder Jonathan Beere – were jailed in June 2011 for up to 24 years each for conspiracy to import cocaine. All five were far from the image of multimillion pound drug kingpins, described by friends and family as hard-working with modest lifestyles. None had previous convictions relating to drugs. Known as the Freshwater Five, all maintain their innocence. Now compelling new evidence from the radar of a UK Border Agency surveillance vessel casts doubt over the safety of their convictions. Not disclosed during the original trial, the nautical navigation data from the vessel’s Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) appears to show that information presented to the jury was incorrect. Detailed in a fresh submission on the case to the court of appeal and seen by the Observer, lawyers believe the failure to submit the ECDIS evidence at the original trial “was a significant failure that has yet to be properly explored and explained away”. The 22-page submission says that the inexplicable disappearance of the radar data was a serious shortcoming by the since disbanded Serious Organised Crime Agency (Soca), which coordinated the drugs operation that led to the jailing of the Freshwater Five. “The absence of key material was a significant failing on the part of Soca and/or the experts deployed by the prosecution at trial,” the document adds. Dated 2 October, the submission follows a six-year battle to obtain the radar evidence by lawyer Emily Bolton. Bolton, director of Appeal, a charity law practice that fights miscarriages of justice, said: “This is a case where the investigating authorities developed chronic tunnel vision early on and ignored evidence that suggested they were pursuing the wrong suspects. And of course it snowballed from there.” The prosecution case claimed the Freshwater Five were involved in a plot that entailed sailing behind a container ship, the Oriane, to recover 11 holdalls of cocaine tossed from its stern in the dark, in high seas. Yet the new evidence reveals that the path of the fishing boat never crossed that of the container ship, making a transfer of drugs impossible. In fact the ECDIS radar course suggests the Galwad never got sufficiently close to the Oriane to pick up the drugs. The nautical data reveals that a UK Border Agency aircraft and cutter were closely monitoring the Oriane and subsequently tracked the container boat for over an hour after the Galwad left the area. Such monitoring led the UKBA to “specifically discount the Galwad as the drugs-receiving vessel”, says the submission. The radar data also provides striking new details that Bolton feels would have influenced the jury very differently. Another small vessel, recorded as “A50” by the ECDIS, was tracked that night travelling “towards the position in which the drugs were found” nearly an hour after the Galwad had left the Freshwater Bay area. The mystery potential “suspect” boat was not disclosed at trial. Expert analysis of the new data indicates the A50 is “likely to be a RHIB [rigid hulled inflatable boat] or fast power cruiser moving at 46 knots”. The document for the court of appeal states: “It is submitted that A50 was either another suspect vessel or a vessel deployed by a law enforcement agency. “If it was the latter, it would profoundly undermine any suggestion that the Galwad deposited the drugs, as the Soca officers were manifestly unaware where the drugs were to be found until the next day after their discovery by a fisherman.” It adds: “The failure by the prosecution to examine and disclose the ECDIS product at trial deprived the defence of substantial arguments that might have led to different verdicts.” Another central plank of the prosecution case is also challenged by the radar findings. Film from a plane flying over Freshwater Bay the day after the Galwad returned to shore was shown at trial. Clearly visible are the holdalls of cocaine that had been discovered by then. However, the new data shows that a surveillance aircraft flew over Freshwater Bay just after the Galwad passed through. Yet the hi-tech plane noted nothing out of the ordinary and did not report any unusual objects in the water. “Had there been anything suspicious left in the water, the aircraft would have spotted it,” states Bolton. Finally, the ECDIS data shows the crew of a UKBA cutter monitoring the Oriane “had visuals” on its rear deck at the time the drugs were said to have been thrown off. However, there is no entry in the ship’s log indicating this took place. “The jury would then have had evidence that the Galwad was observed and disregarded on account of there being no activity on the stern of the Oriane at the relevant time,” states the submission. Despite extensive searches, no traces of cocaine were found on either the Galwad or Oriane. The families of the Freshwater Five hope the case will be heard in the court of appeal early next year. • The subheading of this article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct a misspelling of Isle of Wight.
5||Farewell James Randi, prince of reason. Now who’ll mock the quacks and anti-vaxxers?A mong many tributes to the great James Randi, who died last week aged 92, one stands out. Hours after the death was announced, cutlery expert Uri Geller reacted with a tweet he piously expanded on Facebook. “How sad that Randi died with hatred in his soul. Love to you all.” One thing that the most professional paranormalist may find it hard to conceal, you gather, is indecent glee. Geller’s public gloat has, however, ensured that many people who might never otherwise have viewed his televised humbling in 1973, at the height of media credulity about his claimed paranormal talent, will now have witnessed the spectacle of his inexplicably interrupted powers. Randi had advised the producers to supply their own props. Even supreme rationalists, it turns out, can exact vengeance after death. Spoon-benders are unlikely to be the only profession toasting the disappearance – supposing we rule out further hauntings – of Randi, who, being himself a brilliant magician as “The Amazing Randi: The Man No Jail Can Hold” (previously “The Great Randall: Telepath”) was repeatedly more effective than scientists at examining paranormalist claims, sometimes by simply performing their stunts himself. Mediums, dowsers, astrologers, homeopaths, clairvoyants, faith-healers, mind-readers, spirit guides and anti-vaxxers also featured among Randi’s targets after he moved on from surpassing Houdini’s escapology to exposing all forms of pseudoscience, on principle but with a showmanship that made him reliably more compelling than his subjects. This made him immeasurably valuable to sceptics. Addressing homeopathy, for instance, he appreciated that argument alone would have less impact in demonstrating the staggering uselessness of these royal-endorsed products than his filmed consumption of a homeopathic overdose. Before Randi’s retirement in 2015, his eponymous educational foundation’s “paranormal challenge”, offering $1m to anyone who could demonstrate supernatural ability in scientific conditions, provided sceptics with a perfect response to ambitious phonies: supposing they didn’t want the money, how about the glory? The cash went unclaimed. Now, with Randi gone, life just got much more comfortable for purveyors of pseudoscience and, it follows, less so for their prey, the public. If, say, the prognostication industry, which proved either unable or unwilling to alert Earthlings to the horrors coming in 2020, does nothing worse than make fools of consumers, Randi showed that more ambitious charlatans, such as the British manufacturer of a fake bomb detector, which he exposed in 2008, could kill them. Now, with lizard-believers hosting UK anti-mask/anti-5G/anti-Covid-19/anti-vaxx/reportedly antisemitic rallies in Trafalgar Square, and with quack remedies and conspiracy theories disseminated by the White House as well as by social media, his death only underlines the absence of comparably effective sceptics to counter lies more baleful than Doris Stokes’s “I’m getting an Eileen”. Long before Covid-19 elicited interventions from influencers including the anti-vaxxer Novak Djokovic and that oracle Eamonn Holmes, Randi had warned against celebrity contributions to vaccination panic. “We have a Dark Age of sorts facing us,” he wrote in 2010, a time when Andrew Wakefield seemed to have done his worst, “one in which a generation of children may be decimated through the ignorance of the public, fuelled by irresponsible public figures who assume expertise they do not possess”. Since then, irresponsible minor figures have learned, in good time to do extensive damage, to transform themselves into major public nuisances. How much did we hear from Piers Corbyn before Twitter plus the virus turned him from weird sibling into a free-speech martyr, currently telling his followers: “Modern Vax is utterly evil. It’s purpose is to maim kill control and depopulate.” If there’s anything to the theory, one that informs Kate Summerscale’s new novel inspired by 1930s poltergeist reports, that superstition thrives in periods of uncertainty and disruption, the appetite for Corbyn, Wakefield, David Icke and their various scare tactics, directed at an already fearful public, could probably have been anticipated, at least by anyone except a professional astrologer. After the First World War and the 1918 flu pandemic, Summerscale has pointed out, “many of the bereaved found consolation in seances. In an era of widespread technological change, it seemed plausible that the living could forge channels of communication with the dead.” Likewise, earlier, Daniel Defoe: “These terrors and apprehensions of the people led them into a thousand weak, foolish and wicked things, which there wanted not a sort of people, really wicked, to encourage them to; and this was a running about to fortune tellers, cunning men and astrologers, to know their fortune…” Updated, amid reports of a renewed appetite for forecasts, we find the Daily Mail keen to gratify the excellent foppery of the world, as someone once called it, with insights from the astrologer Jessica Adams. One statement in a 2019-dated forecast for March 2020, “we’re going to see computer and human viruses”, is widely taken (unlike Bill Gates’s 2015 prediction) to compensate for the failure of apparently all her rivals to spot what frustrated stars/spirits/entrails have been trying to tell humanity about a virus that, according to other paranormalists, does not exist (Icke), is no worse than flu (Trump), was made by Bill Gates (44% of Republicans) or alternatively in China (also Trump), then accidentally transmitted to a human “while delivering the virus to Iran for bacteriological warfare reasons” (Geller). Luckily for us, Adams is also a medium. “I’ve always been able to see the spirit world and I know about things before they happen,” she told the Mail. I know this is a busy time, especially for the world’s only reliable astrologer, but is there any chance she could make contact with The Amazing Randi – shortish guy, big beard – and ask where we can find his successor? • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist
0||'Power grab': how Republican hardball gave us Amy Coney BarrettThe almost certain confirmation of Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court on Monday represents a “power grab” by Republicans facing possible wipeout at the ballot box, activists and analysts say. Republicans on the Senate judiciary committee shrugged off a Democratic boycott on Thursday to advance Barrett’s nomination to the full Senate, which will vote little more than a week before the presidential election. If confirmed, Barrett could be sworn in as a justice almost immediately. To critics, the rushed process represents one of the most naked power plays yet by a party which, confronting dismal opinion polls, is weaponizing unelected judges to compensate for setbacks in elections. Even as they contemplate the loss of political power, Republicans are poised to cement judicial power for generations. “This is like the last gasp by the Republican party to try to lock in their minority rule,” said Christopher Kang, co-founder and chief counsel of the progressive group Demand Justice. “They’re potentially just days away from not only losing the White House but also the Senate, maybe even resoundingly, and so they’re trying to do everything they can to consolidate on the supreme court a Trump supermajority for decades to come.” Under Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, Republicans have built a reputation for ruthless bare knuckle tactics Democrats struggle to combat. They blocked swaths of Barack Obama’s legislative agenda and in 2016 refused to grant a hearing to his supreme court nominee Merrick Garland, arguing that it was an election year so the voters should decide. In 2018, when the conservative nominee Brett Kavanaugh faced credible allegations of sexual assault, Republicans ignored fierce protests and rammed his appointment through. And when liberal justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg died last month, Donald Trump moved like lightning to replace her with Barrett, 48, a lifetime appointment who would tilt America’s highest court to a 6-3 conservative majority. It was another example of Republican hardball – audacious, shameless and devastatingly effective. Comedian Bill Maher told viewers of his HBO show: “If you haven’t gotten it yet, this kind of completely bald-faced premeditated hypocrisy should make it clear. There’s no catching them in an inconsistency. They don’t care because it’s all and only about power. The only rule Republicans play by is: the people who win make the rules. Power talks, losers walk.” Democrats cried foul, pointing out that the Senate has never confirmed a supreme court nominee so close to a presidential election. They were whistling in the wind. During committee hearings Barrett swerved most of their questions, refusing to commit herself on abortion, the transfer or power or the climate crisis. Kang said: “The process was so rushed and she was far more evasive and refused to answer more questions than any other nominee. That was a little bit jarring, if not surprising, but it shows how little respect Republicans have not only for the Senate but the supreme court itself. The Republican party is very blatantly just treating the supreme court as another political branch of government.” Demand Justice has called for Democrats to fight back by expanding the court, noting that its size has been changed seven times before. Joe Biden, the Democratic presidential nominee, has said he will appoint a bipartisan commission to examine such proposals. Kang predicted: “Republicans’ attempt to assert their raw political partisan power grab to get a sixth seat on the court, when they already have five, could end up backfiring spectacularly on them and they could be on the losing side of a 7-6 supreme court before they know it.” All 12 Republicans on the judiciary committee voted in favour of Barrett. Ted Cruz of Texas hailed perhaps the “single most important accomplishment” of Trump’s presidency. Democrats displayed posters at their desks, of Americans who benefited from Obama’s Affordable Care Act which they warn Barrett could help strike down. Democrats have also warned that if Trump follows through on his threat to dispute the outcome of the 3 November election, it might go before Barrett and other members of the supreme court for a final ruling, just like the 2000 election between George W Bush and Al Gore. Laurence Tribe, a constitutional law professor at Harvard University, described Barrett’s probable confirmation as a “‘power grab’ in every relevant sense of the term, especially in light of President Trump’s open concession that he appointed judge Coney Barrett in part to ensure her ability to vote in his favour should his re-election as president end up turning on a case the supreme court would need to resolve in order to give him an electoral college victory in the face of a national popular defeat.” Trump has appointed more than 200 federal judges, likely to be his most lasting legacy whether he serves one term or two. Critics suggest the courts represent the last bulwark of Republican minority rule and the Barrett episode is starkly indicative of a party that has lost its ideological and ethical moorings and now treats power as an end in itself. Kurt Bardella, a senior adviser to the Lincoln Project, an anti-Trump group, said Republicans have betrayed their claims to be the party of fiscal responsibility, pro-life principles, small government and congressional oversight. “When a party diverges from itself on so many issues so many times,” he said, “it tells you they don’t actually have any moral convictions or principles that guide them. Only the pursuit of power.”
24||Twenty years of the International Space Station – but was it worth it?Space scientists are preparing to celebrate a remarkable astronautical achievement. In a few days, they will mark the 20th anniversary of humanity’s continuous presence in outer space. For two decades, teams of astronauts have made their homes 250 miles above our planet through their uninterrupted occupancy of the International Space Station (ISS). First inhabited by US astronaut Bill Shepherd and Russian cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Yuri Gidzenko on 2 November 2000, the ISS has since provided shelter for a steady rotation of crews that has ensured the station has never been left unoccupied. A total of 240 men and women have set up camp on the 420-tonne station as it has swept over Earth at 17,000 mph, making 16 orbits of our world every day. Accommodation on the 109-metre-long station includes six sleeping quarters, two toilets, a gym – and, most popular of all, a European-built set of bay windows, called the Cupola, which provides 360-degree views and allows astronauts to gaze as storms have gathered, and the Sun has risen, over Earth. Tim Peake, the only official British astronaut to make it to the ISS, was a particular fan of the Cupola, where, he says, he first looked at our planet and realised how fragile it is. “You can see the atmosphere, which is only 16km thick. It is not endless,” he recalled in a BBC interview. “All of the gas that keeps us alive on Earth is trapped in that tiny, tiny layer. You suddenly realise that what we put into that layer is really important.” More mundane aspects of station life have included guitar serenades by floating astronauts; a piece of culinary history made by Italian astronaut Samantha Cristoforetti, who drank the first espresso made in outer space out of a zero-gravity mug; and dealing with a series of broken toilets – “the part of the station which attracts most curiosity back on Earth, I discovered”, says Peake. And these domestic details are important, scientists insist. “Running the International Space Station has shown us that human beings can make their homes away from their own planet in outer space, which is a truly hostile environment,” said astrobiologist Professor Charles Cockell of Edinburgh University. “That has been a critically important lesson for us.” Plans to build a permanent orbiting space station were first drawn up in the 1980s by Nasa. However, forecasts of costs indicated these would be alarmingly high – until the collapse of the Soviet Union offered an opportunity to cooperate with Russia. Its space engineers had already gained considerable experience of long-term space missions with their own small orbiting Salyut stations and the much larger Mir station. “It was also a highly pragmatic move by the United States,” said Professor Anu Ojha, a director of the National Space Centre, Leicester. “America wanted to prevent Soviet space experts from getting snapped up by rogue states as the USSR disintegrated. So it sought to get them involved in a joint space programme so that it could keep them at home and give them some degree of input. The ISS was perfect for that.” In the end, the two nations agreed on a plan for the ISS’s construction, with Canadian and Japanese space agencies also agreeing to join the project, along with the European Space Agency, of which the UK is a key member. Assembly of the station began in 1998 and required more than 30 flights by US space shuttles and 40 by Russian rockets to take components and modules to the station before its completion in 2011. For years, astronauts were preoccupied with constructing the station, and only relatively recently have they been able to concentrate on doing serious science, including running more than 3,000 experiments in collaboration with thousands of scientists on Earth. The final bill for constructing the ISS came to more than $100bn. The station soaks up $4bn a year in maintenance costs and service flights. Most of this has been paid by the US. The question is: was this vast expenditure worth it? Planetary science expert Professor Ian Crawford of Birkbeck, University of London, believes it was. “The ISS is a fantastic example of high-profile international cooperation at a time when the world desperately needs examples of activities that can bring people and nations together. And learning how to live and work in space will stand us in good stead as we prepare to return to the Moon and possibly send people to Mars.” Other scientists take a different stance, however. “There is no way you could justify the vast sums the have been spent on building the ISS,” said the astronomer royal, Sir Martin Rees. “For a start, the scientific returns have been meagre. We have learned a bit about how the body reacts to spending long periods in space, and we have grown a few crystals in zero gravity, but that is in no way commensurate to the tens of billions of dollars that have spent on the ISS. Really, the station only makes news when its toilets get blocked or an astronaut sings while floating about with a guitar.” Nasa’s money would have been better spent on launching robot missions to other planets or constructing orbiting observatories, Rees added – a view that is backed by the physicist and Nobel laureate Steve Weinberg of the University of Texas at Austin. “The only interesting science done on the ISS has been the study of cosmic rays by the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, but astronauts played no role in its operation,” he told the Observer. “It could have been placed in orbit much more cheaply by an unmanned mission.” Ojha added that he was initially very doubtful about the scientific rationale for the ISS but was now convinced it was a major success. “What we have achieved in terms of human spaceflight experience, space engineering, and scientific yield has been immense. We have learned how to assemble huge structures in space and live for long periods up there while dealing with all sorts of incidents that have arisen. It is crucial we do not waste that experience.” A key lesson learned from studying ISS astronauts has been the impacts of prolonged periods of zero gravity on the human body. These include muscle loss, bone density reductions, and vision and taste impairment. Scientists have found it can take several years for an astronaut to recover their bone density after a four- or five-month space mission. On the other hand, by using treadmills and weight machines, astronauts can avoid the worst effects of muscle loss. Nasa is scheduled to continue funding the ISS for four or five years and has said it then hopes private companies will take over and run it commercially while the agency funds more cutting-edge missions to explore and settle on the Moon, and possibly one day take humans to Mars. These projects will involve building Gateway, a smaller version of the space station, in orbit round the Moon as a stopping off point to explore the lunar surface. But is private enterprise interested in taking over the ISS? Early interest has been expressed by a number of companies who say they want to work there. The Texas-based company Axiom Space has signed a deal with Nasa to build a module where research on novel materials would be carried out; actor Tom Cruise and director Doug Liman are scheduled to fly to the station next year on a SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule to shoot scenes for an action adventure film; and the forthcoming reality TV contest, Space Hero – scheduled for screening in 2023 – has announced plans to send a winner to the ISS. Whether ventures like these will be enough to provide the billions of dollars needed to run the station remains to be seen. The alternative would be to dismantle the ISS and send its components spiralling down to the Earth in the hope they would be destroyed as they burn up in the atmosphere. And that would be a terrible waste, says Cockell. “It was a hell of an effort to get everyone to agree to the station and then to build it. We would have little chance of building another one in the near future if we lose this one, so we need to encourage companies to keep the station going for at least another decade.”
12||Lost letters reveal JM Barrie and Robert Louis Stevenson's mutual affectionThey are two of the greatest writers in history and they were also the greatest of friends. But they never met, and the importance and intensity of their relationship has never before been fully understood. Now, the lost letters of JM Barrie to Robert Louis Stevenson – missing for over a century – have been found in a cardboard box in a library archive and will be published for the first time in a forthcoming book. The letters reveal how ardently the young Barrie both adored and admired Stevenson, who was an older and more established writer. A year into their friendship, which was initiated by Stevenson, Barrie wrote to him: “To be blunt I have discovered (have suspected it for some time) that I love you, and if you had been a woman...” He leaves the sentence unfinished. He also imagines in the letters that he and Stevenson are related and were descended from the same Scottish family, a fantasy that allows him to open up to the older man about the intimacies of his family life and his close relationship with his mother. Treasure Island had already been published when the two authors began corresponding in 1892; 12 years later, Barrie went on to write his own masterpiece, Peter Pan, about a dangerous amputated pirate, a young boy and a journey to a far-off fantasy island. He repeatedly fantasises in his letters about meeting Stevenson, who had left their native Scotland in 1879 and was living in Samoa to improve his health. In one letter, Barrie even writes a funny, self-deprecating playlet – never seen before – in which he imagines himself visiting Stevenson’s 314-acre estate, and Stevenson “glumly” saying to his wife about Barrie: “Perhaps he will improve after he has rested a bit.” In reality, Barrie was held back from ever making that thrilling journey to Stevenson’s Pacific island paradise by his desire to stay near his frail, elderly mother – feelings he later explores intensely in Peter Pan – and had to content himself with merely writing 3,000-word letters to his beloved friend. Later, he recounts Stevenson’s whimsical directions to the island of Samoa (“you take the boat at San Francisco, and then my place is second to the left”), which seem to echo Peter Pan’s famous directions for the island of Neverland: “Second to the right and straight on till morning.” While many of Stevenson’s letters to Barrie appeared in print soon after Stevenson’s death in 1894 and the rest were published over the course of the 20th century, Barrie’s side of the correspondence has, until now, remained a mystery. Dr Michael Shaw, a lecturer in Scottish literature at the University of Stirling, stumbled across the missing letters while looking through a neglected box of correspondence at Beinecke Library in Yale University. “When I first saw them, I didn’t realise that these were lost letters,” he told the Observer. “I just assumed that they had been published and I didn’t know about them. I was judging myself, thinking I really should have read these.” It was only when he tried to buy a book of the correspondence and researched why it was not available that he realised what he had unearthed. In Shaw’s forthcoming book, A Friendship in Letters, Barrie and Stevenson’s letters to each other are published together for the first time. “What’s revealed in these letters – and it took me a while to discover the full extent of this – is the influence that both Stevenson and the correspondence have on Barrie,” said Shaw. “In reading over Barrie’s works, I started to see allusions to the letters and to Stevenson that I hadn’t noticed before.” Barrie, he said, loves to play games with his writing and unsettle the line between art and reality. “And I could see how he was doing that with the correspondence. He’s incorporating aspects of the correspondence into his own works, into his poetry and novels, and their friendship is also inspiring his works.” He tries to keep his bond with Stevenson alive in other ways, too. Odd little phrases Stevenson used in his letters creep into Barrie’s stories, and Peter Pan was placed in the same imaginary world as Treasure Island. Long John Silver (who is known by his aliases of Barbecue and Sea-Cook in Neverland) is afraid of only one man, readers are told: Captain Hook. “As a literary critic, I’m trained to be sceptical of biography coming into literary text,” said Shaw, “but the more I re-read Peter Pan, the more potential references I found not just to Treasure Island but to Stevenson, Samoa and their life.” Barrie has a real desire to incorporate Stevenson and his affection for Stevenson in his works, he believes. “I think what Barrie is saying is: if I can never meet Stevenson, because he has unfortunately died, then I want to create the opportunity for our characters to meet. “I think he liked that idea that they could occupy the same world, and could potentially bump into each other.”
5||Why can't questions be asked of Facebook's ads?Facebook wants you to know that it’s being transparent about political ads, requiring advertisers to verify their identity and to show who paid for an ad. But it doesn’t want to be too transparent. It has sent cease and desist letters to two New York University researchers, Laura Edelson and Damon McCoy, part of the Online Political Transparency Project, who are investigating how people are targeted by ads. They helped develop a browser plug-in called Ad Observer, which allows people voluntarily to share data about political ads on Facebook. Edelson and McCoy are particularly interested in two aspects of political ads that Facebook won’t publicly discuss – how particular people are targeted and how campaigns craft messages based on criteria such as race or age. Facebook claims that Ad Observer compromises privacy. This, observes Alex Abdo, a lawyer representing Edelson and McCoy, is “ridiculous”, given that “the plug-in’s users voluntarily sign up to donate data” and it “does not share any personally identifying information”. Facebook also claims that Ad Observer violates its terms of service by automating the collection of data. There are good reasons for blocking data aggregators, but Facebook is trying to block not data aggregation but academic research. It’s not the first time it has tried to do so. Researchers have long called for the company to allow research in the public interest. It has so far refused. The issue here is not simply about political ads. It’s about who controls the narrative. At a time when Facebook, Twitter and other tech businesses are making huge decisions that affect public debate, from blocking tweets to taking down accounts, not only is transparency important, but it is important, too, that the tech giants themselves don’t get to define what it means. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
25||The big picture: magical realism in everyday DublinThe Irish writer Colm Tóibín was first introduced to the photographs of Tony O’Shea when he was an editor at a magazine called In Dublin back in the late 1970s. O’Shea was in the habit of coming to the magazine’s office every other Friday with a cardboard box containing a fortnight’s black-and-white prints, pictures he’d taken around the city’s streets. The photographs, Tóibín observed, in the introduction to their landmark collaborative book of 1990, Dubliners, “were like nothing I’d ever seen”. He looked forward to O’Shea’s arrival, and each time, though the magazine might be going to press, found himself “taking the cardboard box away with me, looking through the photos again and again on my own and wondering about them”. It was Tóibín who first sent O’Shea out on Dublin buses for a story to capture the life of the city from the upper deck. You would never say of O’Shea’s pictures that anything was typical of his work, but this photograph taken in 1989 of two boys and the kestrel is a memorable example of the magical realism that he so often seemed to locate in the everyday. Strange animal spirits are everywhere apparent in his pictures: raggedy boys stand on horseback on city streets, hounds are held at bay on misty bogland; in a famous series, Dublin housewives carry Christmas turkeys home from a side-street butcher, heads and necks and beaks dangling at their knees. O’Shea is 73 now. A retrospective book of his life’s work to date, The Light of Day, is full of natural wonders and human struggles that surface from the borderlands during the Troubles and in the rituals and recreation of his city. Each image wants to be a short story. And there is genius in revealing the teenage kestrel handlers’ eyes to be quite as bright and sharp as the bird he holds. The Light of Day is published next month by RRB Photobooks and the Gallery of Photography Ireland (£40) An exhibition of his work will be shown at the Gallery of Photography, Ireland, next year.
3||Frustration is rising as clampdowns spread across UK: are we in grip of Covid fatigue?As the people of Sheffield prepared to join Greater Manchester and the Liverpool city region in the premier league of Covid-19 restrictions – tier 3 – there were widely differing views on whether the tough new rules about to be imposed from London were welcome, or would even work. On the streets and in the city’s pubs last Thursday evening there was, however, one commonly held opinion – compliance would be some way short of total. “During the first part of lockdown I abided by the rules very strictly,” said Phillip, a 47-year-old gas engineer, as he waited for a pork wrap outside the Greedy Greek Deli. “We still are doing that, but it’s wearing thin. I think the economy and life still has to go on. But then it’s a balancing act with the NHS and the beds.” Back in March when Boris Johnson shut down most of the country including schools, most people understood and obeyed. “Proper lockdown was easy,” said Jason, 29, sitting on a wall on Sharrow Vale Road eating a butty. “You knew what you could and couldn’t do and you just did that.” Like many others he seemed less sure this time. Simon, 36, who works in hospitality and travels a lot with his work, said his attitudes had been influenced by seeing others breaking the rules and ignoring guidance, meeting people outside their households in places where doing so was banned. If they broke the rules, why shouldn’t he? He said: “We’re sat next to a couple in the pub whose opening gambit was ‘so, how’s things?’ They’ve clearly not seen each other for a while. When you look around and see other people who probably don’t even live in the same postcode, you kind of go: ‘fuck the rules.’” Yesterday some 1.2 million people in South Yorkshire joined around 2.8 million in Greater Manchester and 3.1 million in Lancashire and the Liverpool city region in tier 3. In these areas, social mixing is banned indoors and in private gardens while pubs and bars have to close unless they serve substantial meals. Stoke-on-Trent, Slough and Coventry have also joined London in tier 2. Scotland is to enter a new five-tier system of restrictions from 2 November; Northern Ireland has adopted much tougher restrictions; and a 17-day “fire break” is under way in Wales meaning most non-essential businesses are closed, with people only able to leave home for limited reasons. Supermarkets removed non-essential items from sale – including clothing, kitchen electricals and crockery – using barriers and plastic sheets to cover products. But seven months into the pandemic the views of people in places such as Sheffield raise a very serious question – aside from the intense scientific debates – about whether, whatever the new rules are here and there, the country has still got the stomach for the fight? Professor Susan Michie, director of the centre for behaviour change at University College London and a participant in the government’s scientific committee Sage, rejects the idea that “pandemic fatigue” has set in. But she believes there is a real compliance problem that is of the government’s own making. “There is no evidence to suggest people are getting tired. People are getting angry, frustrated and resentful – they’re not getting tired,” she told the Observer. “The collective solidarity of ‘we’re all in this together’ is a really important part of people following challenging restrictions, [but] adherence is being undermined by many kinds of perceived unfairness.” Michie believes the tolerance of Dominic Cummings’ trip to Durham in the spring, the perceived fuelling of a north-south divide which culminated in the rows over financial support involving Greater Manchester’s mayor, Andy Burnham, and “the ideology of privatisation, giving huge amounts of money seemingly to their contacts” for the test, trace and isolate programme have savaged public confidence and, in turn, compliance. She added that communities did not feel involved or consulted: “There isn’t a strategy that makes sense to an overwhelming majority of people. The restrictions haven’t worked, communities have not been engaged with and instead they have been blamed. The government blames health professionals for using too much PPE, it blames people for having tests, it blames young people – it does not celebrate good practice or make people feel good about themselves or pride in what they’ve achieved.” Michie was backed by social psychologist Professor Stephen Reicher, at the University of St Andrews, and Molly Byrne, director of the Health Behaviour Change Research Group and a public health adviser to the Irish government. Both said Westminster’s approach of imposing fines and encouraging neighbours to snitch on one another would backfire. “It’s a bad road to go down,” said Byrne. “The data shows that the vast majority of people want to adhere to the measures in their areas and it’s really important to boost those levels of solidarity and trust.” On Friday, a major report by the London School of Economics revealed that government policies had exacerbated the problem of non-compliance. Researchers advised that communities be put at the centre of pandemic policy if the rules were expected to be followed. Reicher said: “If people see restrictions which don’t seem to have achieved very much being imposed again, they will be sceptical. The British public have shown remarkable resilience and would get behind a national lockdown. The polling has consistently shown that by a ratio of three to one, people want the government to do more rather than less and do it sooner rather than later.” When Sage first recommended a short national circuit breaker or full lockdown on 21 September, as opposed to regional interventions, infection rates in England stood at 4,500 a day. A month on, the figure is four times that. The latest Opinium poll for the Observer this weekend suggests lack of faith in the government’s handling of the pandemic is indeed growing, hand in hand with public confusion and increasing lack of compliance. Approval of the government’s response to Covid is now at a record low of 29%, with 50% disapproving. Some 50% of people say the new three-tier system in England is clear but 44% say it is not, while 34% say they aren’t confident that they know what the rules are in their own area. And among young people aged 18 to 34 the proportion admitting to flouting the rules has risen in two weeks from 10% to 17%. Among those aged 35 to 44 it has risen from 10% to 18%. A sense that the spirit of national solidarity is crumbling is fuelled by parts of the media who believe the restrictions have gone way too far. Yesterday the Daily Mail splashed with “It’s Covid Hysteria”, adding a list of what it regarded as examples of interventionist madness saying “supermarkets ban sock sales, CCTV spies on social distancing, road checks on Welsh border, teacher threatens playdate pupils with police”. But as the Mail rails against diktats, many scientists take the opposite line – that the restrictions on our lives have gone nowhere near far enough. “At the end of March we went into a very severe lockdown. Students were not at university, children were not at school, and pubs and restaurants were all closed and even then we only managed to bring the virus reproduction value R down to just below one,” said mathematician Michael Tildesley, at Warwick University. In comparison, tier 3, the most severe set of new restrictions that can be imposed in England, still allows students to attend university, children to be at school and pubs and cafes to remain open to a limited extent. “My worry is that tier 3 won’t bring us close enough to the crucial ‘R equals one’ level that has to be reached to ensure that case numbers start to come down,” he added. “We could easily get a situation where cities like Manchester or Liverpool will never be able to come out of tier 3 because they cannot get ‘R below 1’. That is my real worry. All we are going to see is tighter and tighter restrictions being imposed and that will have long-term economic consequences and pose threats to people’s mental health.” Like other experts he backs a draconian national circuit breaker in which really severe lockdown measures are imposed for a fixed period. “People would know that it was only a fairly short period and would tolerate it,” said Tildesley. “Certainly, if we don’t do something now, we will soon be in real trouble.” In Westminster, any semblance of political consensus has disappeared, replaced by open division. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has argued for the same kind of circuit breaker over half-term, while accusing Johnson of having “lost control” of the virus. Worries that the government has not been tough enough were expressed also by Professor Neil Ferguson, of Imperial College London. He told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme on Saturday that the NHS would not be able to cope with the current rate of growth in numbers of Covid cases for much longer. New restrictions on households mixing should have a “significant effect”, he said, but these might not be enough and further action might be needed. “There is a limit to what we can do in terms of reducing contacts, short of starting to target, for instance, the older years in schools and sixth-form colleges where we know older teenagers are able to transmit as adults. Of course, nobody wants to start moving to virtual education and closing schools even partially. The challenge may be that we are not able to get on top of the transmission otherwise.” The government’s failure to provide consistent warnings of the disease’s danger to the public was another major factor in the current rise in numbers of cases, added Bharat Pankhania, of Exeter University Medical School. “They launched their ‘eat out to help out’ to encourage people to go to restaurants without giving any additional advice about the need to continue to be vigilant – and that was a real mistake,” he said. “We need to be giving much better advice to people on how deal with this virus.” Pankhania also urged that the government’s test-and-trace system be moved into local areas. “We need a much slicker operation and that sort of thing can be done much better at a local level. We are going to need our trace-and-track services for a long time, I suspect.” Michie adds that confusion is inevitable among the public as the arguments rage. “People are understandably confused. Over time they become disengaged and think: ‘you know what, I’ll try and extract my own principles and do my own risk assessment and management.’” Back in Sheffield some were indeed making their own assessments, bending the rules where they felt they could. A young resident called Rebecca said she had recently “intimately kissed” on a date, insisting it was not a moment of complete abandon but a measured decision. She said: “I judged it on if, you know [I believed] the other person was taking precautions”, rather than on what the strict letter of the latest government rules told her she was allowed to do.
12||Anatomy of a Killing by Ian Cobain review – a death that casts new light on the TroublesIn certain parts of Northern Ireland in the late 1970s, a stranger arriving at the door could provoke panic, even terror. The town of Lisburn, near Belfast, was not such a place. Predominantly Protestant and home to many members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), it had for the most part escaped the violence that had ravaged other parts of the province. Up until 1977, as Ian Cobain puts it, “not a single member of the security forces had lost their life in Lisburn”. All that would change on the morning of Saturday, 22 April 1978, when Millar McAllister, a police photographer, opened the back door of his home in Woodland Park, having glimpsed a figure moving in his back garden. He was shot three times at close range, twice in the chest and the third time, as he was lying on the ground, in the head. In the silence that followed, the killer noticed McAllister’s seven-year-old son, Alan, standing just inside the kitchen door, frozen to the spot. They stared at each other for a long moment until the boy started screaming. The stranger ran to a waiting car, the boy’s cries echoing in his head, In Lost Lives, the vast book of historical record that chronologically documents every death in the Troubles, Millar McAllister is listed as victim number 2,017. The bare facts of his life are outlined thus: RUC, Protestant, 36, married, two children. In Anatomy of a Killing, Ian Cobain rescues him from the abyss of history, tracing the arc of his short life and contrasting it with the still ongoing, altogether more tangled, life of Harry Murray, his killer. By reconstructing a single murder – its planning, its ruthless execution and its protracted aftermath – through in-depth interviews and the careful sifting of not always reliable evidence from official records, Cobain also casts new light on the culture of terrorist violence and state repression that defined Northern Ireland during 30 years of conflict. Cobain is a seasoned, award-winning investigative journalist (most recently for the Guardian), who also sketches the social and historical context that spawned the Troubles. Throughout, his style is brisk and his tone level-headed, the violence he chronicles often evoked through spartan, but chillingly descriptive, detail. Of the aftermath of the IRA bombing of the La Mon hotel restaurant, which happened on 17 February 1978, just a few months before the murder of Millar McAllister, he writes: “Twelve people, including three married couples, died in the blast. All were Protestant. The dead were so badly burned and shrivelled by the flames that firemen thought initially that some of them were children.” Hell is in the details. Amid such carnage, the death of an individual could pass all too swiftly into the anonymous realm of statistics, forgotten by all but family members and loved ones. Cobain’s book is, among other things, an act of reclamation. It is also, in its skilful telling, a tale of two ordinary lives converging with the inexorability of a Greek tragedy. Millar McAllister joined the RUC in 1961, when the Troubles, as Cobain puts it, “were barely visible on the horizon”. He had two hobbies: photography and racing pigeons. The former provided him with a well-paid job; the second unwittingly led to his death. McAllister wrote a monthly column for Pigeon Racing News and Gazette under the byline “The Copper”, which was accompanied by his photograph. When an IRA suspect, who was being held at the Castlereagh interrogation centre in east Belfast, recognised McAllister from the photo, the word went out to find him. Soon afterwards, Harry Murray was dispatched with another young volunteer to carry out his execution. In almost every way, Murray comes across as the polar opposite of the level-headed McAllister: impetuous, impressionable and instinctively rebellious. What they had in common is that they were both Protestants, Murray being one of the very few from his community to join the IRA. A few years before, he had been driven out of his home in loyalist Tiger’s Bay in Belfast by local paramilitaries. His transgression was to marry a Catholic. Having been resettled where his wife grew up in nationalist north Belfast, he grew increasingly sympathetic to the republican cause. Murray seems to have drifted into the ranks of the Provisionals much like, years before, he had enlisted on impulse with the Royal Air Force and served overseas. His military career ended abruptly after one too many breaches of discipline. “I just couldn’t take orders,” he tells Cobain without irony. Murray’s renegade life was not without principle, however. During his induction into the IRA, he claims to have told his recruiters there were two things he would not do: kneecappings and shooting Protestants “just because they were Protestant”. Like all IRA combatants, though, he regarded the RUC as the enemy in a just war, and, as Cobain discovers, remains remarkably free of remorse for the brutal taking of Millar McAllister’s life. In 1983, while serving time for the killing, Murray would take part in an audacious IRA jailbreak from Long Kesh prison, shooting a prison officer in the leg before being wounded himself. On his recapture, he was set upon by prison officers who berated him as “a turncoat bastard”. As with Patrick Radden Keefe’s recent book, Say Nothing, which uses the IRA’s “disappearance” of Jean McConville in 1972 as the starting point for an illuminating exploration of the conflict, Anatomy of a Killing deftly merges history, social context and anecdotal testimony. Cobain explores the psychology of political violence, citing a study from 1978 which found that, rather than being the psychopaths of tabloid headlines, the IRA’s “political killers tended to be normal in intelligence and mental stability”. He also suggests that vengeance may have been a crucial motivating factor for young men joining the Provisionals and, in Murray’s case, it is clear that he has never forgiven his own community for the humiliation of his expulsion. The immediate aftermath of the killing also makes for deeply unsettling reading. On information obtained from an IRA informer, Murray and his accomplices were arrested and taken to Castlereagh, where they were beaten and interrogated relentlessly by Special Branch men working in shifts. Anne, an IRA courier, confesses to her role and, Cobain writes, “appears to have suffered a fairly complete physical and psychological breakdown”. The man she gave the gun to after the killing, Brian Maguire, whom Cobain describes as “highly strung”, was not an IRA member. He was interrogated non-stop for 12 hours and, the next morning, was found hanged in his cell. His death remains disputed. Among the revelations in Cobain’s book is testimony given at the time by another suspect called Phelim, which provides what Cobain calls “an accurate description of the torture technique that became known as waterboarding when used by the CIA in the years after 9/11”. If there is much that is compelling in Anatomy of a Killing, what lingers longest is the awful mundanity of the events leading up to and after the killing. Cobain describes how, on that fateful morning, Anne calmly carried the gun from Belfast to Lisburn on a bus, and, having arrived early, went shopping for a birthday present for her brother. Just a few hours after he killed McAllister, Murray returned to Lisburn to play football on a pitch close to his victim’s home. As the Troubles begin to fade into history and forgetting, it is in these incidental actions that the deep moral fracture caused by the conflict comes sharply and chillingly into focus. We would do well to remember how quickly violence can become almost normalised in a culture riven by intractable differences of identity and belonging. • Anatomy of a Killing: Life and Death on a Divided Island by Ian Cobain is published by Granta (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
10||Into the night: why walking in the dark is good for the soulThe lights from the cottagewindows recede, all too rapidly, as we walk along an unlit country lane and take a footpath through a field into open countryside. Thick cloud cover prevents the moonlight from illuminating the way ahead. Yet, as my eyes begin to get used to the darkness, the landscape around me reveals itself in a new light – albeit a shady one. The contours of Mount Caburn, an iron-age hill fort, are like shadows against the sky. On the horizon, a tree bent by the wind is silhouetted, and the rocky outcrop at the top of the field turns out to be a flock of sleeping sheep. A fox cries, a pheasant crows and the air is full of a heady earthy scent. “For most of human history man lived in close contact with the land,” says Nigel Berman, my guide, whose company, School of the Wild, organises guided night walks on the South Downs. “Only in the past few hundred years have we shut ourselves off from our natural surroundings. Walking at night is a powerful way of reconnecting . When your vision is reduced, your other senses are sharpened.” Darkness is a thing we have come to fear and shy away from. It has become a metaphor for evil and depression, a place held at bay by our electric-lit world. But in the parts where darkness holds sway for much of the winter, inhabitants embrace it rather than yearning for longer days. In the Arctic Circle during the polar night, when the sun never rises and the Earth is swathed in darkness for several months, the Norwegians simply wrap up, strap on a head torch and head for the hills. As nights in the UK close in and a Covid-induced indoor isolation looms, it is a perfect opportunity to take note and go into the countryside, or walk across a deserted beach, to see starlit skies and moonlit rocks, spot owls, see bats swooping and breathe in the night air. Nigel and I walk from Glynde, a village near Glyndebourne opera house, across the South Downs towards the town of Lewes. It’s a walk I know well by day but at night everything is different, and a familiar stroll becomes a mini adventure. The lighter strip of sky above it highlights the ridge of the downs that we head towards to start. At the top, we edge along a wire fence looking for the gate that will take us along a path through the Mount Caburn nature reserve to Oxteddle Bottom. When Nigel told me not to bring a torch, I was alarmed. I can’t remember the last time I used my night vision and I’m not even aware of how it works. Nigel explains that in the dark our pupils not only expand to allow light in they also switch to use different light sensors. In bright light, cone-shaped sensors respond to different colours of light and allow us to see fine detail, but in the dark the eyes switch to rod-shaped sensors, far more sensitive to light but unable to sense colours. We descend past clumps of trees into the darker, hill-surrounded valley, aiming for the eerie shimmer of a dew pond where we pause to sit. I’m aware of the breeze caressing my face, the rustle of leaves and, as I watch the clouds swirling and slowly changing colour against the sky like a natural sound and light show, it feels mesmeric. Normally at this time of night I’d be having a glass of wine in front of the television, but being out in the countryside is a purer form of relaxation. I forget about work and family tensions and begin to blend into the surroundings. There is no one other than Nigel to see or hear me and, with little visual distraction, my mind calms. Walking at night is not without risk, but with knowledge and preparation it opens up a new side to walking. For example, it’s important to know your route by day so that you know what features to pick out by night; to have good navigational skills; take the right kit (hat, gloves, insulated layers and a daypack with a flask of hot drink); and pick favourable weather. A deep unfamiliar sound rouses me from my reverie and Nigel tells me it is the “cronk” call of the raven. We continue walking and, having got used to the dark, the chalk path that leads up the escarpment of Saxon Down now appears to almost shine in front of us. We climb carefully, feeling, rather than groping for, our way on the uneven ground. As we reach the top, Lewes appears below as a twinkly mass of lights, a sight I’d generally think of as inviting. But in just a few hours I have gone over to the dark side and find myself reluctant to walk back down. Walking at night is like discovering a new world on your doorstep, one that allows you to roam beyond the duration of winter’s short days and explore in the time of Covid. As Henry David Thoreau wrote in Night and Moonlight: “Night is certainly more novel and less profane than day.” • Guided mindful night walks are available from schoolofthewild.com, price information is available through the website More ways to explore by night National parks are some of the best places to see the star-studded autumn and winter skies, and there are a number of dark sky festivals that include organised stargazing walks. • darkskiesnationalparks.org.uk The Bat Conservation Trust has groups across the UK and most run local bat walks. • bats.org.uk Ramblers groups offer group night walks. • ramblers.org.uk Many charities now run organised night walks as a way of raising money. The original MoonWalk, organised by breast cancer charity Walk the Walk, now takes place all around the world. • walkthewalk.org
3||Rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccine, say scientistsScientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Finn said such confusion could cause setbacks in dealing with Covid, adding: “We should be preparing to meet this challenge and work out ways to compare the effectiveness of early vaccines – but at present we are not doing that well enough.” A total of 198 Covid vaccines are now under development across the globe with four key versions undergoing final phase 3 trials. These include Pfizer’s BNT162b2 and the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine. Results of those trials – in which each is compared with a placebo – are expected in weeks or months. Once the first vaccine that shows efficacy in countering Covid-19 is revealed, there will be enormous pressure to use it immediately. Key candidates would be healthcare workers who deal with Covid cases and others at high risk of becoming infected. But for groups such as the elderly, who tend to have weaker immune systems, caution will be required. “The problem is that early vaccine trials are not likely to show how well these products work in these populations,” said Kanta Subbarao, a World Health Organization director, in an editorial in Nature last week. “We know vaccines often work better in young, healthy adults, which is why they are enhanced with a higher dose or an adjuvant to boost immunity for diseases such as flu and shingles. It is also unclear how well clinical trials will assess effectiveness in those in minority ethnic communities.” In other words, by spring, several vaccines may have passed their trials without any mechanism being in place to select which is the most effective for different groups. Nor is the problem confined to the UK. “The complexity and chaos and confusion that will happen in a few short months has hardly dawned on anybody,” Dr Gregory Poland, director of the Vaccine Research Group at the Mayo Clinic, told the New York Times. It is expected that approval would be given to any vaccine that protects at least half of those injected with it. The problem will come when other vaccines appear and it is unclear whether or not they are better than the first licensed product. Bryan Deane, a director at the Association of British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI), said: “There was a lot of over-optimistic talk earlier this year about Britain having a vaccine before Christmas. However, that really looks unlikely now. Results of trials are not likely to arrive until next year, and when they do they are likely to come out sequentially. “The first one that shows any significant protection will be the one people will want to start using straightaway. The problem will be that when the others come through their trials, you won’t be able to say that one is better than another because we have not set up ways to compare them.” This concern was backed by Finn. “It is a paradox. If we get a vaccine that works, but not very well, it’s almost worse than not having one at all because it gets in the way of getting a better vaccine. We need to be thinking about it to avoid that situation urgently.”
14||For Halloween match dark lips with facial glowIn the run-up to Halloween, you’ll see a lot of impractical makeup options. While I accept pragmatism isn’t at the top of Halloween’s cosmetic agenda, if you’d rather something less terrifying, try Rodarte’s AW20 look. The trick is to juxtapose brooding lips with a glowy – not ghostly – face. Mimic skin by mixing in a bit of foundation with moisturiser. Apply subtle hints of highlighter to your cheekbones, add a dark eyeliner and finish off with a moody lip. 1. Dior Rouge Dior Ultra Rouge Lipstick £30, dior.com 2. Dolce &amp; Gabbana Passion Lips Lipstick £36, harrods.com 3. Laura Mercier Caviar Intense Ink Waterproof Liquid Eyeliner £22, feelunique.com 4. Westman Atelier Super Loaded Highlight £69, net-a-porter.com 5. Guerlain Rouge G de Guerlain Lipstick £26, guerlain.com I can’t do without… An excellent but simple cleanser that doesn’t break the bank Long before single-ingredient products became fashionable, Indeed Laboratories was there, quietly getting on with it producing clever formulations at great prices. As someone who grew up battling skin issues, I have always had a soft spot for efficacious, targeted skincare brands that are not financially prohibitive. The basis of good skincare is a decent cleanser, but even the very best shouldn’t cost you three figures – so if yours does, you are wasting your money. Especially when you have this. Now, a lot of cream cleansers irk me because I find they don’t clean well enough and they leave a residue on the skin. This one, however, has a myriad of characteristics I could champion all day long. The formula is made up of hyaluronic acid (hence the name) thereby enhancing moisture in the skin. It also includes a resurfacer and exfoliant that is gentle but powerful (clinically proven to brighten skin in 14 days) and grapeseed oil, which is a non-clogging source of antioxidants that also helps to reduce hyperpigmentation. The texture – a thick cream that lathers, but not too much – cleans like a gel counterpart. Like really cleans, but not in a way that leaves my skin feeling tight. Instead, my skin feels completely balanced. Which means on the days I am feeling particularly lazy I can skip my toner and go straight to moisturising. Always a winner in my book. Indeed Laboratories Hydraluron Cream Cleanser, £19.99, boots.com On my radar… A trio of body treats to sooth and smooth Salt of the earth Using avocado oil and sustainably sourced mineral salts from the Dead Sea and Kalahari desert, these bath salts create a relaxing soak, replenishing moisture and soothing aching muscles. Olverum Bath Salts, £37, spacenk.com Called to the bar I’m obsessed with this body-exfoliating bar. It has orange blossom and neroli, as well as bamboo powder for dead skin, and sunflower seed and aloe vera to lock in moisture. Glossier Body Hero Exfoliating Bar, £12, glossier.com Cream de la cream This thick luxe body cream – infused with soothing saffron flowers and moisturising shea butter and babassu – is excellent for dry skin. Feel the silkiness. Sisley Velvet Nourishing Body Cream, £102, sisley-paris.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto
18||Bail out our musicians or risk losing them for ever, say classical music starsLeading figures in classical music say many highly-trained orchestral musicians are giving up on music as they face homelessness and hunger this autumn. Speaking to the Observer this weekend, the internationally renowned conductor Sir Simon Rattle warned that an “exodus is happening right now”, while top English soloists the violinist Tasmin Little and the pianist Stephen Hough both spoke of despair and desperation among even successful performers. “Next month, we will all expect to hear the traditional sound of music as we commemorate Armistice Day,” said Little, an acclaimed virtuoso musician who trained as a child at the Yehudi Menuhin School. “But consider who is playing all this beautiful music for us and where it will come from in the future?” When the Last Post sounds, Little suggests, it will be heralding the end of Britain’s celebrated musical culture if there is no rescue for thousands of professional freelance musicians without work. She called on the government to support more distanced concerts to make them commercially viable for venues. Earlier this month, leading orchestras and music festivals received a first government bailout grant, including Rattle’s London Symphony Orchestra. But there is renewed concern that the majority of musicians who are freelancers have no safety net while only a few socially distanced concerts are staged. “While some of us working in established institutions have been fortunate to be given grants that help us to hang on, the vast majority of freelancers are in a desperate situation,” said Rattle. Institutions such as the LSO, BBC Radio 3, London’s Wigmore Hall or Snape Maltings Concert Hall in Suffolk, home of the Aldeburgh festival, have been creating as much paid work as possible since the lockdown eased, staging performances in front of reduced audiences and for live broadcast. But it is a tiny proportion of the scale of music once made. “My worry is that so many musicians will be forced to leave the profession that we will not be able to return to anything like the cultural life that we enjoyed previously. And that this exodus is happening right now, and that it will not be noticed until it is too late,” said Rattle. The controller of Radio 3, Alan Davey, said he hears worry and sometimes despair from musicians on a daily basis. “Everything that was certain for the next year has been thrown into complete uncertainty. “Music has got me through this so far, but musicians are particularly exhausted now because of the effort of finding new ways to reach audiences.” Radio 3 now stages concerts every week for live broadcasts that go out around the world, including a current residency at the Southbank Centre and upcoming events at the Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival. “What we are doing is a small thing, but if we can find ways to do it safely we will keep on, of course, because it matters.” Davey’s words were echoed by Cheshire-born concert pianist Stephen Hough: “It is strange, then distressing, to find oneself suddenly cut off from the joyful exhilaration of making music for an audience,” he said this weekend. “Musicians almost always chose this life not because of financial rewards but because of an inner necessity to communicate the beauty to others. And then … the concerts stop and the money stops too – voice silenced, and pockets emptied.” But Hough said he has found hope by playing at the Wigmore Hall and with the Liverpool Philharmonic, where he performs this week to a small crowd and an online ticketed audience. “It feels like a healing of the soul.” Petroc Trelawny, breakfast presenter on Radio 3, fears the new generation of young musicians will miss their moment to start a career while older audiences will lose the concert-going habit. “You have only a few years to sell yourself as a young performer,” he said. “You start out at the age of seven or eight, with the same commitment a doctor makes but with no guarantee at the end at the best of times,” he said. “There are wonderful things still happening, of course, but there is a danger in taking comfort from that. The vast majority of concerts are not happening. It is pretty grim for most musicians and they are very tired.” Trelawny added that he knows of one “really very famous name who his hit massive financial problems”. The difficulty for freelance musicians, he said, is that even those with viable careers rarely earn enough to save. “Many had just banked on being able to carry on.” For some performers the sudden drop in income has already forced them out of their homes or made the weekly shop unaffordable. He paid tribute to organisations, such as the Oxford Lieder festival, that are “still heroically staging distanced events and online concerts and paying musicians a normal wage” from any remaining funds. He also praised local musical groups, such as one in Kendal which has moved into the local church to allow smaller concert audiences to socially distance. “At the beginning of this, musicians tried to raise our spirits and now they need our help because there is no national organisation protecting them all,” he said. Little, who is playing out her last season as a violinist through the pandemic, having already decided last year to quit at the top of her career, urged music fans to support performers. “A huge percentage of us now have no work and yet we all expect music to be everywhere around us, on the radio, on television and in films. And musicians create great value for this country in terms of culture and the wider economy,” she said. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the spelling of Tasmin Little’s first name.
14||The Danish plot is all about trees, but it’s hard to resist flowers, tooIt took us years to add flowers at the Danish plot. An aesthetic thing to some extent. It is, after all, a simple piece of land by the sea, surrounding a black wooden beach hut, or summerhouse as they call them. There were already delicate wild hepatica, clumps of cowslip and campion, and carpets of celandine and cow parsley. We planted a crimson rugosa, an echo of the beach-side banks that colonise this coast. Next, a pale-blushed clambering rose, an old Danish variety. Here is where we mostly plant trees, replenishing the birch and beech, the larch and pine and fir that grow everywhere. Our first flower for its own sake: a shy naturalising species tulip that promptly disappeared for a few years. Next, Henri’s birthday lily of the valley, set in clumps by tree roots, quietly in keeping with a woodland feel to the plot. But then the species tulip showed and spread, and we were lost in admiration. Most years since, we have added to them, though always in small numbers. Sometimes we’re there when they’re at their best. Other times, we simply find the fallen petals. Our most recent tulip plantings: in late September, pale ‘Coerulea Oculata’ and a more exuberant T acuminata in the longer grass. We also added our first snake’s head fritillary (Fritillaria meleagris from Farmer Gracy) that we dotted though patches of the meadow. These all still in modest amounts. Then, as we were leaving, Henri’s missing parcel arrived with Sarah Raven border tulips and another tall French mix. I blame lockdown loneliness and the siren call of online shopping. I suspect we may stop. Though this year I’m trialling overwintering, calendula covered by clear storage boxes. For now, our thoughts turn to a Danish family Christmas and bright spring. A few more scattered flowers by a northern sea. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.com
0||From climate to China, how Joe Biden is plotting America’s restorationBy any measure, Joe Biden is old in the ways of the world. As Barack Obama’s vice-president, he met all the big international actors. As chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, he helped direct US foreign policy. After four years of Donald Trump’s manic leadership, the Democrat offers a steady, dependable hand on the tiller. Biden’s grand aim: a glorious American restoration, at home and abroad. But his long experience cuts both ways. For many on the left, Biden’s conventional global outlook represents not so much a new dawn as a return to the Washington establishment-led policies of the pre-Trump era. Those hoping for radical action on pressing issues such as the climate crisis, global inequality, or confronting authoritarian “strongman” leaders could be disappointed. If he wins, Biden’s supporters say, America will be back in charge at the global helm. Normal service will resume. Biden’s critics say he is but a pale shadow of his old boss – a cautious, centrist politician like Obama but lacking the latter’s vision. In either case, who Biden selects to be his secretary of state, national security adviser and defence secretary could be crucial. Pressure from Democratic party progressives such as Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren pushed Biden leftwards during the campaign. The twin health and economic crises caused by the coronavirus pandemic also shifted his thinking. He now talks about “reimagining” America’s relationship with the world. Whether his views have really changed remains to be seen. And for all his foreign policy expertise, it’s clear Biden’s primary focus, if elected, will be domestic. Writing in Foreign Affairs magazine earlier this year, he set out a “foreign policy for the middle class” whose top priority was “enabling Americans to succeed in the global economy”. Strengthening the US at home was a prerequisite for restoring global leadership, he said. His priorities were plain. The idea that America must and should lead internationally, and that Trump “abdicated” that duty, is nevertheless hard-wired into Biden, a child of the cold war. This assumption of supremacy is challenged nowadays by those who believe post-1989 and post-9/11 US leadership, and particularly its armed interventions abroad, have served neither the US nor the world. They point to Iraq – a war Biden supported. “If you liked US national security policy before Trump mucked things up, then Biden is probably your kind of guy,” wrote historian Andrew Bacevich, a former army colonel. “Install him in the Oval office and the mindless pursuit of ‘dominance in the name of internationalism’ will resume.” Bacevich argues foreign policy-making – for example, decisions about sanctions on Cuba or Iran – should be taken out of the hands of the foreign policy elite, publicly debated, and democratised. Biden’s is more a top-down approach. To be fair, he says he will rebuild alliances, nurture multilateralism, and always try diplomacy first. But the worry remains that his grand project could become a restoration tragedy, heralding a return to old-fashioned, high-handed American exceptionalism. Climate &amp; health Trump abandoned the Paris climate agreement last year; Biden has pledged to immediately rejoin it, committing the US to meeting international global warming targets by cutting national greenhouse gas emissions. In July he announced a $2tn, four-year plan to invest in a range of climate crisis solutions and a separate scheme to decarbonise the electricity sector by 2035. On the pandemic, Biden has said the US will rejoin the World Health Organization and restore funding. He has proposed a US-led coalition to coordinate the search for a Covid-19 vaccine and new treatments. Democracy &amp; values Biden says the world is caught in a battle between democracy and authoritarianism – and that the US must be at the forefront. “As a nation, we have to prove to the world that the US is prepared to lead again – not just with the example of our power but also with the power of our example,” he wrote in Foreign Affairs. He says he will convene a “global summit for democracy” within his first year in office “to renew the spirit and shared purpose of the nations of the free world”. He has vowed to ensure the US presidency is again seen as a principled defender of open and fair elections, judicial independence, human rights, and free speech. Britain &amp; Europe As a man proud of his Irish roots, Biden is strongly opposed to any Brexit outcome that jeopardises the Good Friday agreement or threatens peace in Ireland. Even if such concerns are allayed, a swift US-UK free trade deal, as promised by Trump, is likely to prove harder to achieve. Given Boris Johnson’s perceived Trump-style brand of rightwing populist politics, Biden is expected to call on Berlin and Paris, rather than London, as preferred partners on European issues. Like Obama, he favours a strong, united EU that makes common cause with the US. Biden may be the undertaker who finally buries the “special relationship”. China Despite Trump’s repeated claims to the contrary, Biden says he will be tough on China, citing its threats to Taiwan, its “unfair” trade practices, and its habit of “robbing” American companies of technology and intellectual property. To do so, he proposes “to build a united front of US allies and partners to confront China’s abusive behaviours and human rights violations – even as we seek to cooperate on issues where our interests converge, such as climate change, non-proliferation and global health security”. He has been notably critical of Beijing’s treatment of Uighur Muslims. Nuclear proliferation Biden plans to revive the system of nuclear arms control treaties with Russia degraded during the Trump years, starting with an extension of the 2010 New Start strategic arms treaty negotiated by Obama. He also says he will rehabilitate the 2015 Iran nuclear deal that Trump abandoned, if Tehran recommits to observing its terms. On North Korea’s nuclear weapons, he has little new to say. However, the modernisation of the US’s own nuclear arsenal, begun by Obama, looks set to continue. Conflicts Biden says he wants to reinvigorate Nato and strengthen alliances in Asia; will adopt a strong deterrent stance in the face of Russia’s anti-western machinations; will try to revive the Israel-Palestine peace process short-circuited by Trump; will end US support for the Saudi war in Yemen; halt family separations on the Mexican border and reform immigration; and support the UN and international law. Like Trump, he also vows to end what he calls “forever wars”. “We should bring the vast majority of our troops home from wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East and narrowly define our missions as defeating al-Qaida and Isis,” he states. Another Middle East war, in Syria, is rarely mentioned. Diplomacy first “Diplomacy requires credibility and Trump has shattered ours,” Biden says. “In the conduct of foreign policy, a nation’s word is its most valuable asset. As president, I will elevate diplomacy as the United States’ principal tool of foreign policy.”
5||The Observer view on Poland's draconian abortion banLast week’s flawed ruling by a constitutional tribunal in Warsaw drastically restricting the right to abortion is a grim reminder that women’s rights and, more broadly, the rule of law are under serious threat in Poland. This oppressive decision is part of a slide towards authoritarianism that began in earnest after the rightwing populist Law and Justice party (PiS) of Jarosław Kaczyński won an absolute majority in 2015. It must not be allowed to continue. Halting this deterioration is, first, a matter for the people of Poland. Although this predominantly Catholic, socially conservative country already has some of the strictest abortion prohibitions in Europe, surveys suggest that only a small minority supports additional curbs. Not for the first time, Kaczyński and PiS are deliberately ignoring the democratic consensus to advance a narrow ideological and religious agenda. Pro-choice supporters have reacted quickly. Angry crowds besieged streets around Kaczyński’s home in Warsaw waving signs that read “You are building women’s hell”. More demonstrations are planned this weekend in a nationwide upsurge of protest reminiscent of 2016, when tens of thousands of women dressed in black marched against earlier anti-abortion legislation. The new restrictions ban terminations in the case of severe foetal impairment, currently the reason given for most legal abortions. In future, abortion in Poland will be allowed only in cases of rape, incest or where there is a threat to the mother’s life. Such cases account for only 2% of legal terminations. Each year, thousands of Polish women seeking abortions are forced to travel abroad. The ruling is a direct assault on women’s rights and a moral obscenity. It is also legally flawed, in the sense that the PiS packed the tribunal with loyalists who delivered the result it wanted. Sadly, this is not unusual in Poland, whose government is locked in a long-running dispute with the EU commission over its repeated attacks on judicial independence, free media and LGBT rights. Past attempts by Brussels to impose penalties have been ineffective, owing to a lack of solidarity and, more recently, to Polish threats to block the new EU budget and pandemic recovery fund. Last month, the commission singled out Poland (and Hungary) for criticism in its first rule-of-law audit of EU states. Some MEPs and governments want to withhold EU financial aid, from which Poland benefits hugely, unless or until the PiS shifts ground. A poll last week showed overwhelming public support for linking EU funding to the rule of law. Those who doubt the Europe-wide relevance of Poland’s assault on women’s rights and the wider dispute with Warsaw should study Kaczyński’s recent remarks: they are the typical distortions of a populist-nationalist politician disdainful of democratic and legal norms. He vowed not to succumb to “threats and blackmail” from Brussels. “Those who want to take away our sovereignty based on their own whims are headed for a fall,” he said. “Today, the EU institutions, their officials, some politicians that the Polish people have never elected, demand that we verify our whole culture, reject everything that is very important for us, just because they like it,” Kaczyński told the Gazeta Polska Codziennie newspaper. His words could equally have been spoken by Italian, French or Brexit-touting British ultra-nationalists. For the sake of women’s rights and its own integrity, the EU must stop pulling its punches and crack down on governments that mock its core beliefs. And it should be clear eyed about the universality of this fight. Last week, the Trump administration promulgated a “global anti-abortion declaration” along with 31 like-minded illiberal or authoritarian regimes. Poland is a signatory. What do these governments have in common? They are run by men and they oppress women.
4||Refugee advocates concerned for detainee held in Brisbane hotel for 16 monthsRefugee advocates have raised concerns about the welfare of a 37-year-old man who is under suicide watch at the Brisbane Immigration Transit Accommodation after attempting self harm. The man, from Somalia, had been detained in a hotel at Kangaroo Point in Brisbane since being transferred to Australia from Nauru under now-defunct Medevac laws in June last year. He was approved for transfer under clauses allowing people to reunite with family members in Australia for medical treatment. His wife and infant son were transferred to Australia in 2017 because his son was having trouble breathing. They now live just 20 minutes from the motel where he has been detained for 16 months. But the family has not been reunited, and since coronavirus restrictions were introduced in March they have been unable to visit. “The only time he has seen his wife and son is when his wife brings his son to the fence,” Refugee Action Coalition spokesman Ian Rintoul said. “That’s the only time he has seen them since March.” In recent weeks they have been unable to visit because both have been unwell. “He is extremely distressed to be so close to them and not be able to provide any kind of support,” Rintoul said. The man attempted to self-harm about 3am on Saturday but guards at the Serco-run facility intervened. He was then kept at Kangaroo Point, without any medical support or assessment, for about 12 hours before being transferred to Brisbane Immigration Transit Accomodation and placed under watch as high risk. As of June there were more than 100 people held in detention at Kangaroo Point, which has been designated as an alternative place of detention. All were transferred to Australia from Nauru or Manus Island under medevac laws, which were repealed in December. Rintoul said detainees at Kangaroo Point, and the Mantra hotel in Melbourne, were now living in more restricted conditions than existed on Nauru. Because of the coronavirus lockdown, all in-person visits have been banned. Meanwhile prisoners in Queensland are now allowed to receive visitors, with Queensland Corrective Services allowing the resumption of in-person from 28 September. There have been suicide attempts among the immigration detainees at both hotels. “They thought when they were transferred here they were going to get medical help, including in some cases for mental health,” he said. “Many of them have not got that medical help that they were promised. There are people who have applied [for refugee status in] Canada, but that has been stalled because of the pandemic. “At least there is a balcony at Kangaroo Point. At Mantra they can’t open the windows.” Guardian Australia has sought a response from the Department of Home Affairs. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org
22||TV tonight: Hugh Laurie's Tory chancer flirts with misfortune in RoadkillRoadkill 9pm, BBC One “People like me because I break the rules. Voters think of me as a character.” While similarities to current politicians are no doubt entirely coincidental, it is impossible not to detect echoes of modern populism in David Hare’s drama as Hugh Laurie’s Tory chancer Peter Laurence continues to push the boundaries of probity. This week, Laurence isn’t the sole architect of his misfortune as his daughter attracts the attention of the tabloids. But her indiscretion comes at an unfortunate time in the light of other events. Phil Harrison Michael Palin: Travels of a Lifetime 8pm, BBC Two Of all the shows repurposed for pandemic viewing, these travelogues have been among the most likable. Partly, that’s down to Palin himself, but they have also tapped into our current longing for freedom. Tonight’s final episode sees Palin revisiting his journey across the Sahara. PH Enslaved With Samuel L Jackson 9pm, BBC Two The powerful series concludes with changing attitudes and the eventual abolition of slavery. Jackson, along with Afua Hirsch, looks at the activists, petitions and cultural changes that led to its demise, while Divers With Purpose examine the wreckage of slave ship the London. Hannah Verdier Piers Morgan’s Life Stories 9pm, ITV The older the guest, the better the chat; that’s a general rule of thumb and one that bodes well for this week’s interviewee. Sir Cliff Richard has just celebrated his 80th birthday and he’s here to discuss his poverty-stricken childhood, conversion to Christianity and an extraordinary life in British pop. Ellen E Jones The Bridge 9pm, Channel 4 There’s little bridge-building and lots of contrived machinations by the programme-makers as the reality show continues. The contestants, one of whom wins cash if they all complete their task, are going hungry, so food is offered – with a catch designed to manufacture division. Jack Seale The Olivier Awards 2020 10.20pm, ITV Originally scheduled for April and celebrating the best of 2019, the theatre awards finally get the go-ahead. Enjoy them while you can because it’s hard to imagine any similar ceremony next year. Nominees include Wendell Pierce and Phoebe Waller-Bridge and our master of ceremonies is Jason Manford. PH Film choice The Lighthouse, 12.50pm, 9.45pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Two salty seadogs question their sanity in a lighthouse: Robert Eggers’s follow-up to The Witch is a claustrophobic yarn of 19th-century mariners, superbly shot in shadowy monochrome by Jarin Blaschke, with haunting performances from Willem Dafoe and Robert Pattinson. Paul Howlett Live sport Scottish Premiership Football: Aberdeen v Celtic, 11am, Sky Sports Main Event Top-flight action from Pittodrie. F1: Portuguese Grand Prix, 1.05pm, Sky Sports F1 From Autódromo Internacional do Algarve. Premier League Football: Southampton v Everton, 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event With Wolves v Newcastle United to follow at 4pm.
23||Land, Birmingham: ‘Vegan cookery to file under thrilling’ – restaurant reviewEditor’s note: we have decided that, while restaurants remain open, we will continue to review them Land, 26 Great Western Arcade, Colmore Row, Birmingham B2 5HU (0121 236 2313). Two courses £20, three courses £26, five-course tasting menu £35, wines from £29 In the beginning there was a wild mushroom risotto and the non-meat eaters looked upon it and saw that it was seriously lame. Really? Is that it? For many kitchens cooking in the European tradition, it was. Going back 20 years or so it often seemed that, without a lump of animal protein to put front and centre, many lazy cooks would fall back swiftly into the heavy embrace of the carbs. Those damn vegetarians and vegans might not get something imaginative, but at least they’d get fed. Bring on the rice and pasta. Or, if you’re really lucky, a vegetable gratin that could grout a bathroom. A lot has changed. A lot hasn’t. As recently as February this year, at the splashy new restaurant of a chef who not only should know better but generally does, the meat-free options were pasta to start and gnocchi for the main. The come-hither menu descriptions listed roasted pumpkin and amaretto biscuits, pickled Thai shallots and dukkah. But none of that disguised those dishes’ true nature: pasta and gnocchi. There has, of course, been innovation. All hail Ottolenghi. Likewise, new generations of cooks have arrived in waves, fully aware that the diverse traditions of the Indian subcontinent, of China and the Middle East and all points in between often get along just fine without reaching for an ingredient that once had a pulse. Give thanks, too, for the rich blessing that is miso; for the uncompromising heft of gochujang. And yet, what occurs to me early on in my terrific lunch at Land, a small restaurant tucked away in the sort of Victorian shopping arcade in Birmingham that Pevsner wrote about, is how many clichés are still present in non-meat cookery in so many British restaurants. And how many of them are completely absent here. In your service I have been living through the cauliflower years. I have survived the aubergine years. Fine, sturdy vegetables, both. Love a bit of roasted cauliflower, me. I haven’t met an aubergine that I couldn’t spank with miso, grill to a charred mess and call dinner. But these can become as deadening a trope as that damn wild mushroom risotto. At Land there is none of that. It’s why I would encourage as many cooks as possible to get to Birmingham right now to see what chef Adrian Luck is doing there. The rest of you should pop along, too. His menu of almost entirely vegan cookery is short – just three choices at each course – but it should be filed under thrilling. There’s enormous, nerdy attention to detail alongside a precise understanding of both acidity and spice that lifts the seemingly humble far beyond its origins. We sit in the small downstairs dining room, at the bare wooden tables overseen by just one masked and attentive waiter, peering at plates of edible wonder. There are crescents of roasted onion squash the colour of a setting sun, on a bed of still-nutty puy lentils, bound by a mustardy dressing tangled with roasted red onion. What makes it sing is the addition of crisp lentils, perhaps deep-fried, to give it texture. There are the sweetest of Indian spice-roasted carrots, perched on a brilliant and vivid sweet-sour carrot and ginger purée. I could do serious damage to a bowl of that alone. There is the crunch of roasted seeds across the top. There are dribbles of what’s described as yogurt. As it’s a vegan dish, let’s assume nuts have been press-ganged into service. A potato rösti isn’t really, but let’s not get too hung up on nomenclature: it’s a plank of multilayered sliced potatoes, deep fried to an encouraging golden. There’s a cloud-like smoked-potato purée draped across the top, dusted with cep powder and, next to it, a spoonful of a boisterously acidulated mushroom ketchup. Oh boy. And on it goes. For a main course, a chunk of sweet potato has been roasted and partnered with a deep and sultry mole, that classic Mexican exercise in controlled burning used to produce a sauce full of spice and toasty dark-chocolate notes. There are whorls of avocado purée, and petals of the sweet potato skin, deep-fried for crunch. In another dish, sautéed king oyster mushrooms come on a cassoulet of borlotti beans lubricated with a little cream, the only dairy in the whole meal. The plate is topped with lacy “carbon tuiles” looking encouragingly like something worn by the women painted by Jack Vettriano. Celeriac, as familiar a non-meat trope as cauliflower and aubergine, is given a new and complex seeing to here. Chunks arrive roasted, under snowy slices of more of the same. Underneath are pearls of barley in a dark, umami-rich yeast broth. There’s a dusting of yeast across the top as well as dollops of a black garlic purée. I have a credo: non-meat dishes should be good because of that fact, rather than in spite of it. But I can’t help describing this celeriac dish as deep, intense and, well, meaty. With all these descriptions I will have missed a detail. I will have missed an ingredient or a moment of wizardry, because so much is going on. Adrian Luck is in complete control of his ingredients. It’s why I wish I could be just as enthusiastic about the desserts, but I can’t. Non-dairy creams can all too often have a musty, cereal back note, especially when sweetened. That’s what happens here in a sweetcorn tart with blackberries. The shell is tough and over-engineered, and the sweetcorn “cream” betrays its origins. Coconut milk might have been Luck’s friend here. A rapeseed oil cake with stewed apple, dribbles of caramel and a scoop of brisk buttermilk sorbet is much better, but lacks a certain largesse. Which is my fancy way of saying it needs loads more caramel. But ignore all that because of the brilliance that has gone before. Land is designed to take you somewhere new. Even the wine list is calculated to encourage experimentation. “If you like pinot noir,” says one heading, for example, before suggesting a gamay. And so we toast Luck’s cooking with a couple of glasses of godello because we like pinot grigio. I am aware that describing a restaurant like this as a find, when it’s been there for three years and always knew exactly where it was, might be a little insulting. But I can say that I’m delighted I’ve now found it. You should find it, too. News bites A new take on the cook-at-home ingredient delivery model: outside caterer Rocket, has launched a programme of food boxes entitled “A cook’s tour”. Alongside those ingredients, available for delivery nationwide, you also get access to a video cook-along, complete with live chat. Upcoming boxes include Flavours of Istanbul, Temples of Balinese Cuisine and Korean Street Food. The boxes cost from £55 for two. For more info visit acookstour.co.uk The tier 2 and 3 Covid-19 rules, prohibiting people meeting up indoors with anybody other than members of their own household, have resulted in mass restaurant cancellations. The Corbin and King group, which runs the Wolseley and Brasserie Zedel among others, says it lost 2,000 covers across the group to the end of October. At the same time a number of restaurant managers have told me that they are not clear how they are meant to police it. ‘Am I supposed to ask the members of every table for a proof of address?’ one maître d’ said to me. Another said there was a concern that, even to enquire of a table, might breach discrimination and equality legislation. In other news, Harrods in London’s Knightsbridge has announced it will be opening a branch of Gordon Ramsay Burger. It follows the success of the first in Las Vegas where the chef’s take on the humble hamburger costs up to $25.99. So there’s that. No opening date has yet been announced (gordonramsayrestaurants.com). Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1
23||The Loire’s chenin blanc is a master of disguiseBouvet Ladubay Saumur Brut, Loire, France NV (£13.99, or £9.99 as part of a mixed case of six, majestic.co.uk) If you’re a producer of chenin blanc in France’s Loire Valley, you get used to ceding the spotlight. You have to accept that the grape variety you’re working with is currently better known around the world for its contribution to the recent proliferation of superb dry white wines from South Africa. And you know very well that the white grape variety for which your home region is most famous has for some years now been sauvignon blanc, as found in the wines of Sancerre, Pouilly-Fumé and Touraine. But there are some compensations. Chenin blanc grown in the Loire Valley has a kind of super-power shared by very few other grape varieties (riesling is the only other one I can think of): you can use it to make any style of wine at the very highest quality level, from golden sweet dessert wines to crisply apple-scented, incisive champagne-alike sparkling wines such as Bouvet Ladubay’s reliably fresh and tangy fizz from Saumur. Domaine la Rouletière Patrimoine Vouvray Sec, Loire, France 2015 (from £17.49, allaboutwine.co.uk; greatwinesdirect.co.uk; corkingwines.co.uk) My current favourite Loire chenin fizz is a little more expensive than the Bouvet Ladubay. But at £21.95 (vincognito.co.uk) Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Triple Zéro is pretty competitive alongside the likes of champagne and English wine. It gets its name from the absence of sugar, which is commonly added in three stages in the production of sparkling wine, but not here: what you get is a tinglingly dry wine of luminous clarity and depth of ripe apple (a classic chenin character) and more exotic fruit. It’s made by one of the stars of Loire still wines, Jacky Blot, whose Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Remus 2017, a still dry chenin from vineyards around the village of Montouis-sur-Loire (£26.68, justerinis.com), has the same mix of fruit-depth and struck-bell resonance of flavour as the Triple Zéro, and which you can also find in the silkily elegant Patrimoine from Domaine la Rouletière in Vouvray. Domaine des Forges Coteaux du Layon Chaume 1er Cru, Loire, France 2016 (£18.56, gauntleys.com) The very best Loire chenin is certainly a match for the best chardonnay from Burgundy, and at a fraction of the price to boot. But the combination of grape and region is also responsible for some charming wines at more accessible prices: I’m thinking of reliable staples such as Waitrose’s Les Andides Saumur Blanc (currently on offer for £7.49) and Yapp Bros’ never-less-than-fun, tangy-racy and drinkable Saumur Blanc (£11.49). For sheer gastronomic pleasure from chenin, however, it’s hard to beat the dessert wines, which combine the lusciousness of honey, brown sugar and crystallized apple with that resounding, cleansing, Cox’s apple acidity you find in the dry and sparkling wines. A wine such as Domaine des Forges’ lingeringly lovely Chaume 1er Cru, for example, is the closest thing the wine world has to the experience of eating a perfectly made tarte tatin. Follow David Williams on Twitter @Daveydaibach
0||Many midwest Democrats stayed home in 2016. Will they turn out for Biden?Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. “Trump’s presidency, the last four years, have been absolutely horrible. Trump blew life back into white supremacy. Him being so open and unapologetic about the stuff he says, and things that he’s done, really gave that power,” he said. “Plus coronavirus, because now we have tens of thousands of people, especially in the black community, really suffering from Covid-19. We have an economy decimated to almost the proportions of the depression. The loss of jobs and loss of wealth is worse than I’ve ever seen before.” Collins will be voting for Biden and encouraging anyone else he can to do the same because the election hangs in good part on the turnout in major midwestern cities. Trump decisively won Ohio four years ago after the state had voted twice for Obama. But with the president holding a lead of just 1% in the aggregate of recent polls, the result in Ohio may come down to just a few thousand votes in Cleveland. Four years ago, Clinton won nearly 50,000 fewer votes than Obama in Cuyahoga county, which includes Cleveland and its small satellite cities, in part because so many Democrats stayed home. In neighbouring Michigan, Democratic turnout in Detroit fell by about 60,000 votes in 2016. Trump took the state with a majority of just 10,704 votes. Similarly, the drop in turnout between presidential elections in the Democratic stronghold of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, was more than double the number of votes – just 23,000 – that Trump won the state by. Those victories were key to the president winning the electoral college and taking the White House. The Democrats have reason to hope Biden can turn that around on 3 November. More than 8m people have registered to vote in Ohio, the second highest on record after Obama’s 2008 race. The number registering as Democrats has surged 20% in the state this year while Republicans have fallen 6% although they still have a slight lead in total registrations. Little more than half of the electorate are independents. Two-thirds of the drop in Republican voters is in Cuyahoga county. Those retreating from Trump include blue collar workers and white women living in the Cleveland suburbs. “Voting for him was a big mistake,” said a shop assistant, Lynn, who is married to a factory worker, after a campaign worker knocked on her door. “We both didn’t like Hillary and thought Trump would be good for bringing jobs back. I lost it with him that first year. I realised he was completely unfit to be president. But my husband hung on, believing in him until Covid. We’re both voting Biden just to get him out. I don’t know what Biden will do but at this point I don’t care.” Like others who once backed Trump and have turned away she did not want to be identified because “we have some crazy neighbours around here”. Lynn is among about 2.5m Ohioans who applied for absentee ballots, double the number in 2016. Nearly one quarter of the electorate has already voted in Cuyahoga county, whether by post or in person. “What we’re seeing right now is astronomical volumes of people voting by mail,” said Erika Anthony of Cleveland Votes, a nonpartisan get out the vote group. “Weirdly, despite the fact that every sort of tactic that we normally would be deploying to get people to vote has been compromised because of the pandemic, I will say there’s been an increased excitement when we are engaging with residents, potential voters.” But for all that, less than half of the population of Cleveland registered to vote. Some in the city have never been to the polls. Others turned out for Obama but not since. “Voter apathy is a real thing,” said Anthony. “If I’m a black person particularly, I really am not seeing anything that’s demonstrating to me that democracy is working for me.” Cleveland is among the most racially segregated cities in the country and one in three residents lives below the poverty line. It struggled through the Obama years, never really recovering from the 2001 recession or the national economic collapse seven years later. Then came coronavirus. Amanda King, an African American volunteer working to register voters in Cleveland said some voters are more motivated to turn out this year. “I think that among young and educated voters, there’s a feeling that this is our duty to vote in this election because it’s consequential. It feels more pressing than the Trump-Hillary election,” she said. “I think for some people, their bubble has been burst. After the Obama presidency they were thinking we’re a progressive society, things are great. And then this four years of Trump has really made some people come to the realisation that our country is not the democracy that it could be or should be.” But King, who runs an art collective, Shooting Without Bullets and who helped curate City Champions, the Guardian’s week-long focus on the city last year, said she met far less enthusiasm in one of the city’s poorest neighbourhoods, Hough, where she visited barbershops, a popular gathering place for discussion among African American men. “When I do voter registration in Hough, which is a majority black neighbourhood that has been disinvested from, redlined, a lot of that population is functionally illiterate, it’s a very different response over there. There’s a lot of people who are not interested and who don’t believe in electoral politics,” she said. “Many of their arguments were that whether it’s Trump, whether it’s Obama, whether it’s Bush, whether it’s Clinton, they’ve never cared about me. Me choosing them as leadership has never changed the conditions in which I’m living. And you look at that neighbourhood, and you look at those statistics, and you say, you’re damn right. I understand that frustration.” King said dire predictions for four more years of Trump are doing little to galvanise people in neighbourhoods like Hough. “That might work for white women who voted for Trump last time but that’s not going to work necessarily for the people on the fence. You can’t say to someone who has nothing, to someone who is constantly in a state of struggle, well this guy is gonna make it worse. There’s no more fear to be had. They’re not selling greatness here, they’re selling well, it’s worse or worse,” she said. “I’m thinking that there’s a lot of barbershops around the midwest where this conversation is happening. It scares me because I know that we need to turn out for this election.” Detroit and Milwaukee also saw a drop in voting in African American neighbourhoods in 2016 that local activists in part attributed to a lack of interest because Obama was not on the ballot or disillusionment because he was able to achieve less than they had hoped, in part because of Republican obstruction. Collins grew up in overwhelmingly black East Cleveland where his father worked for General Electric and his mother was a bus driver. “People feel like their vote is not going to make a difference. And people may be too concerned with other stuff that’s going on right in front of their face versus getting into politics. They don’t trust politicians, never have,” he said. “Up until Obama, there were never a lot of people voting around here because I don’t think they really saw them making a change.” Collins, who teaches at a school and a community centre, said coronavirus forced his classes online but some of young people he teaches don’t have computers. Others lack decent internet connections. They might rely on their phones for social media but that doesn’t work for interactive lessons. “These are the kinds of problems a lot of their families are focused on, not voting,” he said. Democratic politicians remain confident but have a different concern. Kent Smith is running unopposed for re-election as a state representative in Euclid, a majority black small city within Cuyahoga county that is effectively a suburb of Cleveland. He is less worried about turnout than whether the votes get counted. “I really think that in 2020, because of the global pandemic and the change in how people are voting, it’s really going to be turnout versus the number of votes that are ruled ineligible,” he said. Smith said a combination of voters not being used to filling out postal ballots – a common error is to put the date instead of date of birth – and efforts by Ohio’s Republican secretary of state, Frank LaRose, to throw roadblocks in the way of voting by post which is more favoured by Democrats, has raised concerns of large numbers of ballots being discounted. “Projections of turnout are healthy for the Democrats. It’s a matter of how many of those votes will actually count,” said Smith.
5||Better late than never –  how Rishi Sunak ended up with a planThree mini-budgets from the chancellor in four weeks isn’t normal. But then nothing much is these days. This trilogy started at the end of September, with the winter economy plan. The name gives you a clue that this was meant to be the plan for the whole winter. Far from getting through to the spring, the plan’s flagship policy didn’t make it to the end of October before being totally reinvented by the Treasury last week in the third instalment of this economic policy saga. The policy in question is the job support scheme (JSS), the replacement for the furlough scheme that ends a week today. For those returning to work for a fraction of their previous hours, the scheme pays them two-thirds of their wages for the hours not worked. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said its goal was to give businesses “the option of keeping employees in a job on shorter hours rather than making them redundant”. That is the right aim, but the scheme didn’t give many firms that option. It was too expensive, asking firms being hammered by this pandemic to pay a third of wages for hours not worked. This design flaw was obvious a month ago. As we at the Resolution Foundation pointed out within minutes of the chancellor’s announcement, there’s a reason other short-hour work schemes, like that in Germany, do not ask employers to pay towards the costs during downturns. Government’s response was that our analysis might be right on a spreadsheet but didn’t reflect the real world. You didn’t need a spreadsheet to tell you that the scheme incentivised firms to keep one worker on full time rather than two on half-time, which is not how you reduce the coming rise in unemployment. On Thursday, the chancellor recognised this reality, slashing the employer contributions from 33% to 5%. What sounds like a tweak is a revamp of the JSS, turning it into a functioning short-time work scheme. The cost to an employer of keeping two staff earning £17,000 on for half their usual hours has fallen from £233 to just £35 a month – an 85% reduction. This will make a huge difference to take-up, incentivising firms to cut hours, not jobs. It won’t be cheap, increasing its cost many times over, but it will lead to lower unemployment and protect household incomes. So we’ve got to the right place, albeit too late, with the now heavily revised scheme set to go live in seven days’ time. It’s worth asking how this mess happened, because there are lessons for policymakers. Fundamentally, this is a classic case of optimism bias. The hope that the summer pause in the pandemic would last was understandable, but a terrible basis for policymaking. It, combined with talk of a V-shaped recovery, lies behind this painful display of economic policy slowly catching up with the return of the virus. High employer contributions might have made sense if we were phasing out lockdown restrictions, but make little sense when we are ramping them back up. Optimism bias is something almost all of us are guilty of. In our private lives we tell ourselves we’ll make it on time even when it’s clear we’re running late and it’s a common pandemic survival technique not to admit to ourselves quite how long this will go on. This same optimism bias explains why it took until Wednesday for the government to confirm that this autumn’s spending review, which was set to hand our departmental budgets for the coming three years, had been scrapped. It’s been clear for months that we’re in no position to plan public spending three years ahead right now, and only placing a lot of value on hope over evidence would make you think otherwise. We don’t know what we’ll be spending next month, let alone in 2024. Underpinning this optimism bias is a misdiagnosis of our pandemic-stricken labour market. We’re regularly told that, while it’s sad jobs are going in sectors such as hospitality and leisure, it’s best for those workers to enter unemployment because they’ll swiftly find jobs in less pandemic-hit parts of the economy. This works in textbooks but ignores the evidence. The UK is seeing the largest rise in unemployment in over a decade. That is driven more by huge falls in the chances of someone out of work finding a new job than by increased job losses themselves. Far from growing fast and hiring, even firms less affected by the pandemic have stopped investing, given the huge uncertainty. The real lesson here is that, while optimism bias may be a human flaw that we all live with in our private lives, it’s a dangerous force in politics. History shows us that previous pandemics lasted years not months, and that second and third waves were common. In a pandemic it’s fair enough to hope for the best, but policy needs to be set with a closer eye on the painful and messy reality. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation
0||Biden gains as suburban women and elderly voters turn backs on TrumpJoe Biden’s hopes of reaching the White House could rest on two crucial demographic groups that appear to be deserting Donald Trump: elderly people and suburban women. They would join a broad coalition that includes strong support among African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans, the LGBTQ community and young people. With the gender gap potentially bigger than ever, the president appears more reliant than ever on white men. Little more than a week before election day, Biden enjoys a double-digit lead in almost every national poll and is ahead in the crucial battleground states. More than 52 million people have already voted, according to the US Elections Project. In the past four presidential elections, Republicans have led among the elderly by around 10 points. But about four in five Americans killed by the coronavirus were older than 65 and a majority of Americans say Trump has mishandled the pandemic. The president trails among elderly voters by more than 20 points, according to recent CNN and Wall Street Journal/NBC News polls. This swing could prove critical in states such as Arizona and Florida, which have a high number of retirees. “In terms of voting blocs, there are two that are absolutely dooming Donald Trump,” said Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota. “He won the senior vote by seven points in 2016; that was very important in Florida and a few other states. He’s now losing that bloc and the polls differ about how much, but the fact that he no longer has an advantage among seniors is really crippling for him. “And then he has so alienated suburban women that it’s put a whole number of states in play, including states you wouldn’t expect, like Georgia. This kind of macho presidency has gotten the ringing rejection by women, particularly educated women who are so tired of the 1950s.” The suburban revolt against Trump’s bigotry, hardline agenda and chaotic leadership was manifest in the 2018 midterm elections when Democrats gained 41 seats in the House of Representatives, the biggest such shift since the post-Watergate 1974 elections, and won the popular vote by 8.6%. Trump’s campaign to win back this constituency, variously known as “soccer moms”, “security moms” and “hockey moms”, has been anything but subtle. He has tried to tap racist fears of suburbs overrun by crime, violence and low-income housing. In one tweet, he promised to protect “the Suburban Housewives of America”. At a recent rally in Pennsylvania, he pleaded: “Suburban women, will you please like me? Remember? Hey, please, I saved your damn neighborhood, OK?” Polls suggest the plea is falling on deaf ears. Biden leads by 23 points among suburban women in swing states, according to the New York Times and Siena College, and by 19 points among suburban women overall, according to Pew Research. Pew also found that Hispanic women prefer Biden by 44 points and Black women go for the Democrat by a staggering 85 points. Andrea Moore, 45, a stay-at-home mom in suburban Wayne county, Michigan, voted for Trump in 2016 because she was tired of career politicians. “He was an unknown quantity, but now we know,” she told the Associated Press, explaining that she will not vote for the president again because of “a million little things” including his divisiveness, fearmongering and failed Covid-19 response. The trends were underlined this week by a national survey of 2,538 Americans by the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) that showed Trump haemorrhaging support among the elderly and suburban women as well as another, less expected group: white Catholics. Only 38% of people aged 65 or older approve of Trump’s handling of the pandemic while 61% say they disapprove, the PRRI found. Among white college-educated women, seven in 10 disapprove of Trump’s handling of the pandemic, seven in 10 disapprove of his response to racial justice protests and a similar share believe he has encouraged white supremacists. There are also signs of erosion among religious conservatives, a bulwark of Trump’s base. PRRI found that while three in four (76%) white evangelical Protestants still approve of the job Trump is doing, only 52% of white mainline Protestants and 49% of white Catholics agree. Biden would be only the second Catholic president. Robert P Jones, chief executive and founder of PRRI, said: “White Catholics are a group that particularly in those swing rust belt states – Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Ohio – are really on the president’s must-win list. They’re also important in a place like Arizona. They are as big or bigger than white evangelicals in those states, so in terms of religious groups they are quite an important constituency. “White Catholics in 2016 were basically evenly divided between Trump and Hillary Clinton at this stage in the race. We have them at 54% Biden, 41% Trump, so that’s a sea change. This group is going to play an outsized role in Trump’s path to the electoral college and he’s not doing well with them at all.” Clinton was beaten in the electoral college after suffering heavy losses among non-college-educated white voters – a majority of the population in battleground states such as Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin – and failing to turn out African Americans at levels Barack Obama achieved. Current polling suggests Biden will do better on both accounts. Whereas Clinton lost whites without a college degree by more than 20 points, Biden is trailing by just 12 in UCLA Nationscape’s polling, according to an analysis by the FiveThirtyEight website. This appears to vindicate strategists’ view that Biden, a 77-year-old white male from humble origins in Scranton, Pennsylvania, would resonate more with this demographic than the New York-based wife of a former president. But, FiveThirtyEight added, Trump is performing slightly better than four years ago among college-educated white voters, and has made modest gains among voters of colour. The president’s support among Black voters aged 18 to 44 rose from around 10% in 2016 to 21% in UCLA Nationscape polling. He is also at 35% among Hispanic voters under age 45, up from the 22% in 2016 – and potentially significant in Florida. Jason Miller, a senior adviser to the Trump campaign, told reporters on Friday: “We’re very proud of the president’s efforts to turn out Latino voters … There’s a lot of enthusiasm for the president, not just for everything that he’s done so far but also because people are really scared about Joe Biden’s appeasing the regimes from Cuba and Venezuela.” Older voters of colour remain overwhelmingly Democratic, however. Biden is also dominant among all people under 35 even in Republican strongholds, with leads in Texas (59% to 40%), Georgia (60% to 39%) and South Carolina (56% to 43%), according to Axios and SurveyMonkey.
27||Malcolm Turnbull signs Kevin Rudd's petition challenging News Corp media dominanceFormer Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has signed Kevin Rudd’s petition calling for a royal commission into News Corp’s dominance of the Australian media. Rudd, also a former Australian prime minister, launched the petition to the Australian parliament earlier this month, saying the media company employed tactics that “chill free speech and undermine public debate,” and calling for a royal commission to ensure a strong and diverse news media in the face of “new business models that encourage deliberately polarising and politically manipulated news”. Both Rudd and Turnbull faced negative campaigns from News Corp during their time in office. On Sunday, Turnbull shared that he had signed the petition. “Kevin has done well to get this petition going,” he said on Twitter. “I doubt it will result in a Royal Commission and Murdoch’s print monopoly (since 1987) is only part of the problem. But I have signed it and encourage others to do so.” Rudd said it was “good to have you on board”. “Supporting media diversity isn’t about left or right, Labor or Liberal, but preserving the lifeblood of our democracy,” he said on Twitter. In Australia, there is no requirement for the parliament to respond to a petition once it reaches a certain number of signatures. Rudd told Guardian Australia that he knew it was unlikely the current federal government would respond. “Obviously, the beneficiaries of the Murdoch protection racket, the Liberal National party, will not do that [act],” he said. “It will take some time to convince the Labor party that it’s in their interest as well. That will be influenced directly by the volume of public support.” The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has a distanced himself from the petition, saying Rudd was acting as a private citizen and it was not reflective of Labor policy. Rudd told the ABC on Tuesday that Turnbull had reached out to him to see how they could work together on curtailing Murdoch’s influence over Australian politics. “Malcom reached out to me a couple of days ago,” he said. “He wants to have a discussion about how we handle these matters in the future, so I’ll do that in due course.” He highlighted that NewsCorp campaigns against him and against Turnbull were a matter of documentary record. “That is all about the influence and the exercise of Murdoch’s media muscle and knocking over an Australian prime minister,” he said. “Now, I don’t support Mr Turnbull, as you know, for a whole range of policy reasons – although in some areas of policy we have a common view – but this petition of mine is not about partisan politics. “I’m no longer a player in national politics, I’m not seeking elected office but I am concerned about this cancer on our democracy and if Mr Turnbull wishes to join forces with me on this, well and good.” Rudd said News Corp’s owner, Rupert Murdoch, was a “virtual monopoly player” in Australia. In his home state of Queensland, which is currently in a state election campaign, every newspaper is owned by NewsCorp. “This is a one-newspaper state, not just a one-newspaper town,” he said “And anyone who thinks that’s fair in terms of every side of politics having a fair go has got rocks in their head.” The two former prime ministers have been strange bedfellows in the past 12 years of Australian public life. Turnbull was made opposition leader in 2008, after Rudd won the 2007 election, and then lost the leadership to Tony Abbott in 2009. In 2012 they appeared together on an episode of ABC’s Q&amp;A, when they were viewed as so similar – moderate, wealthy, and “not very popular in your own parties, but very popular among people” – that one audience member asked if they had considered joining together to form their own political party. Rudd quipped: “Malcolm and I could never agree on the leadership.”
14||We are railing: Britain embraces the joys of the humble train setIt started with a standard Scalextric set: two slot cars, some track, a 10-year-old boy and his enthusiastic father. Six months later, Ben Martin has a 75ft raceway in his loft and a growing collection of cars. “I went down a rabbit hole with my son,” Martin said. “There was a time when the postman was bringing track every day. He was laughing, ‘What’s all this about?’ But you can never have too many straights. It’s fulfilling a childhood dream. I played with Scalextric with my brother and I always wanted a track in the loft that lived there, that you could use whenever you wanted, not just taking over the living room for a few days before your parents made you pack it up and maybe get it out months later.” Martin is not alone. Slot cars, model railways and model-making have boomed during the pandemic. Hornby, that stalwart of the British hobbyist industry, said last month it had seen far higher sales between April and August than expected. Peco, which makes tracks and scenery, is struggling to keep up with demand. And hobby shops have seen a huge increase in customers. Hattons has supplied customers in Widnes and beyond for decades, and Richard Davies, the managing director, said sales had been “a blur”. “We’ve been inundated with orders,” he said. “Last year, people were buying three and a half items on average, but in March and April that went up to seven or eight. We were about 50% up. “The whole crisis has prompted people to take a look at how they use their time – people think they’ve been spending too much time at work, and now they want to make the model railway that’s been on their mind for the last 20 years.” Some are new model enthusiasts, like the Martin family. Others, such as Chris Chewter in Oxfordshire, are established hobbyists who have had more hours to invest in getting a little closer to perfection. For the last five years, Chewter and his daughter have been recreating Tetbury station in Gloucestershire, which was a victim of the Beeching railway closures. The layout is a “small piece of utopia where the sun is always shining and the world is Covid-free”, Chewter said. “I’ve always wanted to take a real location and model it as close to scale as I possibly could. There’s something about making a model when it looks like it’s been shot by a Bond villain’s shrink-ray that captures my imagination.” Steve Haynes, Peco’s sales and export manager, said: “It appeals to people who have artistic flair, to people who have a technical mind because they like the electronics, to people who have an interest in history. It stimulates the mind.” Peco had to shut its factory in Devon for five weeks at the start of the pandemic. “Now we’re trading at a much higher level this year than we were last year, even with that disruption,” Haynes said. “We’re recruiting more staff and we’re still behind the curve – the demand is relentless. Some of our retail customers have seen more business than at Christmas.” It helps that model railways now have a stamp of celebrity approval, and geek culture is not merely tolerated but feted. Rod Stewart was proud to show off his extraordinary reconstruction of an American city to Railway Modeller magazine last year. The sprawling layout of 1940s cars, trains and skyscrapers is 125ft by 23ft, and he is reportedly shipping it back to Essex from Beverly Hills. Musician Jools Holland, another enthusiast, has recreated the Channel tunnel and 1960s London. “There are plenty of people showing off their model railways on Instagram,” Davies said. “When I was 15, I was embarrassed by my model railway. I didn’t want anyone at school to know about it. It seems like we’ve moved forward.” Hornby, which owns many of the brands in British model shops, had been in the doldrums for some time, but its fortunes turned a corner after Lyndon Davies took over as chief executive three years ago. Stock market rules prevent him from revealing details before its interim results in November, but he is ebullient. “Whenever there’s a national crisis, people turn inwards and look for things of comfort,” he said. “And we’ve tried to give people more fun.” Hornby now makes Scalextric models of Batman and Joker cars, and Del Boy’s Reliant van from Only Fools and Horses. The track was more reliable now, Davies said, and customers also liked controlling their trains and cars with mobile phone apps. “I had a race with my grandson, he had Superman, I had the Reliant Robin,” Davies said. They have a range of Yellow Submarine buses and trains that has launched in time for Christmas.” “It’s so wholesome and innocent, and there’s absolutely nothing negative about it,” Ben Martin said. “It’s not like screen time. Everyone is interested. We’ve had load of visitors in the loft, from six-year-olds to my uncle in his 70s. “But I’m done now. I’ve got enough track. We’ve started collecting Star Wars figures.” • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to add a photographer credit to the main image.
15||Man in critical condition after shark attack on Great Barrier Reef north of TownsvilleA man is in a critical condition after being attacked by a shark at the Great Barrier Reef. He was airlifted to Townsville University hospital after being bitten at Britomart Reef around 12.20pm on Sunday, Queensland Ambulance says. The area, off the north Queensland coast about 150km north of Townsville, is a popular spear-fishing location. Seven Australians have died from shark bites in 2020 including six in unprovoked attacks – more than any year since 1934. While the total number of shark bites is in line with the annual average over the past decade, it has prompted experts to consider whether the La Niña weather event, associated with cooler sea surface temperatures in the central Pacific, may be affecting where sharks search for prey. According to the Australian Shark Attack File, it has been 86 years since six people last died from unprovoked shark bites in a single year. In 1929, nine people died from unprovoked shark bites in Australia – a record that preceded debate about introducing the first shark nets at Australian beaches several years later. There have been 18 unprovoked shark bites so far in 2020, one more than last year and the same as in 2018. In 2015, there were 22. In January, a 57-year-old experienced diver, Gary Johnson, was killed by a shark near Esperance in Western Australia, and in April, a 23-year-old wildlife ranger, Zachary Robba, was killed by a shark off the Great Barrier Reef. In June, Rob Pedretti, 60, died after he was bitten by a shark while surfing in northern New South Wales, and in July, a teenager died from a shark bite while surfing at another beach in the region. In September, 46-year-old Nick Slater died after being bitten while surfing near the Gold Coast. Authorities called off a search for the body of Andrew Sharpe earlier in October after friends saw the 52-year-old attacked while surfing near Esperance. While surfing is not considered provoking a shark, the death of a 36-year-old while spearfishing off Queensland’s Fraser Island in July is considered to be the result of a provoked bite, as the release of fish blood can attract sharks.
28||For the recordAn article said that Scotland “is due to conduct” a census in the spring. In fact, the impact of Covid-19 means its national survey has been postponed a year to March 2022 (“Census to ask about sexual orientation for the first time”, 18 October, page 12). The term of office served in the US House of Representatives is two years, not four, as we had it (“How the US Senate might change”, 18 October, page 39). Visiba, a company that undertook research into incidents involving people suffering from mental health crises in England, is a digital healthcare platform provider, not an online mental health care provider, as an article said (“Police 999 callouts to mental health incidents soar”, 18 October, page 28). A review of the documentary film White Riot referred to punk bands in the 1970s having “significant numbers of NF and Britain First supporters”. Britain First was not founded until 2011; the intended reference was to the British Movement (TV review, New Review, 18 October, page 29). A column described the artist Laura Knight as “the first female Royal Academician” (“Guess the painting”, New Review, 11 October, page 38). Knight was the first fully elected female Royal Academician, after the founding members Mary Moser and Angelica Kauffman. Other recently amended articles include: Coronavirus: 1 million young Britons ‘face jobs crisis within weeks’ Police call for urgent review of stop and search protocols after officer’s death in Croydon Pizza, kebabs, chicken tikka masala: make your own takeaway favourites Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736
5||Letters: Britain at fault for Brexit fishing woesYour interesting article did not explain why so much fish in British waters is now caught by boats from other EU countries (“Brixham fishermen hope Brexit will tip the scales for shrinking industry”, Business). In the late 1980s, grants from Europe were made available for fishing communities to modernise their boats and tackle. This funding had to be match-funded by national governments. Other governments supplied this funding, unlike the UK. The result was that British fishermen were unable to compete with the bigger, more efficient boats, and many sold their quota to French, Spanish or Dutch fishing companies. The quotas were introduced to preserve fish stocks. The reason the future of fishing is so fraught in the Brexit negotiations is that other European nations paid British fishermen to be able to fish for what had been British quotas. Veronica Hardstaff, MEP for Lincolnshire 1994-1999 and former member of the European parliament fishing committee, Sheffield The most serious threat to the UK fishing fleet is that 37% of fish caught by UK boats are landed in the European Economic Area, with the largest shares being exported to Norway, the Netherlands and France. The UK fleet may well want a larger quota of available stocks, but the main species found in UK waters are mackerel and herring, which do not have a UK market. The continuation of EU/EEA landing rights without tariffs, quotas or phytosanitary restrictions is far more important than sharing a few cod with France. A no-deal Brexit would result in the loss of substantial and valuable exports for the UK fishing fleet. Eric Goodyer Birsay, Orkney Rough justice on golf course It is regrettable that Aberdeen has granted planning permission for a new Trump golf course on the Menie estate (“New Trump golf course provokes fury in Scotland”, News). But had Trump been refused planning permission, he could have appealed directly to the Scottish government. But objectors to planning applications have no equal right of appeal, despite repeated attempts to get this introduced into Scottish law. Should Trump act on his granted permission, the invaluable coast and dunes will be further destroyed. Rose Harvie Dumbarton, West Dunbartonshire Arts bailout ‘blackmail’ I am appalled that arts organisations are being compelled to give public praise to named members of the government and to the Treasury and Arts Council England (“Want an arts bailout? Then you’d better praise Sunak &amp; co”, News). Were the artists told that this blatant blackmailing would be integral to the government’s culture recovery fund? It appears the government is shamefully taking advantage of the Covid crisis to bring the arts to heel and to give the appearance that artists are supportive of its notoriously unprincipled behaviour. Philip Hedley, director emeritus, Theatre Royal Stratford East, London WC1 Land is our heritage too Joe O’Donnell, the director of the Victorian Society, is not alone in his concerns about the government’s proposed changes to the planning system (“‘Greatest threat in a generation’ faces heritage buildings”, News). Heritage is just one of several qualities that places possess. He cites English Heritage research on the carbon savings of refitting existing buildings. In Wales, government agencies were quick out of the blocks, introducing in 2008 their unique land use information system, Landmap, with its all-Wales coverage of areas that merit being taken into account in land management and change decision-making. This information base of more than 10,000 areas is freely available online, just the kind of thing England’s public sector ought to introduce without delay to ensure a place’s qualities are properly understood and not wasted, for example, in carbon-costly new developments or habitat loss. David Eagar Birmingham Word ban is hard to swallow Barbara Ellen hit the nail on the head in her criticism of the powerful meat industry’s attempt to ban words such as “banger” and “burger” in relation to similar-tasting alternatives that cut out the cruelty (“Bangers and burgers belong to us vegetarians and vegans too”, Comment). It is obvious that the meat industry does not, and cannot, own words. The use of the phrase “cultural hijacking” by the meat industry is frankly hilarious and rather pathetic. The only “hijacking” I can see is directed towards our planet, exploiting its precious resources for the mere benefit of a consumer to buy a chunk of butchered meat. Sebastian Monblat Sutton, London Held back by my class I share Kenan Malik’s scepticism about the reporting, both political and academic, of the assumed educational disadvantage of “white”, working-class boys (“Being white won’t hold boys back. Being working class just might”, Comment). I am from a northern, white, working-class background, failed the 11-plus and then got to university from a secondary modern, which limited my academic choices and future. I found the work of the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu a useful insight into this “disadvantage”. Like Malik, he contended that the main factor was the constrained life chances of being working class; he contended that this was “operationalised” through “cultural capital”. Our heavily exam-based, traditional and elitist schooling and curriculums are biased towards “middle/upper class cultural capital”, with all the enrichment, private tutoring and access to literary/musical/cultural opportunities that go with it. Philip Wood Kidlington, Oxfordshire Sins of the Flesh Your article on the “lost” Nic Roeg Flash Gordon film does not mention that an “erotic” comedy version titled Flesh Gordon actually was released in 1974 (“Flesh Gordon? Artwork reveals erotic version that was never made”, News). Having sneaked in to see this film aged 15 in the days before ID was required, I can vouch that it was neither erotic nor particularly comedic, although I do remember many people in the audience rolling about with laughter at the heavy-handed script. But a Nic Roeg version I would love to have seen! Dougie Mitchell Edinburgh
0||Kleptopia review: power, theft and Trump as leader in Putin’s own imageIn a year dominated by a US presidential election between a kleptocrat and a democrat, a book about world-class thieves laundering trillions ought be the perfect bedtime reading for anyone curious about the unprecedented amounts of money that have been looted and hidden over the last 20 years. Tom Burgis, a reporter for the Financial Times, is certainly an impressive investigator. He works hard to explain how myriad financial institutions, from the Bank of New York to Merrill Lynch and HSBC, have tried to deceive regulators and wash the ill-gotten gains of countless dictators. The oligarchs of Putin’s Russia are big players in these pages. So are Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, British bankers turned regulators, a trio of Central Asian billionaires, and no fewer than 30 other major characters, all listed at the beginning. This results in so many competing storylines that it becomes almost impossible to keep track. We bounce back and forth, from the Russian and Italian gangsters of Brooklyn to the oil fields of the former Soviet Union, from the platinum mines of Zimbabwe to the copper and cobalt of the Congo. There are long sections about the wholesale theft of natural resources in post-Soviet Russia and the birth of the oligarchs, all of whom were forced to become Putin’s partners – or face imprisonment or death. For example, the purchase of a three-quarter stake in Yukos, for $350m, made Mikhail Khodorkovsky the richest man in Russia. Five years later, the vast oil company with 100,000 employees was worth $12bn. Khodorkovsky was arrested, jailed and eventually sent into exile. Burgis draws useful parallels between Putin’s kleptocracy and Hitler’s Germany, each home to both a “normative state” that generally respects its own laws and a “prerogative state” that violates most of them. According to the German-Jewish lawyer who was the author of the theory in the 1930s, “Nazi Germany was not a straightforward totalitarian system. It retained some vestiges of the rule of law, chiefly in matters of business, so that the capitalist economy had the basic rules it needed to keep going. But the prerogative state – Hitler’s political machinery – enjoyed … ‘jurisdiction over jurisdiction.” Putin has used his jurisdiction over everything to vanquish almost all of his enemies. And since Donald Trump has been collaborating with Russians in one way or another for almost 40 years, our kleptocrat-in-chief does finally make an appearance in Kleptopia, on page 250. After we’ve read a lot about Felix Sater, a second-generation Russian mobster connected to several schemes including the Trump Soho in lower Manhattan, Trump is identified as the “crucial ingredient” in Sater’s “magic potion for transforming dirty money”. Once the ratings of The Apprentice had washed away the public memory of multiple bankruptcies and “reinvented” his name as “a success”, Trump’s role in real estate deals became simply to “rent out his name”. “The projects could go bust,” Burgis writes, and “they usually did – but that wasn’t a problem.” The money had completed “its metamorphoses from plunder to clean capital”. Then there was the notorious sale of Trump’s Palm Beach mansion, to Russian oligarch Dmitry Rybolovlev for $95m, more than twice what Trump paid a few years before. According to Michael Cohen, Trump’s former fixer, Trump thought the real buyer was Putin – a story which hasn’t gotten nearly as much attention as it should. With his election as president, as Burgis puts it, Trump helped to construct a new “global alliance of kleptocrats”. Their whole goal is the privatization of power, and they control “the three great poles” – the US, China and Russia. In our new world of alternate facts, corruption is “no longer a sign of a failing state, but of a state succeeding in its new purpose”. The new kleptocrats have subverted their nations’ institutions, “to seize for themselves that which rightfully belonged to the commonwealth”. This is a ghastly and very important story. But the secret to great storytelling is knowing what to leave out. If Burgis had found a more focused way to tell this one, he would have written a much more powerful book.
5||Trump assaulted American democracy – here's how Democrats can save itBarring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. The vote on Barrett’s confirmation will occur just eight days before election day. By contrast, the Senate didn’t even hold a hearing on Merrick Garland, who Barack Obama nominated almost a year before the end of his term. Majority leader Mitch McConnell argued at the time that any vote should wait “until we have a new president”. Barrett was nominated by a president who lost the popular vote by nearly 3m ballots, and who was impeached by the House of Representatives. When Barrett joins the court, five of the nine justices will have been appointed by presidents who lost the popular vote. The Republican senators who will vote for her represent 15 million fewer Americans than their Democratic colleagues. Once on the high court, Barrett will join five other reactionaries who together will be able to declare laws unconstitutional, for perhaps a generation. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? For starters, increase the size of the supreme court. The constitution says nothing about the number of justices. The court changed size seven times in its first 80 years, from as few as five justices under John Adams to 10 under Abraham Lincoln. Biden says if elected he’ll create a bipartisan commission to study a possible court overhaul “because it’s getting out of whack”. That’s fine, but he’ll need to move quickly. The window of opportunity could close by the 2022 midterm elections. Second, abolish the Senate filibuster. Under current rules, 60 votes are needed to enact legislation. This means that if Democrats win a bare majority there, Republicans could block any new legislation Biden hopes to pass. The filibuster could be ended with a rule change requiring 51 votes. There is growing support among Democrats for doing this if they gain that many seats. During the campaign, Biden acknowledged that the filibuster has become a negative force in government. The filibuster is not in the constitution either. The most ambitious structural reform would be to rebalance the Senate itself. For decades, rural states have been emptying as the US population has shifted to vast megalopolises. The result is a growing disparity in representation, especially of nonwhite voters. For example, both California, with a population of 40 million, and Wyoming, whose population is 579,000, get two senators. If population trends continue, by 2040 some 40% of Americans will live in just five states, and half of America will be represented by 18 Senators, the other half by 82. This distortion also skews the electoral college, because each state’s number of electors equals its total of senators and representatives. Hence, the recent presidents who have lost the popular vote. This growing imbalance can be remedied by creating more states representing a larger majority of Americans. At the least, statehood should be granted to Washington DC. And given that one out of eight Americans now lives in California – whose economy, if it were a separate country, would be the ninth-largest in the world – why not split it into a North and South California? The constitution is also silent on the number of states. Those who recoil from structural reforms such as the three I’ve outlined warn that Republicans will retaliate when they return to power. That’s rubbish. Republicans have already altered the ground rules. In 2016, they failed to win a majority of votes cast for the House, Senate or the presidency, yet secured control of all three. Barrett’s ascent is the latest illustration of how grotesque the power imbalance has become, and how it continues to entrench itself ever more deeply. If not reversed soon, it will be impossible to remedy. What’s at stake is not partisan politics. It is representative government. If Democrats get the opportunity, they must redress this growing imbalance – for the sake of democracy. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a columnist for Guardian US
5||The Observer view on the Commons vote to let poor children go hungryIt speaks volumes of the government that it has taken a 22-year-old footballer to step into the vacuum to provide moral and compassionate leadership during a pandemic. Perhaps Boris Johnson thought that giving Marcus Rashford an MBE for his campaign for holiday food vouchers for poor children would muffle his voice. But Rashford has continued to speak truth to power in a way that puts the government to shame. Johnson last week instructed Conservative MPs to vote against a motion to uphold Rashford’s continued calls to extend holiday food vouchers for poor children. Just one Conservative minister, Caroline Ansell, thought this was a resigning matter. The rest of the sorry pack, including education secretary, Gavin Williamson and children’s minister, Vicky Ford, dutifully trooped through the lobby. That vote to deny children who get free meals during the school term food vouchers in the school holidays was bad enough. Even worse are the arguments MPs wheeled out to justify their decision. Brendan Clarke-Smith said giving food to hungry children was akin to “nationalising children”. Ben Bradley implied these vouchers were spent in crack dens and brothels over the summer. Mark Jenkinson argued that food parcels were being traded for drugs in his constituency. (Neither offered a shred of evidence for these ridiculous suppositions.) Selaine Saxby hoped those businesses in her constituency stepping in to provide free meals would not be seeking further government support. Philip Davies lambasted a 16-year-old constituent who wrote to him about the issue for being “intolerant”. Senior ministers know better than to openly voice these sentiments. But these views are far from fringe: they offer an ugly glimpse into a persistent strand of Tory thinking about poverty. Too many who have lived privileged lives on the Conservative benches believe their successes are down purely to their hard work, not the advantages that were handed to them on a silver platter. The corollary of this fantastical belief is that people who live in poverty, who cannot get a job that pays enough to support their family, are somehow morally deficient. This is nonsensical dogma. Poverty is less the product of individual life choices but overwhelmingly the inevitable result of the deficient economic and social orders that shape all of our lives. It is generated by low pay, unemployment and poor mental health. Minimum-wage jobs do not pay enough for parents to provide for their children without state support; little wonder that seven in 10 children in poverty come from working families. Just as bad is the poverty that sets in when large numbers of jobs vanish from an area and a lack of support to retrain consigns many to the scrapheap, making it hard for their children and grandchildren to escape the shackles of multigenerational joblessness. But it does not suit small-state Conservatives to acknowledge this. Even as they stigmatise people for relying on state handouts, they refuse to ensure cleaners and carers are paid enough to support their families. The Conservative MP Kit Malthouse justified voting against last week’s motion because a better way to help children in poverty was to “pump money into the welfare system”. We wholly agree, but this was an odd sentiment from someone whose party has spent the last decade eroding tax credits and benefits – many families lost the equivalent of thousands of pounds of support a year – in a way that has contributed to rising levels of child poverty. Conservative chancellors may have told us it was a necessary economy, but the tax cuts they handed more affluent families and businesses that cost billions of pounds a year suggested otherwise. If unemployment soars, as expected, in the coming months, things will get worse. The £20 a week boost to universal credit is set to be rescinded next April, dropping unemployment benefits to their lowest real-term levels since the 1990s. Meanwhile, the government has failed to mitigate the educational and mental health impacts of the pandemic on children. And, rather than address the root causes of the under-attainment of poor children at school over the last decade, Conservative ministers have flirted with the notion that it is somehow the widespread teaching of critical race theory in schools that is disadvantaging white, working-class children. Alongside asylum seekers and the legal profession, children now appear to be fair game in the culture-war politics of Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings: whether it is to take potshots at those campaigning against structural racism or to make Victorian-era aspersions about the feckless poor. They have made a massive misjudgment. The dogwhistle politics of Vote Leave cannot carry the country through a pandemic and the overwhelming response to Rashford’s call – the hard-pressed businesses, councils and individuals who have come forward to reduce the number of children going hungry – shows they have misjudged a nation. It is a heartwarming antidote to the callousness of ministers. But what do we teach our offspring when, though we can afford to, we choose not to ensure that all children have somewhere safe and warm to live, that they don’t go to bed hungry, that they have a pair of shoes without holes? We teach them that to be poor is to be shameful, that there is nothing wrong with a world where despite working all the hours under the sun you will never escape the fear and anxiety of what would happen if your fridge breaks or your landlord serves notice. We teach them that what should be theirs by right is theirs only through charity and benevolence.
4||Daniel Andrews under fire over delayed easing of restrictions after seven new cases reportedScott Morrison has criticised the Victorian government for delaying an announcement about the easing of coronavirus restrictions, saying Victoria’s public health systems “are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not”. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews on Sunday held off announcing opening dates for the retail and hospitality sectors pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs. It prompted criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. Morrison said the decision to delay the announcement – which he interpreted as a decision to keep businesses closed longer – was a “profound disappointment”. “At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave,” Morrison said in a statement “Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening.” The prime minister’s statement was another step in an increasingly bitter dispute between the Victorian and federal governments. In a heated press conference earlier on Sunday, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. “We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs,” Andrews said. “We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and [there] will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. “This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there … is more virus there than we think.” However, Andrews did announce a further easing of restrictions for regional Victoria. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday, the same number as on Saturday. Six of those were linked to other known cases in the outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs while the seventh was a healthcare worker with no known links. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 tests are among the 1,000 tests still awaiting results on Sunday. Andrews said it would be irresponsible to announce an easing of restrictions until those test results had been received and analysed, to determine whether any new cases were linked to the outbreak or if there were signs of untraced community transmission. That could take 24 hours, and Andrews said he would then be able to announce changes on Monday or Tuesday. After 60 minutes of questioning, he said that he still anticipated that restrictions would be eased by 1 November, as slated last week. “I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt,” he said. “November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening up before then.” Asked by a reporter why he did not say that at the start of the press conference, Andrews sighed and said he’d had a late night and early morning discussing the northern suburbs outbreak. From midnight on Sunday, greater Shepparton, which had been held back due to an outbreak, will be under the same rules as the rest of the regions. From midnight on Tuesday, 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funeral; 20 an outdoor religious service; and gyms and indoor pools will reopen to a maximum of 20 participants. Children’s indoor non-contact community sport will also be allowed to resume. Andrews had been foreshadowing a Sunday announcement for a week and said, as recently as Friday that the northern suburbs outbreak would not delay the “significant” easing of restrictions from Sunday. On Saturday he warned that he would “caution people from banking” on that announcement. The timeline for easing restrictions in Victoria has changed several times. In early September the government released a roadmap for reopening, which included a plan to lift Melbourne out of lockdown on 26 October provided the rolling 14-day average was fewer than five cases per day, and there had been no more than three mystery cases in the proceeding 14 days. The rolling average on Sunday was 4.6, and there have been seven mystery cases. Then in early October, Andrews brought forward the easing of restrictions to 19 October. On 18 October, he announced a limited easing of restrictions and promised a further easing from 1 November, with some changes to be outlined from 25 October. The shifting goalposts have caused frustration among some Victorians. At the press conference, Andrews rejected suggestions that the Victorian public had been on a rollercoaster of announcements. Asked if he had misled the public, he said “no”. The Business Council of Australia said it was “at a loss” to understand why Victoria was unable to reopen, when businesses in New South Wales have been able to operate with low numbers of locally-acquired cases for months. New South Wales recorded no new locally acquired cases on Sunday, for the third day in a row. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. “Victorians cannot hang on week to week,” the Business Council CEO, Jennifer Westacott, said. “People are at a financial and mental breaking point.” Earlier on Sunday, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said the only reason the Victorian government would not open up “is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system”. Andrews, the Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, and Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, all separately rejected that suggestion, saying that the number of tests conducted in connection to the northern suburbs outbreak, with up to 400 primary and secondary contacts identified and isolated, showed the system was working well. Andrews refused to comment on a comment from his recently departed health minister, Jenny Mikakos, who tweeted: “The set reopening is gradual and safe so any delay is unnecessary. It’s paralysis in decision-making.” “I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them,” Andrews said. “That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything.” Sutton said none of those criticising Victoria’s public health response were privy to all of the the health data. “None of them are in the tent,” he said.
3||Hopes for Kylie Moore-Gilbert after detained academic moved out of Iran's Qarchak prisonDetained British-Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert has reportedly been moved from Iran’s Qarchak prison, along with all of her belongings, but it is not known to where she has been taken. Family and friends who have been campaigning for her release hope the move is a positive sign, but there is no official word from the Iranian government. A Cambridge-educated Middle East scholar, Moore-Gilbert has served just over two years of a 10-year sentence for espionage. She was arrested in Tehran in September 2018 and convicted in a secret trial. No evidence of Moore-Gilbert’s alleged crimes has ever been publicly presented. She has denied the allegations against her and the Australian government rejects them as baseless and politically motivated. The Iranian Association of Human Rights Activists reported Moore-Gilbert was moved on Saturday – along with all her possessions – to an unknown place. That move came 11 days after she was shifted, along with 15 other political prisoners, to Ward Eight of Qarchak prison, formerly known as the Mothers’ Ward. Qarchak has been trying to quash an outbreak of novel coronavirus among inmates and guards at the prison. Iran, more widely, is suffering under a surging third wave of infections, with nearly 600 new cases and more than 300 deaths in the last 24 hours. Moore-Gilbert’s health has been poor in detention and she has had difficulty getting food that she can tolerate. But sources with knowledge of Iranian detention cases are cautiously hopeful the move could be good news in Moore-Gilbert’s case. “Obviously one hopes the move might be good news for Kylie, but we don’t know yet,” said Elaine Pearson, Australia director of Human Rights Watch. “Kylie has been detained for more than two years now, and she has endured very difficult conditions including extreme isolation. The Australian government should press forcefully and consistently for Kylie’s release and safe return to Australia.” Moore-Gilbert spent the first 22 months of her incarceration in Tehran’s Evin prison, including months in solitary confinement, before being moved to the desert prison Qarchak, widely regarded as the worst women’s prison in Iran, and known as a site of extrajudicial killings, torture and other rights violations. Sources have told the Guardian Moore-Gilbert was closely watched inside Qarchak – with two fellow prisoners assigned to follow her – restricting her contact with the outside world. Australia’s ambassador to Iran, Lyndall Sachs, has met with Moore-Gilbert in Qarchak and urged more regular consular access. In letters smuggled out of prison, Moore-Gilbert revealed she had rejected an offer to spy on behalf of Tehran in exchange for her freedom, but said she felt “abandoned and forgotten”. In a rare phone call earlier this year she said couldn’t eat anything in Qarchak: “I feel so very hopeless … I am so depressed.” On Friday, Human Rights Watch said Iranian judiciary authorities were prosecuting human rights defenders for reporting abuse inside detention, despite the presidential cabinet ordering its justice minister investigate claims of torture against an environmental conservationist, Niloufar Bayani. There has been no report. Born in Bathurst, New South Wales, Moore-Gilbert is a lecturer in Islamic Studies at the University of Melbourne. She hold both British and Australian citizenship, but was travelling on her Australian passport. She was arrested in September 2018 after attending an academic conference in Qom. Fellow conference delegates and an interview subject for her academic work flagged her as “suspicious” to Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, who arrested her at Tehran airport as she prepared to fly out of the country. Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said their efforts to secure Moore-Gilbert’s release were “an absolute priority”. “We remain focused on her health, wellbeing and safety,” a spokeswoman said. “We do not accept the charges upon which Dr Moore-Gilbert was convicted, and want to see her returned to Australia as soon as possible. Our Ambassador in Tehran has regular consular access to Dr Moore-Gilbert.”
4||Regional Victoria ‘step 3’ coronavirus roadmap restrictions and lockdown rules explainedRegional Victoria has consistently outperformed its metropolitan counterpart in suppressing the Covid-19 virus and as such is subject to significantly fewer restrictions. Currently, it is in the third step of the state’s roadmap out of lockdown allowing for a significant reopening of the retail and hospitality industries. On 19 October, premier Daniel Andrews announced some easing of restrictions, increasing capacity in restaurants and cafes as well as allowing more guests to enter private homes. Further changes were announced on 25 October. Here are the main things you need to know about the step three restrictions in regional Victoria: When can I leave my house? The only restriction on leaving home is that you cannot travel into areas with higher restrictions, which includes metropolitan Melbourne. Otherwise, there are no restrictions on reasons for leaving your house or on where you go within the state. People can gather in groups of up to 10 people outdoors. What are the rules for wearing masks? People must still wear a mask or covering whenever leaving the house. There are a few exceptions. People with a medical reason are exempt, as are children younger than 12. Those who have a professional reason “or if it’s just not practical, like when running” are also exempt, but those people will still be expected to carry a face covering at all times “to wear when you can”. In schools, teachers will not need to wear a face covering while teaching, but students attending classes will. Both teachers and students will need to wear a mask on the way to and from school. Andrews said “common sense” would guide how the new rules are enforced. People would not be required to wear one when it was impractical, such as when exercising or visiting a bank. Breaking the rules is punishable with a $200 fine. Can I have visitors to my house? Can I see my partner? Whereas previously regional Victoria operated under the “household bubble”system, this was replaced from 19 October. You can now have up to two people visit you at home once a day. These do not have to be the same people each time and the two people can come from separate households. Infants under 12 months are not included, and other children or dependents can come if they cannot be left unattended or cared for by another. There is no time limit on how long they can visit but you can only have a single visitation each day. Can I now dine-in at a restaurant or cafe? Hospitality businesses are now able to serve up to 70 people outdoors with a minimum of one person per two square meters. From 19 October, indoor spaces are allowed to operate with up to 10 people per distinct space, with a minimum of four square meters per person and no more than 40 indoor customers total. Tables must be spaced at least 1.5m apart, cleaned after every customer and the details of all patrons must be kept. Businesses must continue to ensure people from metropolitan Melbourne do not eat-in. Will the shops be open? Yes, all shops can open. Hairdressers, tattoo parlours and beauty servers are also open, but only where a mask can be worn for the duration of the service. What about other businesses and services? Similar to dining out, entertainment venues and events that are predominantly outdoors are now open. Real estate inspections are still by appointment only, but outdoor auctions can return, subject to gathering limits. Libraries and toy libraries can open for up to 20 people indoors, but no more than 10 people can gather in a single space, and there must be at least four square meters per person. Licensed tourism services that use open-air vehicles only are also now allowed to operate. A vehicle is considered an open-air if at least two sides are open to airflow at all times. What are the rules for exercise? All community sports have resumed for children in regional Victoria, but only non-contact sports are allowed for adults outdoors, within gather and density limits. Outdoor exercise is also now allowed for groups of up to 10 people. Outdoor skateparks have also opened. From 11.59pm on 27 October, indoor gyms will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with minimum space requirements in place. Children’s indoor non-contact community sports will also be allowed to resume, provided participants can remain 1.5m apart. Outdoor pools are open and from 19 October indoor swimming pools can open exclusively for those aged 18 and under. One parent or guardian is allowed per child to supervise, and swimming classes can resume. Indoor pools can also open for one-on-one hydrotherapy sessions with a limit of 10 people in the pool at one time. From midnight on 27 October, indoor pools will be open to up to 20 people. What is happening with schools? All students in regional Victoria will now be expected to return to onsite learning. The return will be staggered and will apply when term four begins during the week of 12 October. Childcare centres remain open while adult education remains restricted, with students encouraged to learn from home if they can. What happens to weddings, funerals or religious services? Weddings can now have up to 10 people, including the couple, two witnesses and a celebrant. Funerals are now allowed to have up to 20 people, not including children under 12 months and people required to conduct the funeral. From 28 October, up to 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funerals. Outdoor religious gatherings are allowed for up to 20 people plus one faith leader. This includes ceremonies, but no sharing of food, drink or utensils is allowed. From Wednesday up to 20 people plus one faith leader will be allowed to attend a religious gathering indoors, and up to 50 will be allowed to attend outdoor religious gatherings. Where can I travel? Restrictions on travel within regional Victoria have been eased, with people now allowed to travel within the state, with the exception of areas with higher restrictions. In this case, that means everywhere except metropolitan Melbourne. Tourist accommodation is open, but exclusively for regional Victorians travelling and holidaying within regional Victoria. Caps and density limits still apply, however. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
4||Australian production of non-protein Covid-19 vaccine may take an extra year, minister saysIt could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine if a non-protein-based version proves safe and effective, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews said CSL would be able to immediately start making a protein-based vaccine, but “significant work” would be required if it was another type based on mRNA, or messenger ribonucleic acid. Vaccines traditionally introduce proteins into the body to provoke the immunity system into responding but if an mRNA vaccine of the kind being developed by US company Moderna is approved it would be the first of its type, experts say. During an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday, Andrews was pressed to give a timeframe to get production up and running in Australia if an mRNA vaccine was approved. “I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe,” she said. “But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range.” Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades – with some of that work already under way. The rollout of a successful vaccine has implications for opening international borders and restoring a sense of normality to social and economic activity in Australia. The federal budget, released earlier this month, assumed that a population-wide Australian Covid-19 vaccination program would be “fully in place by late 2021”, with social distancing restrictions continuing until a vaccine was available. The health minister, Greg Hunt, moved to assure people later on Sunday that Australia was “very strongly placed” when it came to securing access to and producing vaccines. “We in a strong position, we’re progressing, there’s never a guarantee – but what we know is that we’ve been exceptionally cautious in relation to vaccines and each day the evidence is stronger and the proximity to distribution of that treatment is closer,” Hunt told reporters in Canberra. Hunt said Andrews had been asked a hypothetical question about non-protein vaccines and was “absolutely right that some of the mRNA ones will take longer”. But he said the protein-based vaccine candidate being developed by AstraZeneca and the University of Oxford remained “on track for first quarter [2021] commencement and significant rollout during the course of the year [2021]”. “So our timeframes are unchanged. On the hypothetical if there were no protein-based vaccine, Minister Andrews was 100% correct. But when you take away that hypothetical, when we look at the board reality, Australia is on track for first quarter commencement of that rollout.” Hunt said Australia had reached a deal to access 33.8m units of the Oxford and AstraZeneca vaccine, including 3.8m units brought in from overseas in early 2021, subject to approvals in the UK and Australia. He said Australian manufacturing would able to commence and be well under way in the first quarter of 2021. Hunt said CSL was also aiming to make sure that the vaccine developed by the University of Queensland was “available during the course of next year – about the middle of the year”. He said there were contracts for 51m units of the UQ vaccine to be manufactured in Australia throughout 2021. He said the government was also “highly advanced” in investigating other vaccine candidates, and had joined the Covax international buying facility.
4||Storm cuts power in Queensland as thunderstorm asthma alerts issued for southern NSW and CanberraAlmost 29,000 homes in south-east Queensland have been left without power due to wild thunderstorms. Large hailstones, damaging winds and heavy rain hit the region on Sunday afternoon. Electricity provider Energex reported 28,898 outages around 3pm (AEST), with about 7,000 of those in Brisbane. Social media photos have shown ice cube-sized hail in the city’s northern suburbs. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe weather warning for Redland City, parts of Ipswich, Logan, Scenic Rim, Lockyer Valley, Gold Coast, Brisbane City and Moreton Bay Council areas. Earlier this weekend, thunderstorm asthma alerts were issued for the Australian Capital Territory and New South Wales’s nearby Murrumbidgee region. The Bureau of Meteorology said a low-pressure trough and strong cold front would continue to cross NSW on Sunday, reaching the north-east of the state by evening and leaving significantly cooler conditions in its wake. A new high-pressure system was forecast to strengthen south of Tasmania early this week, with the potential to maintain showery conditions across eastern areas for a number of days. Health authorities warned that severe thunderstorms, combined with existing elevated pollen levels, could create a situation conducive to a thunderstorm asthma event. “Not all thunderstorms produce an asthma event, and thunderstorm asthma is a rare event,” ACT Health said in a statement. “However, people who suffer from hay fever or asthma are encouraged to be vigilant over the weekend for any worsening of their condition. Where possible avoid being outside during a thunderstorm – especially in the wind gusts that come before the storm. Go inside and close your doors and windows. If you have your air conditioning on, turn it on to recirculate.” The NSW public health unit director, Tracey Oakman, issued a thunderstorm asthma alert for the Murrumbidgee local health district area for the entire weekend. “If you know you have asthma, carry your asthma puffer with you at all times and try to stay indoors with the windows and doors closed during the storm period,” the NSW Health statement said. “Be aware that thunderstorm asthma can also affect people who have not had asthma before.” Ten deaths were attributed to a thunderstorm asthma event in Melbourne in November 2016 and 14,000 people were taken to hospital with breathing difficulties. A sheep graziers’ warning was also in force for the NSW south coast, southern tablelands, Snowy Mountains and parts of the Illawarra, south-west slopes, Riverina and Australian Capital Territory. And in Victoria, the north-central, south-west and central districts and parts of the west and South Gippsland and East Gippsland areas were subject to the same warning. The BoM said cold temperatures, showers and strong winds could cause losses of sheep and lambs on Sunday. A gale warning was in force for the Hunter and Sydney coastal areas on Sunday and a minor flood warning was in place for the Murray River around Jingellic. In Victoria there were also flood warnings for the Bunyip and Kiewa rivers and Dandenong Creek.
20||Investors fear there'll be no bright post-Covid dawn for oil majorsThe oil market may have heaved itself out of the darkness of “Black April” but investors are far from convinced that major oil companies will walk away unscathed from the coronavirus pandemic. Royal Dutch Shell and BP will both face investors this week with quarterly financial results that will deliver profits well below those achieved a year ago, against a backdrop of tumbling share prices and rising Covid infections across major economies. On Tuesday, BP is expected to report an underlying loss of $120m for the last quarter, according to analysts’ estimates. This would be a major improvement on its underlying loss of $6.7bn in the second quarter, following heavy writedowns on the company’s exploration business, but would still be well below the $2.3bn third-quarter profit reported in 2019. BP’s announcement will come days after its share price fell below 200p a share for the first time since 1994, and months after the company cut its dividend for the first time since the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and set out plans to cut 10,000 jobs. In the same week, Shell is expected to reveal a modest underlying profit, of $146m, for the third quarter, according to analysts, after plunging to a loss of $18.4bn for the second quarter. This is still a fraction of the $4.76bn profit recorded in the same quarter last year, and follows the company’s decision to cut 9,000 jobs and reduce the dividend for the first time since the second world war. This trend is expected to be followed across the world’s oil companies, tracking the fragile and uncertain recovery of global oil markets amid a second wave of coronavirus infections. The price of oil reached an average of $43 a barrel in the third quarter – stronger than the average of $30 a barrel in the second quarter, when US oil prices fell below zero for the first time in April – but still well below the $62 a barrel price that prevailed in the third quarter a year ago. Oil industry investors may have already weathered the darkest days of the pandemic, but in recent months it seems to have dawned on many that there is a very long road ahead – and that a full oil industry recovery may never happen. Many experts believe that the heavy hit to demand for oil during the pandemic may mean it is years before market prices recover to $50 a barrel. BP’s own global energy forecasts suggest that oil demand may never recover from the impact of coronavirus on the global transport industry, heralding a sooner-than-expected existential decline for fossil fuels. The company’s energy outlook report seemed to underline the importance of BP’s plans to reduce production of oil and gas by 40% over the next decade while investing billions in renewable energy to transform it from oil major to modern energy company. But in investors’ eyes the oil industry’s battered balance sheets don’t look in good shape for fuelling a green energy transition. BP’s shares have languished at 25- year lows for the past month, taking its £41bn market cap to less than a third of what it was a decade ago, following its failed bid to move “beyond petroleum” in the early 2000s. The company’s market value has been topped by offshore wind developer Ørsted, once known as Danish state oil company Dong Energy, which has a market valuation of £49.6bn on the Copenhagen exchange. Its valuation has doubled in the past two years after it switched from fossil fuel investments to renewable energy a decade ago. Ørsted is a stark reminder of what might have been possible for other oil companies had they seized the opportunity to invest in the nascent renewables industry, and may prove a formidable rival for the favour of investors, too.
3||Test-and-trace chief Dido Harding should quit, says senior ToryBaroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the government’s much-criticised test-and-trace programme, should be removed and replaced, a senior Conservative MP has said. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. He warned of a “vacuum of leadership in test and trace, which is destroying public confidence and compliance”, it was reported on Saturday evening. He went on to criticise the handling of calls and data in a “spaghetti of command and control” at the top of the organisation. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. “Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. “The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace,” he wrote in the Sunday Telegraph. His sharp criticism came as it was reported that officials on the Downing Street Covid-19 taskforce have been asked to consider cutting the self-isolation quarantine period for those infected from 14 days to between seven and 10 days. After a week in social isolation, people testing positive could be offered a second test, with the quarantine period ending as soon as a negative result is declared. The proposal came after the prime minister was apparently told that 14 days’ isolation is a major barrier to widespread support for the rules.
29||Azed crossword 2,524Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.
29||Speedy crossword No 1,308
3||Colombia due to surpass 1m cases; arrests made at London anti-lockdown protest – as it happenedWe’ll be closing down this blog shortly, as the Sydney team get a new one up and running. Thanks to everyone who wrote in with tips and suggestions for coverage. In the meantime, here’s a quick summary of recent key developments: Several European countries have reported record daily increases in coronavirus cases, including Italy, Greece, Austria, Luxembourg and France. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. The government is facing a legal battle with academics over its “unlawful” decision to reopen universities for face-to-face teaching last month. The UK’s largest academic union is seeking a judicial review of the government’s decision to ignore advice from its own Sage committee of experts to move all non-essential university and college teaching online in September. In a pre-action letter, sent to the education secretary Gavin Williamson and shared with the Observer, the University and College Union (UCU) argues the government’s failure to direct universities to move to online teaching this term was unlawful, unfair, unjust and irrational. The proportion of younger adults in the UK who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a new poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer shows the proportion of 18- to 34-year-olds who admit breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35- to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. Interesting Reuters update from Colombia amid global anticipation for a vaccine: As scientists around the world race to find a coronavirus inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine which proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme which offers 21 vaccines to everyone in the South American nation - among the region’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not just Colombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country distributes about 23 million doses per year. Colombia has already committed $213 million to the global COVAX initiative, guaranteeing COVID-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. In Australia, Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. This is a small figure on a global scale, but to residents of Melbourne it is worryingly high. Melbourne has been under stay-at-home orders for 109 days and the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to announce an easing of restrictions today. It comes as the 14-day rolling average of new cases in the city fell below the target of five cases per day, to 4.6. However, Andrews said on Saturday that the easing of restrictions could be in doubt because of a new outbreak in the city’s northern suburbs. Labour is ramping up the pressure on the UK government to U-turn and extend free school meal provision over the holidays, warning it will bring the motion back to parliament if ministers do not reverse their position before Christmas. Shadow education secretary Kate Green called on the prime minister to meet with the taskforce set up by footballer Marcus Rashford “as a matter of urgency” to discuss its proposals for ending child poverty. “There is still time to change approach, but the Government must act quickly. If you change your policy now, we can ensure that no child goes to bed hungry on Christmas Day,” Green wrote in a letter to education secretary Gavin Williamson. “Labour will not give up on the fight to ensure that no child goes to bed hungry, and if you do not change course we will bring this issue back to the House of Commons before Christmas.” Australians have become accustomed to the daily announcements of new Covid-19 cases. Although the majority of those cases – bar Victoria – have come through returning travellers from overseas, little has been known about Covid-positive cases that have passed through hotel quarantine, and how governments are tracking the origins of these cases. But data provided to Guardian Australia by three states – New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia – offers some important insights into Covid-positive returning travellers. The states each provided data from 29 March, when the travel restrictions were introduced, to 19 October, revealing that they were indeed monitoring countries-of-origin where returning travellers may have contracted the virus. Data from NSW Health shows the majority of 873 Covid-positive travellers who arrived in the state were returning Australian nationals. Melissa Davey with the full report here: Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police, some mounted on horseback, fired teargas and beat up the protesters, who had set up barricades along the roads using skips, boulders and burning tyres, while others set a national flag ablaze, according to an AFP photographer. A police source who asked not to be identified told AFP that the demonstration – demanding the holding of local government elections – “resulted in barricades and acts of vandalism”. Municipal elections, which had been scheduled for this year, have been postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic. “Those were acts of rioting, in a flagrant violation of (new pandemic restrictions), which do not allow street gatherings of more than five people,” he said. UK paediatricians have published an open letter calling on the government to extend provision of free school meals until at least Easter 2021 – you can read it here: The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. It took the country of 10.7 million seven months to reach 1,000 deaths after the first reported case. The number of patients in a serious state grew to 772 as of Friday, up from 438 two weeks ago. Hospitals were treating 5,314 people with coronavirus in total. Here are the main developments from over the last few hours: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. Net approval of the UK government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has fallen to a record low of -21%, a poll by Opinium shows. Public health officials and contractors in England have barely used check-in data from millions of people who have visited cafes, pubs and restaurants, the Guardian has learned. As a legal condition introduced last month, venues are obliged to record customer details in an effort to contain the spread of Covid-19, but the government’s hamstrung test-and-trace scheme has appeared unable to cope with the swiftly rising number of coronavirus cases. Mattha Busby reports here: France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. A further 138 people have died, taking the toll to 34,645. The Welsh first minister has said the government will be “reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets”, amid anger over a ban on selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. A petition to reverse the ban has gathered more than 30,000 signatures. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. Mark Drakeford has said the restriction is in place as a “matter of fairness” to non-essential shops that have been ordered to close. The US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections above 100,000 a day, health experts have warned, just as a presidential campaign with the pandemic as its core issue enters its final week. In a further blow to Donald Trump’s hopes of keeping the White House, the US death toll from Covid-19 will pass 225,000 by early this week, bringing extra scrutiny to the president’s repeated but evidently false claims that the crisis is “rounding the turn”. Richard Luscombe has the story here: Spain’s cabinet will meet on Sunday morning to discuss announcing a national state of emergency, the government announced on Saturday. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez “has called an extraordinary cabinet meeting at 10am to study the conditions for a new state of emergency,” it said, saying such a proposal had been “positively welcomed by most of Spain’s autonomous communities, who had requested it”. The meeting comes just days after Spain registered more than one million virus cases, becoming the sixth country in the world to pass the grim milestone – and the first in the European Union. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. Five further deaths were also reported, taking the country’s toll to 564. The previous highest increase in cases was on Thursday, when 882 cases were reported. New measures were announced on Thursday, including a 12.30am-5am curfew in areas with high numbers of infections which comes into force tonight. Face masks are now compulsory in outdoor spaces as well as indoors. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London, for offences including breaching coronavirus regulations, assaulting an emergency service worker, violent disorder and for being already wanted. Three officers suffered minor injuries, the force said. Commander Ade Adelekan, the Met’s gold commander for the protest, said: “Organisers did not take reasonable steps to keep protesters safe which then voided their risk assessment. At this point, officers then took action to disperse crowds in the interests of public safety. “I am grateful that the vast majority of people listened to officers and quickly left the area. Frustratingly, a small minority became obstructive, deliberately ignoring officers’ instructions and blocking Westminster Bridge.” Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The previous record daily increase in cases was on Thursday, when 595 infections were added to the tally. This brings the country’s total number of cases to 13,713, while the death toll stands at 144. It follow Friday’s announcement of new measures to tackle the virus’s resurgence, including a curfew between 11 and 6pm. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Last Saturday, 1,747 cases were reported – which was also a record at the time. The total confirmed cases in Austria rose to 79,770 cases, There are currently 25,825 active cases in the country, according to Metropole. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, entered self-isolation on Saturday after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Tebboune, who is 74, has been advised by medical staff to isolate for five days. Algeria has officially recorded 55,630 coronavirus cases and 1,897 deaths so far. Jason Rodrigues with the latest from the anti-lockdown protest at Westminster Bridge New coronavirus measures have been announced in Brussels. From 26 October, masks will be compulsory throughout the country, while cultural venues (museums, galleries) and sports facilities will be closed. Other measures include shops closing at 8pm, and takeaways operating until 10pm. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a nationwide lockdown like the one during spring. Several regions have imposed overnight curfews. It follows clashes between protesters and police in Naples late on Friday night after a nighttime curfew was ordered in the Campania region. Arrests have been made on the anti lockdown demonstration in London after a group of protesters decided not to disperse and instead carried on a march from Trafalgar Square to Westminster Bridge. Police blocked the path of protesters at the north end of the bridge, leading to scuffles as some tried to carry on marching and calls went up from some to rush the police lines. The Guardian saw police making at least three arrests. One group of protesters tried to stage a sit down protest on the bridge. They were being forced south by a line of police. Damien Gayle with a video from London’s anti-lockdown protest, which has been ordered to disperse: Jason Rodrigues also reports that there’s been “at least one arrest” by Westminster Bridge: There have been a further 23,012 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases recorded in the UK, according to government data. This compares with 20,530 new cases registered on Friday. A total of 854,010 people have tested positive. A further 174 deaths within 28 days of a positive test were reported on Saturday, bringing the total to 44,571. There were 224 deaths on Friday. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is mainland China’s first local case since 14 October, when one was reported in Qingdao. No new cases have been found in Xinjiang since 15 August, when a cluster of infections were reported. The case was identified after the patient, a 17-year-old woman, was tested during a regular inspection. She has been transferred to a hospital in the city and all close contacts have been isolated. Police have called time on the anti-lockdown protest in London, where several thousand people remain in Trafalgar Square after a long march through the city. In a tweet posted on a Metropolitan police account, the force said: “The protest under the name of ‘Stop The New Normal’ have failed to comply with the terms of their risk assessment, government guidelines and they are not maintaining social distancing. “The officer in charge has now determined their protest is no longer exempt from the regulations and is an illegal gathering. “We are now telling those participating in this protest to leave. Officers will be engaging with crowds and informing them of this development. “By leaving now, you can keep yourself safe and avoid any enforcement action being taken by officers.” The square was flooded with police asking people to leave soon after. The announcement came at the end of a long and noisy protest march through the city. Louise Creffield, founder of Save Our Rights UK, who organised the protest said: “We’re really pleased, the turnout was phenomenal and we’ve managed to get away with no one being injured or arrested. “It’s really good to be able to have a voice, and this is the only way we get it.” Among the protesters taking part was Chloe Toop, 32, a schoolteacher. “I’m doing it for the next generation, fighting for them,” she said. She said she was anxious about young people “not having a life that I have growing up, not being able to go on holiday or to festivals”. “Kids are now scared to go and meet each other, hug each other. Social interaction is so important,” she said. Hello, Clea Skopeliti taking over the blog for the next few hours. My Twitter DMs are open for any suggestions for global coverage, or you can drop me an email. Thanks in advance! I will shortly be handing over the blog to my colleague. Below are the latest updates. Welsh government called on to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit country tried to tackle its third wave of infections. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Thousands of people have signed a petition calling on the Welsh government to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown in Wales. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. Supplies for the “essential upkeep, maintenance and functioning of the household” - such as batteries, lightbulbs and rubber gloves - can be sold during the lockdown. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme that offers 21 vaccines to all Colombians, among the South America’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, the secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not onlyColombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country delivers about 23 million vaccinations a year. Colombia has already committed $213m to the global Covax initiative, guaranteeing Covid-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. Colombia’s cases have climbed steadily despite more than five months of a gradually loosened lockdown. The death toll is set to top 30,000 people over the weekend. Chile has identified more than 500,000 coronavirus cases since the outbreak began in March, the health ministry said on Saturday. The ministry said 500,542 Chileans were now confirmed to have suffered from the virus, including 1,631 cases added in the past day and 48 deaths, taking fatalities to a total of 13,892. Active cases are at a record low of 9,900, it added. Chile, which was among the worst-hit countries in July, ranking only behind Qatar globally for per capita cases , has gradually eased its lockdown over the past two months. Restaurants and bars have opened with limited capacity, office workers are returning and some schools have reopened. Chileans will vote on Sunday in a referendum on whether to replace the country’s Pinochet-era constitution. The charter, drawn up by a key lieutenant of the military leader Augusto Pinochet in 1980, is blamed for segmenting pension, health and education provisions and entrenching inequality. The organiser of a party attended by more than 50 people has been handed a £10,000 fine for “blatant disregard” of Covid-19 regulations. Police were called to a flat in Simpson Street, Angel Meadows, Manchester, shortly after 11.20 pm (BST) on Friday. Officers found DJ mixing decks, speakers, a buffet and about 50 people in attendance, Greater Manchester Police said. The force said the party was closed down and the organiser given a £10,000 fixed penalty notice for breaching coronavirus legislation, one of the first issued since Greater Manchester entered tier 3 restrictions. A further 1,324 people have tested positive for coronavirus in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 41,577. Public Health Wales said 16 people with Covid-19 had died, bringing the total number of deaths to 1,772. The government is set to deliver £75m in grants to 35 of the country’s top cultural organisations and venues, from the Old Vic to Shakespeare’s Globe. It is the latest tranche of money to be distributed from the government’s £1.57bn culture recovery fund. These grants are the largest to have come from the package to date and will go to bodies which require between £1m and £3m. Money was allocated based on whether applicants provided jobs, supported the wider community and engaged with the public through innovative means during the pandemic. More than £52m – 70% of the total awarded in this round - will go to organisations outside London. The culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, said: “As part of our unprecedented £1.57bn rescue fund, today we’re saving British cultural icons with large grants of up to £3m - from Shakespeare’s Globe to the Sheffield Crucible. The fund has also distributed £188m to the devolved administrations - with £97m for Scotland, £59m for Wales and £33m for Northern Ireland. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit nation battled the third wave. Latest officials figures showed coronavirus had killed 32,320 Iranians and infected 562,705, with 5,814 new cases and 335 fatalities in the previous 24 hours. Taking a swipe at arch-foe the United States, Khamenei said Iran must enforce curbs better and end disputes between institutions over the pandemic. Thanks, everyone for following the blog and for your emails. Please do get in touch if you have any news tips or want to share any information from where you are. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com Spanish regions are urging the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as the country battles a resurgent coronavirus epidemic. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. “I would say with almost total certainty there will be one. But it has not officially been called yet,” a source from the Spanish government told Reuters. While many regions favour some form of curfew, the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Thousands of anti-lockdown protesters have begun a noisy march through central London. After gathering at Speakers’ Corner in Hyde Park, crowds began to walk down Oxford Street in the direction of Oxford Circus. Before leaving, they heard from Piers Corbyn, the brother of the former Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who exhorted followers to “stop new normal, save lives”. Louise Creffield, the founder of Save Our Rights UK, one of the groups behind the protest, told the crowd: “Today we are standing in our power and we are not abiding by their rules. “It doesn’t matter what they say, it doesn’t matter what threats they bring, it doesn’t matter if they try and intimidate us, we are not going to accept it, because we don’t abide by their rules. We don’t listen because we do not consent.” As they marched down Oxford Street, protesters chanted for freedom and told passersby to take off their masks. Others played the drums, blew whistles and played music on portable sound systems. Here are the latest developments in the coronavirus crisis: More than 1.1 million dead The virus has claimed at least 1,145,847 lives worldwide since it first emerged in China late last year, according to an AFP tally based on official sources. At least 42,262,299 cases have been registered across the globe. The US is the worst-affected country with 223,998 deaths, followed by Brazil with 156,471, India with 117,956, Mexico with 88,312 and Britain with 44,571. WHO warning The WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. Germany deaths top 10,000 The Robert Koch Institute, a federal government agency, has recorded a total of 10,003 coronavirus deaths in Germany, where 14,714 new cases have also been diagnosed in the last 24 hours, a record figure. Lothar Wieler, the president of the institute’s disease control authority, said the country was facing a very serious situation. The chancellor, Angela Merkel, told citizens in a weekly video podcast that “the order of the day is to reduce contacts, to meet as few people as possible”. New daily record cases in US Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Poland president tests positive Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Naples clashes Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late on Friday during a demonstration against restrictions in the southern Italian city. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as a curfew in the Campania region started at 11:00 pm. Some protesterslit smoke bombs. Grants for UK arts institutions The British government has announced a £75m rescue package to save 35 cultural institutions hit by the pandemic, including London’s Globe Old Vic theatres. New coronavirus restrictions are to take effect in Madrid on Saturday as the Spanish government weighs declaring a national state of emergency to allow curfews to be imposed. Days after the country registered more than a million cases of Covid-19, the regions - which are responsible for managing public healthcare - have put pressure on the government to give them legal right to impose tighter restrictions. In practice, that would involve the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez declaring a national state of emergency that would enable the regions to impose curfews, a measure increasingly applied across Europe. Nine of Spain’s 17 autonomous regions have formally requested such a move, and a decision is expected to be at an extraordinary meeting of ministers on Sunday. The government can impose an emergency for up to a fortnight, but it would need parliamentary approval to extend it. Spain used the powers in spring to enforce one of the world’s tightest lockdowns, and a similar measure has been in force in Madrid for the past fortnight, although only to impose movement restrictions on the capital and various nearby towns. That measure ends at 4:47 pm (1447 GMT) on Saturday, when new restrictions drawn up by the regional authorities will come into force. Hello everyone. I am running the Guardian’s global live feed, updating you on all the latest coronavirus news from around the world. Please do feel free to contact me while I work today, providing any news tips or comments. Thanks Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and the World Health Organization (WHO), probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Istanbul’s mayor Ekrem Imamoğlu has been admitted to hospital after testing positive for coronavirus and suffering a fever. “Yesterday evening around 9pm I got a fever and with a temperature of 38 degrees. I came and spent the night in hospital,” he said in a video. “Now I am actually well. My fever is not bad. The process is continuing. There is nothing that can be viewed as negative in a medical sense.” Istanbul’s American hospital said in a statement that Imamoğlu, an opponent of the country’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, was admitted at 10pm (1900 GMT) after displaying symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection. It said he tested positive for coronavirus and that his treatment was continuing. Imamoğlu, from the secular Republican People’s party (CHP), was elected mayor in a re-run election in June 2019 in a blow to Erdoğan and his ruling AK party. There have since been sporadic tensions between his municipality and the central government, including disputes over fundraising and measures to combat the coronavirus pandemic in its early stages. Spanish regions have urged the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as coronavirus cases rise. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement, Reuters reported. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. Many regions favour some form of curfew, but the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Total cases rose to 1,046,132 on Friday, and the death toll is nearing 38,000. Catalonia said on Friday night that it would impose a curfew across the region, which includes Barcelona, as soon as the central government acted. The deputy Catalan leader, Pere Aragones, told a press conference: We need a decentralised state of emergency in which the Catalan government maintains all management capacity. The evolution is very worrying. Either we increase our efforts or Covid-19 increases. Some regions are considering imposing curfews by alternative means, such as going through regional courts, if the central government does not act. “We cannot wait any longer and we have to take steps forward,” Murcia’s regional president, Fernando López Miras, told the Spanish broadcaster TVE on Saturday. “If the central government does nothing, we will approve a curfew.” Malaysia reported 1,228 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, a record daily jump since the start of the pandemic, bringing the total number of cases to 25,742. The health ministry also said seven new deaths had also been recorded. Recent data has highlighted the struggle authorities around the world face in bringing the coronavirus pandemic under control, as the US reported 80,000 infections in a single day, France extended a curfew to two-thirds of its citizens and Germany’s death toll passed 10,000. The World Health Organization had earlier warned of an exponential rise in infections that threatened health systems’ ability to cope. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions to slow the resurgent virus’ spread. There were clashes overnight in Naples between Italian police and hundreds of protesters. Covid-19 has become a central election issue in the US ahead of the presidential election on 3 November. Donald Trump promised attendees at a Florida rally on Friday that “we’re going to quickly end this pandemic, this horrible plague”. Joe Biden matched Trump’s vow to make a vaccine available free to all who want it “whether or not you’re insured” and said the Republican incumbent has “given up” on controlling the outbreak. Johns Hopkins University had earlier reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Ministers may be forced to close schools in England to older children if coronavirus cases continue to increase at the current rate, a scientist has said. Prof Neil Ferguson, whose modelling led to the original lockdown in March, said the NHS would soon be unable to cope unless the spread of the disease was stemmed. He said there were 8,000 people in hospital with coronavirus - around a third of the peak earlier this year - and that numbers were continuing to rise. “It is a worrying situation,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “If the rate of growth continues as it is, it means that in a month’s time we will above that peak level in March and that is probably unsustainable. “We are in a critical time right now. The health system will not be able to cope with this rate of growth for much longer.” His warning came as South Yorkshire became the latest region to enter the tightest Tier 3 restrictions in England following Liverpool city region, Greater Manchester and Lancashire. Ferguson said it would be another week or two before it became clear whether the stricter measures would have an impact on case numbers. He said the restrictions on households mixing should have a significant effect, but that further action may also be needed. Bulgaria’s capital Sofia, home to about 2 million people, will close nightclubs and discos on Sunday for two weeks in an effort to contain a surge in coronavirus infections straining its health system. Speaking on national BTV television on Saturday, the city’s mayor, Yordanka Fankakova, also urged Sofia universities to switch to online education and appealed to businesses to let as many employees as possible work from home. “The situation is Sofia is becoming increasingly alarming. We have a new increase in infections and of people who need hospital treatment. This is straining the hospitals,” she said. Hello everyone and thanks for following the Guardian’s live feed today. I am keeping you up to date with all the news on coronavirus from around the globe. Please do email or message me if you want to share thoughts, comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com In the UK, Prof Neil Ferguson has said a decision about whether restrictions on households mixing should be relaxed over Christmas will be a “political judgment” . “It risks some transmission and there will be consequences of that. Some people will die because of getting infected on that day,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “But if it is only one or two days the impact is likely to be limited. So that is really a political judgment about the cost versus the benefits.” Indonesia reported 4,070 new coronavirus infections on Saturday, taking the total number of cases to 385,980, official data from the country’s Covid-19 taskforce shows. It also reported 128 new deaths, taking the total to 13,205, and 4,119 people recovered from the virus on Saturday, bringing the total to 309,219. Wales’ firebreak lockdown should bring the R value - the number of people each coronavirus case infects - below one, health minister Vaughan Gething has said. Gething told BBC Breakfast the 17-day period would be followed by a set of national measures to control the spread of Covid-19. Asked about economists warning that the lockdown could cost the Welsh economy more than £500m, Mr Gething said: “It’s not just about the direct costs within the firebreak, when we know there will be a challenge and loss in economic activity. “It’s about saving a much greater loss if we need to have longer, deeper, more sustained measures.” The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus and is subject to quarantine but is feeling good, presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country imposed new restrictions on Saturday to curb the spread of the illness. Poland faces a surge in the COVID-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of 13,632 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. Russia has reported 16,521 new coronavirus cases and 296 deaths in the past 24 hours, up from 17,340 new cases and 283 deaths the previous day. The Czech Republic reported 15,252 new cases for 23 October, the highest daily tally. Deaths rose by 126 to 1,971. In the UK, Sheffield city region mayor Dan Jarvis has said he will not hesitate to seek additional government support for South Yorkshire after the region entered the strictest Tier 3 coronavirus controls. Jarvis said a 41 million funding package had been secured after a “tough” process of negotiation and he had won an agreement from ministers to keep the situation under review. “The scale of the challenge is very significant,” he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “We are acutely aware of the pressures our NHS is under, not least because winter hasn’t bitten yet, so we are looking very carefully at what we need to do. “But if there is a requirement for more resource - whether it is economic support or it is other measures of assistance from the Government - I won’t hesitate to go back and ask for them.” Morning all from London, where it is 8am (BST). I am taking over the coronavirus live feed, bringing you all the latest information on the virus from around the world. Please do keep in touch with me while I work, by sharing any comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com That’s where I will leave you for now, but never fear Sarah Marsh is here to take you through the rest of the day’s news. The Czech Republic recorded 15,252 new Covid-19 cases on Friday, the country’s highest ever daily increase. It also recorded 126 deaths overnight, bringing the death toll to 1,971. The Czech Republic managed to escape the first wave of Covid-19 relatively unscathed, with case numbers rarely rising above 200 a day prior to September, but has been hit extremely hard as Europe battles a resurgence in the virus. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus but is feeling good, the presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country faces a surge in the Covid-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of more than 13,600 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role, but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. From Saturday, more restrictions to curb the spread of the virus are due to come into force in Poland, including a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. The health ministry reported 153 coronavirus deaths on Friday, taking the total toll to 4,172. The Conservative MP Ben Bradley has been accused of “stigmatisation of working-class families” over a tweet that labelled the free school meals programme as “20 cash direct to a crack den and a brothel”. Bradley replied to the post, which was by another user. The MP wrote: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did ...” The deputy leader of Labour, Angela Rayner, said: A Conservative MP has said that free school meals are effectively a direct payment to brothels and drug dealers. Notwithstanding the fact that the vouchers in summer could only be used to purchase food, this stigmatisation of working class families is disgraceful and disgusting. MPs rejected a campaign, started by the Manchester United player Marcus Rashford, to offer free school meals for local children during half-term. A vote on the measures was backed by Labour and made its way to parliament this week but it was defeated by 322 votes to 261. Bradley said the context of his tweet “wasn’t as clear as I’d thought it was”. Needless to say, I haven’t said what I’m being accused of, nor would I ever. I’m sorry if others get dragged into the fire. If you want a proper debate you have to accept that sometimes you get it wrong. Proper debate is important. You learn from it, you move on. We’re all human. More than a million people in South Yorkshire are now living under the strictest coronavirus rules in England after the region moved into the tier 3 controls as health officials battle to stem the spread of the disease. The region joined Liverpool city region, greater Manchester and Lancashire on the highest alert level for England with the new rules kicking in on Saturday at 12.01am. Meanwhile, talks were continuing between the government and local leaders in Nottinghamshire, with parts of the county expected to enter tier 3 on Wednesday. And the council in Warrington in Cheshire – where many residents commute to Manchester and Liverpool – has confirmed that it will be moving to tier 3 on Thursday. It means households will be banned from mixing except in parks and other open spaces while pubs and bars will have to close unless they serve meals. Three more areas – Coventry, Stoke and Slough – have now also moved into tier 2, the second highest alert level. It came as Wales began a two-week national “firebreak” at 6pm on Friday evening with a return to the “stay at home” message of the initial lockdown in March. In Scotland, the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has set out a five-tier series of controls that will come into force on 2 November if they are approved next week by the Holyrood parliament. In England, ministers have said they hope the latest measures will suppress the virus sufficiently to enable families to spend Christmas together. Thailand reported one more locally transmitted case of the coronavirus on Saturday, after confirming five domestic infections last week. The new patient is a 57-year-old French woman in the southern province of Surat Thani who tested positive for the virus a few days after she had completed a 14-day quarantine, the country’s coronavirus taskforce said. The patient’s husband and child tested negative, health officials said. Earlier in the week five people in the town of Mae Sot, on the border with Myanmar, tested positive, and in September a prison inmate in the Bangkok area tested positive. Before these six cases, Thailand reported its first confirmed local transmission in more than 100 days on 3 September. In total, Thailand has reported 3,731 cases of the virus and 59 deaths. Victoria’s Department of Health and Human Services has put out its daily press release, which gives us a bit more clarity on exactly where those seven cases came from. Six of today’s seven new cases are linked to known outbreaks and cases. One is a close contact already identified as part of the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak and was already in quarantine and one is a staff member from Estia Keilor. One is a student from East Preston Islamic College, one is a student from Croxton Special School, also linked to East Preston Islamic College through family and two are parents from East Preston Islamic College. The remaining case is a previously positive case that is currently under investigation. Of today’s seven new cases, there are three cases in Darebin, and single cases in Banyule, Greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. In his daily press conference, the premier, Daniel Andrews, suggested that one remaining case is being investigated as a possible reinfection, but is more likely to be someone who has recovered from Covid-19 but is still shedding the virus. The AFP has provided this wrap of the current Covid-19 situation in Europe: The European Union’s disease control agency has joined frantic health workers to sound the alarm over a coronavirus surge across the continent, as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in infections. Even countries that avoided severe outbreaks during Europe’s first wave of contagion in the spring have watched their case numbers surge, with Germany’s death toll passing 10,000 on Saturday. Governments have reintroduced containment measures to slow the renewed spread of the virus in nations that only weeks earlier believed they had triumphed over the crisis. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions, including overnight clashes in Italy’s hard-hit Naples between police and hundreds of protesters. After Spain became the first European country to officially record a million Covid-19 cases earlier in the week, the prime minister, Pedro Sanchez, said on Friday the real number of infections was likely more than triple that number. France followed Spain past the million-case milestone on Friday while Germany hit a fresh daily record of nearly 15,000 new cases, with health authorities urging the public to follow social distancing measures. Urgent new restrictions on daily life have come into effect in several nations, with France extending a curfew to cover 46 million people. Wales entered a full lockdown on Friday evening, a day after Ireland shut down, while Poland adopted a nationwide “red zone” lockdown mandating the partial closure of primary schools and restaurants. Only Sweden, which famously refused to lock down earlier this year, continued to stick to its guns despite a rise in cases. Belgium has seen one of Europe’s deadliest per capita outbreaks and has found itself suffering some of the highest second-wave infection rates in Europe. “We’re losing. We’re overwhelmed. We’re bitter,” said Benoit Misset, the head of the intensive care unit at the University hospital in the city of Liege, where several of his staff are having to work despite being positive – if asymptomatic – themselves. Queensland health officials are working to determine the strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Australian state’s Sunshine Coast. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland’s health department to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given [the cases] have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... [to] the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters. You can read the full story here: Hello, Matilda Boseley with you now to take you through the next few hours of Covid-related news. No new cases of Covid-19 in South Australia for today. A man who allegedly refused to comply with self-quarantine rules in Western Australia has been taken into custody and refused bail following a struggle with police, AAP reports. The 32-year-old New Zealander, who resides in Queensland, had been granted approval to enter WA to work and was issued a FIFO self-quarantine direction on 13 October when he arrived in Perth. He was required to remain in quarantine for 14 days at an East Perth apartment but police say that on Friday a compliance check found he was not there but in front of the complex. Police said it was further found he had been socialising with a 30-year-old man from the same company who was also quarantining in the complex. Both men were told they would be fined $1,000 for failing to comply with directions. But on leaving the complex police officers again found the 32-year-old man at the front of the property, WA police said in a statement on Saturday. The man was told he would be moved to a secure self-quarantine hotel for the remainder of his quarantine but he became “aggressive and hostile towards the officers”, refusing to comply with the direction, the statement said. “The man was arrested after a short struggle and was relocated to the Perth watch house.” He was charged with four counts of failing to comply with a direction and was refused bail to appear in the Perth magistrates court on Saturday. South Korea has reported 77 new cases of Covid-19, AP reports, mostly from the greater capital area where officials are scrambling to stem transmissions at hospitals and nursing homes. More location notifications from Victoria. I appreciate that they’re getting pretty speedy with getting these out now. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah will consult with other rulers to discuss proposals by the prime minister, Muhyiddin Yassin, the palace said on Saturday, after sources told Reuters the PM had asked the king to declare a state of emergency. Muhyiddin met with the king on Friday to present the emergency proposal that includes a suspension of parliament, sources said – a move the opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, denounced as an attempt by the PM to cling to power amid a power struggle. The proposal comes as Malaysia sees a resurgence in coronavirus cases and as Muhyiddin faces a leadership challenge from Anwar, who last month said he had majority support in parliament to oust the PM. The palace did not identify the recommendations made by Muhyiddin, and said the king would soon hold the consultation with other Malay rulers. “Al-Sultan Abdullah greatly understands the need for the country’s administration to continue to tackle the threat of Covid-19,” the palace said in a statement. The Council of Rulers, which groups the heads of Malaysia’s nine royal houses, has the power to withhold consent from any law and deliberate on questions of national policy. A source familiar with the matter said the rulers would meet on Sunday. Muhyiddin’s office has not commented on the emergency proposal. The government is scheduled to propose its 2021 budget on 6 November, and there have been questions over whether it can muster a majority in parliament for that. Defeat on the budget would count as a vote of no-confidence in Muhyiddin and could trigger an election. Emergency rule might mean the budget would not be put to a vote at that time. Western Australia has reported four new cases of Covid-19 overnight. The positive cases – all males aged between 30 and 57 – returned to Perth from overseas. They are all in hotel quarantine, and none are in hospital. This is probably a good time to summarise some of what we have learned so far today: The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19, and no new deaths. There are fewer than 100 active cases in the state for the first time since late June, as Victoria seeks to contain an outbreak in the northern suburbs of Melbourne before more restrictions ease. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country. Germany has reached 10,000 deaths from Covid-19. The country has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths.It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths. Authorities in Sri Lanka on Saturday closed at least two fishery harbours and many stalls after a surge of 609 cases linked to the country’s main fish market, AP reports. The government also widened the curfew in parts of Colombo. At least 11 villages were isolated in the densely populated Western province, which includes the capital. Health authorities on Wednesday temporarily closed the fish market on Colombo’s outskirts after 49 traders tested positive for the coronavirus. By Saturday, the number of cases went up to 609. Hundreds of traders and fishermen are being tested. Authorities say the outbreak is related to a cluster in a garment factory early this month, which has grown to 3,426 cases, almost half the country’s total of 6,287. It broke a two-month lull in infections. Several thousand people have been asked to quarantine at home. Schools and key public offices are closed, gatherings banned and restrictions imposed on public transport. Sri Lanka has had 14 deaths since March. Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late Friday during a demonstration against coronavirus restrictions in the southern Italian city, AP reports. Calls were issued on social media to challenge a curfew that took effect in the Campania region ahead of the weekend, enacted in response to a spiralling second wave of infections that saw nearly 20,000 new cases detected in the last 24 hours. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as the curfew started at 11 pm, with some lighting smoke bombs. One carried a makeshift sign that read: “If you close, you pay.” Regional president Vincenzo de Luca had called for stricter confinement measures to contain the virus in Campania, which recorded 2,300 cases over the last day. “We are on the verge of tragedy, we need a national lockdown,” he said. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte has so far avoided reimposing the kind of restrictions that saw the entire nation confined to home quarantine for two months earlier this year and precipitated the country’s worst post-war recession. Italy was the first European country to be badly hit by the virus. It has now registered nearly 500,000 cases and 37,000 deaths, according to health ministry figures. Some new exposure site information for Victoria. AFP has more on the Germany numbers: 14,714 were diagnosed in the last 24 hours – a daily record. Robert Koch Institute president Lothar Wieler said Germany was facing a “very serious” situation and asked the population to adhere to social distancing measures. Germany was spared during the first wave of coronavirus infections that hit Europe in spring but is now suffering a sharp increase in cases along with the rest of the continent. Authorities have tightened measures against the pandemic including the adoption of a public assembly ban. Chancellor Angela Merkel last weekend asked the country to reduce their social contact and stay home as much as possible. “What winter will be, what our Christmas will be, will be decided in the days and weeks to come,” she had warned. Queensland health officials are working to determine the mystery strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Sunshine Coast, AAP reports. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new mutated strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected with Covid-19 and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland Health to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given (the cases) have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... (to) the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters on Friday. He said the additional testing would take about a week. The Sofrana left New Zealand earlier in the month with fresh crew from the Philippines before stopping at Noumea in New Caledonia and then sailing for Brisbane. New Zealand requested Australian health officials perform the additional testing after an engineer who had previously worked on the ship tested positive in Auckland. Miles on Saturday said zero new cases of Covid-19 had been uncovered inside Queensland, meaning the state still had six active cases. It has been 44 days since the last locally acquired case in Queensland. Miles on Friday said it was likely an announcement would be made about Queensland’s border reopening to NSW late next week. Asked when Victorians would be free to travel to Queensland, Miles said it would be after health restrictions in that state were eased and several incubation periods had been completed. Earlier this week I reported former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott has been allowed to leave Australia not once but twice as part of his new trade envoy role for the Boris Johnson government in the United Kingdom. The former PM was allowed to leave on what was termed an “auto-exemption” because it was government business. I’d been trying to figure out how many people have been allowed to leave while Australia has had a travel ban in place during the pandemic. Australian Border Force refused to say how many auto-exemptions have been granted, but I just came across some data on how many exemptions in total. According to Border Force in documents tabled in the Senate, between April and September this year, a total of 73,848 Australians and permanent residents have been allowed to leave Australia. More are coming back, however. Border Force also reports 93,937 Australians and permanent residents have travelled to Australia in that time. It’s not clear how many have left and come back, or how many, if any apart from Abbott, have made multiple trips. Senate estimates heard Abbott would be expected to go into hotel quarantine for a second time when he returns. Meanwhile, our current prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said he will seek to get 26,000 stranded Australians back home before Christmas. Some extra capacity will be made available, with around 6,290 places in hotel quarantine available each week. Germany has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths. It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country, according to a Reuters tally. The spike in cases comes less than two weeks before the presidential election on 3 November and is hitting battleground states such as Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. On Thursday, the United States reported a near-record 76,195 new cases. The previous record was 77,299 new cases on 16 July. At the time, hospitalisations for Covid-19 patients hit 47,000 and two weeks later deaths rose to an average of 1,200 per day. Now, hospitalisations are over 41,000 and deaths average nearly 800 per day. Health experts have not pinpointed the reason for the rise but have long warned that colder temperatures driving people inside, fatigue with Covid-19 precautions and students returning to schools and colleges, could promote the spread of the virus. The United States has the most cases in the world at 8.5 million and the most fatalities with 224,000 lives lost. The United States has reported over the past week an average of 60,000 new cases per day, the highest seven-day average since early August. The Midwest has been the epicenter of the latest surge but infections are rising nationwide. The Northeast reported an 83% increase in cases in the past month. New cases have doubled in Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and New Jersey in the past four weeks as compared to the prior four weeks, according to a Reuters analysis. Western states including Montana, New Mexico and Wyoming have reported a 200% increase in cases in the past four weeks when compared with the previous four weeks. Mexico’s northern border state of Chihuahua returned to the highest level of alert and lockdown Friday after coronavirus cases jumped there and hospitals began to fill up. The Chihuahua state government declared the return to the “red” level of alert Friday, which closes down most non-essential services and encourages people to stay at home. The Health Department said the state’s hospital beds were now 69% occupied, and that only about 23% of intensive care beds were open. The department said steps were being taken to expand hospital facilities. The department also said that three other northern states — Durango, Coahuila and Nuevo Leon — were at risk of returning to maximum alert unless infections were brought under control. Nationwide, 19 of Mexico’s 32 states will be at high alert starting Monday, 11 will be at medium alert and one state was considered at moderate risk level. Mexico as a whole has seen 880,775 test-confirmed cases, up 6,604 from the previous day’s count, and 88,312 confirmed deaths, up by 418. Here is a bit more info on the Covid-19 situation in NSW today: It’s the second consecutive 24-hour period in which NSW recorded no new locally acquired virus cases, and comes as the state government from this weekend eases some restrictions. Up to 30 people are now allowed to gather outdoors, group bookings at hospitality venues have been extended from 10 to 30 people and up to 300 are allowed at places of worship. Protesters can also gather en masse, with up to 500 people allowed to convene outdoors. Staffing regulations at gyms across NSW have also been relaxed, with a safety marshal only required when more than 20 people are working out. Two drugmakers have announced the resumption of US testing of their Covid-19 vaccine candidates. Testing of AstraZeneca’s vaccine candidate had been halted since early September, while Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine study was paused at the beginning of last week. Each company had a study volunteer develop a serious health issue, requiring a review of safety data. The two coronavirus vaccines are among several candidates in final-stage testing, the last step before seeking regulatory approval. The drugmakers said they got the go-ahead on Friday from the Food and Drug Administration to restart tests in the US. Such temporary halts of drug and vaccine testing are relatively common. In research involving thousands of participants, some are likely to fall ill. Pausing a study allows researchers to investigate whether an illness is a side effect or a coincidence. You can read the full story below: Sutton was asked when the press conference will be held tomorrow, and he said “when it is called”. And that’s the end of that. Victorian chief health officer Prof Brett Sutton says he is “very confident” Victoria will get control of the cases associated with the northern Melbourne outbreak, but reiterates there is a need to find the links between the cases, and that will inform the easing of instructions. Sutton declines to comment on why he instructed lawyers acting for the health department not to include evidence where it showed he was included on emails on 27 March that mentions the use of private security guards well before he previously said he was made aware. Sutton says he is providing an affidavit to the inquiry and it is appropriate to wait for that to be provided to the inquiry. Andrews won’t cop criticism of the public health team who communicated with the family at the centre of the East Preston Islamic College outbreak. He said the family were advised what to do, but the message didn’t get through because one child went to school while infectious. Andrews disagrees with the suggestion it would be a miracle to have low case numbers tomorrow given all the tests waiting to be processed. I wouldn’t say that. We have done, haven’t got a weekly total, but we have had a very, very strong week in terms of test, right back to the weekend. And we have turned up a relatively low number of cases this week and the vast majority have been linked to other known cases. Andrews says the 25km radius limit and the Melbourne metro/regional border are on the table to be eased tomorrow, if that happens, but suggests both could remain in place to prevent potential spread of Covid-19 to popular tourism locations like Mornington Peninsula. Daniel Andrews says the school, community and faith leaders are calling people in the northern Melbourne area to get tested. The two schools involved are organising for everyone who hasn’t been tested to get tested. I had a conversation this morning, Jerome and I, with some of the school leadership. They have gone through and booked in family by family to come and be tested at the site that the testing station is on the school grounds. They will work through all those different appointments and that will give them a list of people who did not show and that is not a criticism, they may have gone somewhere else. Circumstances may have intervened. But then they will go back and do that for a second time, a third time. We are confident we will get all of those people to come and get tested and then we will get the results as fast as possible. Daniel Andrews says “it’ll be a very late night, and a very early morning” when it comes to making decisions around restrictions easing tomorrow. Earlier in the press conference he said the easing of restrictions tomorrow could not be “banked on”. We really do have to wait to see what those test results show us ... what we are hopeful of is connections and linkages to these cases and these cases do not speak to the virus being in the northern suburbs more than we had thought, so it is all about trying to find those linkages and that is why there is a very big team of people interviewing, re-interviewing, looking at things from every conceivable angle to try to find linkages. He says Victoria is still in a good position with low case numbers, and will proceed with easing of restrictions if possible. It’s just about getting those test results. I’m trying to be as frank as possible. A lot of people had banked tomorrow as the day where we would have absolute clarity about what the rest of October and November looks like. If we can do that, we will. But the appropriate thing to do if you have thousands of tests in the laboratory being processed, you have to wait for the results. Jeroen Weimar says the Victorian health department is focused on close and secondary contacts for the northern Melbourne outbreak, and says he doesn’t think schools opened up again too soon. “Some family members live in all sorts of housing, some in public housing, some in community housing, many in private accommodation. We are increasingly doing door-to-door testing for them so we are going to them to ensure that they get the care they need and support that they need but also to get tested,” he said. “If I look at the response of the school leadership of the schools that we are leading with, dealing with in this particular outbreak, they have taken prompt and swift action. We are talking about cases that happened on Monday this week.” The positive case at Croxton school is a student, they are part of a family of four, and all four of the family are positive, Jeroen Weimar said. One of the family’s other children attends the East Preston Islamic College, but it is not clear whether the cases are connected. The two children attended school while infected on one day. A total of 9,405 tests have been conducted for staff, students or close contacts at the East Preston Islamic College, Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, says. There are 101 close contacts associated with the college isolating, and 307 secondary contacts isolating. There are 34 close contacts of the Croxton special school also isolating. The Victorian health department sent out 22,000 text messages and emails to taxi and Uber drivers in the northern Melbourne area, and Weimar has encouraged the drivers to come forward for testing. Daniel Andrews flags the long-awaited easing of restrictions announcement tomorrow should not be “banked on”. He says the announcements will still come tomorrow, but the actual easing will depend on the thousands of tests results waiting to come back as a result of the testing blitz in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. Now is not the time for us to start ignoring when we find significant virus ... whether it be in a given community or in a given geographical area ... We are still optimistic that we will be able to have positive things to say, but I’m just ... It’s a note of caution, with so much information yet to come to us, we need to be guided by that. That has always been the way. That is what has delivered these low numbers. On the northern Melbourne outbreak, Daniel Andrews says he met with the community leaders this morning. I had a meeting early this morning with a number of community and faith leaders from the inner northern suburbs and, indeed, the northern suburbs more broadly. I want to thank them for the very proactive and cooperative way – the partnership that we have with them. They’re reaching out to literally hundreds and thousands of people in their own networks, whether they be faith-based or community-based networks, setting up telephone trees, calling upon people to come forward and get tested, making sure that they’re reminding people that, if you’ve been asked to stay in your home – either pending a test result or because you’re a positive or a close contact – that that’s critically important to do and that everybody, regardless of your background, everybody is in this together. This virus does not, in any way, discriminate between different members of the Victorian community and neither does the government and its agencies when it comes to providing the most appropriate public health response. He says there are thousands of test results from people in the area still waiting to come back, and hundreds if not thousands of more people are likely to be tested today. He says it is a 35% increase in the normal amount of testing you would expect to see in that community. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews says Victoria has under 100 active cases of Covid-19 for the first time since 19 June. Of today’s seven cases, Andrews says six are linked to outbreaks or known cases, including East Preston Islamic College, Croxton special school Northcote, the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak, and Estia in Keilor. One of those seven cases is under investigation. There are three new cases in Darebin and single cases in Banule, greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. There were 17,219 test results since yesterday, which Andrews says is “another very, very strong number.” Eight people are in hospital, and none in the ICU. There are seven active cases among healthcare workers. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. I am in Melbourne, the city with one of the, if not the, longest lockdowns in the world. Now we only have around 100 actives cases left, we are on the verge of opening up. We all crave a return to “Covid normal” as the politicians like to say, but there’s a fear it could return, and we might be forced to endure another lockdown. For the second day in a row, the Australian state of New South Wales has reported no new locally acquired Covid-19 cases. There were five cases reported in hotel quarantine. There were 12,890 tests reported to 8pm last night, compared with 13,686 in the previous 24 hours. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, will provide his daily update at 11.30am AEDT today. It’s the last update before tomorrow’s expected announcement of the further easing of restrictions in the state. Australia’s ABC has reported the principal of the East Preston Islamic College in Melbourne has said the family of the child who attended school while infectious with Covid-19 is considering leaving the area after being devastated that it has led to the virus spreading. The family had been isolating, but was told by the Victorian health department that two of the family’s children could return to school. English is not their first language, and it was interpreted that this meant all three children could go back to school, too. The child was meant to keep isolating, and tested positive on Wednesday. Now four new cases connected to the outbreak of 32 cases were reported on Saturday and around 800 people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne are currently isolating and being tested. A bright yellow helicopter rose into a blue sky on Friday carrying a Covid-19 patient from the Netherlands to a German intensive care unit, the first such international airlift since the pandemic first threatened to swamp Dutch hospitals in the spring, AP reports. The clatter of the helicopter’s rotors as it lifted off from a parking lot behind a hospital 30km east of Amsterdam was a noisy reminder of how the coronavirus is again gripping Europe and straining health care systems that struggled for equipment and staff during the pandemic’s first wave. Elsewhere on the continent, an absence of noise will underscore the virus’ resurgence. More than two-thirds of the people living in France were to be subject to a nightly curfew starting at midnight Friday, hours after health authorities announced that the country had joined Spain in surpassing 1 million confirmed cases since the start of the pandemic. “The epidemic is very strongly accelerating,” French President Emmanuel Macron said after visiting a hospital near Paris. France became the second country in Western Europe and the seventh world-wide to reach that number of known infections after reporting 42,032 new daily cases. Of the 445,000 confirmed cases the World Health Organization had recorded in the past 24 hours, nearly half were in Europe, Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on COVID-19, said. I’m Josh Taylor and I will be seeing you through the rest of the morning and early afternoon of Saturday, Australian time. Here’s what we know so far today: Victoria has reported no new deaths and seven new cases of Covid-19 overnight, including four new cases linked to an outbreak at the East Preston Islamic College. About 800 people who are either close contacts or secondary contacts of those associated with the school are currently isolating and awaiting test results. All staff and students from the nearby Croxton School have also been told to get tested and self-isolate, even if they aren’t experiencing symptoms. AstraZeneca has resumed the US trial of its experimental Covid-19 vaccine after approval by US regulators, the company said. It was paused on 6 September after a report of a serious neurological illness, believed to be transverse myelitis, in a participant in the company’s UK trial. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US infectious disease expert, said the White House coronavirus task force’s meetings have become less frequent, even as infections rise in dozens of US states. The EU’s disease control agency joined health workers across Europe in sounding the alarm about the surge in coronavirus infections as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in cases. Several countries in Europe are reporting infection rates higher than during the first wave of the pandemic in March and April, with Spain saying it has now more than 3 million cases. France’s second wave of coronavirus could be worse than the first, the boss of Paris public hospital group AP-HP said on Friday as the country registered a record number of daily cases. With pressure on hospitals rising fast, France has expanded a 9pm to 6am curfew to cover 46 million people, more than two-thirds of its population. Italy registered 19,143 new coronavirus infections, a jump of more than 3,000 within the last 24 hours. The northern Lombardy region, the worst hit region during the first wave of the pandemic, recorded almost 5,000 new cases while in Campania, in the south, there were 2,280. More than half a million people in the US could die from Covid-19 by the end of February next year, but about 130,000 of those lives could be saved if everybody were to wear masks, according to estimates from a modelling study.
1||Jürgen Klopp and Chris Wilder at odds over Anfield VAR callsJürgen Klopp claimed Liverpool were “disadvantaged” by VAR once again as his side overcame a controversial penalty award and a disallowed Mohamed Salah goal to beat Sheffield United 2-1 at Anfield. The Premier League champions moved level on points with Everton at the top of the table thanks to Roberto Firmino’s first goal of the season and Diogo Jota’s second‑half header, but had to come from behind when the VAR official, Andre Marriner, awarded Chris Wilder’s team a penalty for a tackle by Fabinho on Oli McBurnie. Mike Dean had awarded a free-kick outside the area before VAR upgraded the punishment to a penalty converted by Sander Berge. “There was no foul,” the Liverpool manager said. “It is now six games into the season and in three of them we have been on the wrong end of these kind of decisions. We are not asking for an advantage – we just don’t want to be disadvantaged. And that is the situation. The penalty gave Sheffield a proper boost. Until then they couldn’t get to us. “Then we lost a bit of patience but we scored a goal from our best attack of the first half, scored a second goal and I don’t know any more if it is offside or not. Then we did get the second goal and Mo had an incredible chance. They had their moments too but we defended with big hearts. It has been a tough week with a lot of minutes and tough opponents, so I am really pleased.” Chris Wilder disagreed about the spot-kick, saying: “I thought it was. I’ve been informed there might have been another couple as well. I thought their reaction to the challenge was quite telling.” Overall the Sheffield United manager was pleased with how his team had played. “The performance was good, it had to be to come here and get an opportunity to get a result and I thought we had opportunities to get a result. “There is lots of disappointment in our dressing room. We got on the bus believing we could get a result and we get back on the bus disappointed we haven’t got that.”
17||Sunak's £12bn scheme for self-employed was 'terribly targeted', says analysisRishi Sunak’s flagship scheme to help the self-employed through the pandemic has handed £1.3bn to workers who saw no loss of income while giving nothing to 500,000 people left without work, new analysis has revealed. In a sign of major flaws in the £12.7bn self-employment income support scheme (SEISS), more than 400,000 workers were able to claim support despite losing no income in the crisis. The analysis by the Resolution Foundation thinktank, to be published later this week, concluded that the scheme had been “terribly targeted”. The findings are part of its review of the labour market six months into the crisis. It finds that the self-employed have suffered “an even bigger labour market shock” than employees. Three in 10 self-employed workers stopped working altogether at the peak of the crisis. Many have returned to work but their recovery has been slow. Around one in six (17%) are still without work, rising to almost a quarter (24%) of 18- to 34-year-olds who were self-employed pre-crisis. The SEISS has been an expensive scheme to run for the Treasury and apparently more generous than the job retention scheme for employees. Some £2,518 was spent supporting each self-employed worker through the scheme, twice as much as the £1,128 spent per employee. However, the new analysis raises major doubts over how the money has been directed. While 78% of SEISS claimants lost income, in many cases that loss was smaller than the amount claimed. Meanwhile, 67% of self-employed workers who had not claimed under the scheme did lose income during the crisis. The thinktank blamed strict eligibility rules and weak assessment rules for the issues with the scheme. Applicants were not asked to prove they had been hit financially by the crisis. Hannah Slaughter, economist at the foundation, said: “The UK’s five million self-employed workers have been at the heart of its jobs crisis. A quarter of young self-employed workers are still without work today. This crisis is far from over for the UK’s self-employed workers. Future support should avoid excluding so many groups, while ensuring payments reflect genuine falls in income. And an immediate priority should be to strengthen universal credit for the many self-employed workers who will really need it in the months ahead.” It comes with the government under increasing pressure to increase its help for the self-employed further as Covid restrictions increase again. A slimmed-down version of the scheme is now in operation, though Sunak last week doubled the value of the grants the self-employed can access from 20% to 40% of average monthly profits. This is half the level available during the spring’s lockdown. Andy Chamberlain, director of policy at the Association of Independent Professionals and the Self-Employed, said: “Two-fifths of income simply will not be enough for many of the UK’s creative freelancers, who are the backbone of our vital cultural, entertainment and hospitality sectors. It’s also crucial to remember how many freelancers in these industries have been entirely excluded from claiming even 40% of their income – because they work through limited companies or are newly self-employed. “Government must take note and drive more and better targeted support to self-employed people in need – especially our forgotten freelancers and those working in badly struggling sectors.” The Treasury disputed the Resolution Foundation’s findings, arguing that there were safeguards designed to ensure the help only reached those who needed it. “As the report states, we were right to introduce the self-employment scheme – which has helped protect the livelihoods of 2.7 million people and is just one part of our £200bn package of unprecedented support.” “The scheme is targeted to help those most in need. All those who apply must confirm they have been adversely affected by the pandemic and the vast majority of those who do not qualify either earn more than half their income from another source or have trading profits of over £50,000.”
3||Ministers ‘still hiding’ full details of 2016 pandemic simulationThe government has been accused of withholding the full findings of a simulation exercise that warned ministers that the UK would not cope in the event of a pandemic. Campaigners have questioned what the government is hiding by choosing not to release all the documents relating to Exercise Cygnus, a three-day wargaming simulation that examined what would happen if there were an influenza pandemic in the UK. Last week, in response to pressure from the Information Commissioner’s Office, health secretary Matt Hancock announced that he had published the report into the exercise. However, it transpired the report was the same as that leaked to the press in May – but failed to include numerous other reports that are believed to make up the full filings. Now an NHS doctor and journalist who have been campaigning for the full disclosure of the documents relating to Cygnus have called on the government to release all the findings from the exercise. Dr Moosa Qureshi and Tommy Greene submitted a Freedom of Information request to see the full findings in April. They have lodged an application for judicial review into the government’s decision not to release the full report that is due to go to appeal on 19 November 2020. The pair have been told that the full findings of Exercise Cygnus are contained in numerous reports, not just the one released by Hancock. In their legal case they explain that it is their understanding that there is a “compendium” document containing all of the lessons and recommendations from Exercise Cygnus which does not resemble the report now published. They say that they are aware there are specific reports focusing on NHS population triage – the process for deciding how to treat patients – and what powers would have to be enacted legally to prepare for a pandemic. There are also individual reports assessing the performance of the different bodies and organisations that were involved in the three-day simulation. “This announcement by Matt Hancock to the House of Commons on Tuesday does not take us any further,” Greene said. “We already know what is in the version of the report he has ordered to be published. We want to see the full findings of the report that details in full the gaps in NHS provision that would have helped this country be better prepared when Covid hit and could still help us as we go into a the second wave of the pandemic.” The pair claim that further attempts by their lawyers, Leigh Day, to have the full findings published have been met throughout by “evasion” and “obstruction”. Recently, the Information Commissioner ordered Hancock to respond to Qureshi and Greene’s Freedom of Information request by Friday 23 October. Government lawyers said they required further time until 9 November to provide a substantive response. “We have been requesting Cygnus for many months now, and the government has repeatedly delayed disclosure, saying each time that it was ‘weighing the public interest’ while NHS frontline workers were struggling blindly, deprived of potentially life-saving data,” Qureshi said. “Now the government has published what the newspapers published months ago, and its document is preposterously bereft of the healthcare data expected from a national pandemic exercise, which begs the question, “What else is this government hiding?” Tessa Gregory, a partner at Leigh Day, said: “Our clients understand that there are other key documents which set out more fully the findings of Exercise Cygnus and the action which the government should have taken following the exercise. Our clients will continue to fight for transparency and seek the release of the full findings of Exercise Cygnus as the findings had and continue to have a bearing on the government’s response to the ongoing pandemic.” A government spokeswoman said it could not comment on a matter involving potential legal action. But she said: “Exercise Cygnus was a national exercise that looked at how well prepared the UK was to respond to a serious flu pandemic. “It was not designed to consider other potential pandemics, or to identify what action could be taken to prevent widespread transmission. “We have used the lessons learned from Exercise Cygnus to rapidly respond to this unprecedented global crisis.”
0||Obama campaigns for Biden in Florida as Trump heads to battleground Ohio – as it happenedIt’s been a lively day on the election trail. We’re closing this blog now but will be back with all the developments in US political news, as it happens, tomorrow. Here are the main events of the day: Alaska’s Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski has hopped off the fence and says she will confirm Amy Coney Barrett for the US supreme court in the vote expected on Monday. Barack Obama, speaking at a drive-in rally to support Joe Biden in the key swing state of Florida, laid into Donald Trump for his response to the coronavirus pandemic. Democratic vice-presidential nominee Kamala Harris, campainging in Ohio, also decried the Trump administration’s handling of Covid-19 and lamented that the crushed economy has led to a “hunger crisis” in America. Campaigning at two rallies in Pennsylvania today, Joe Biden said at each that he would not ban fracking - a very active industry in the swing state. Top infectious disease public health official Anthony Fauci supports the idea of a national face mask mandate if that’s the only way to get people to wear them and curb the spread of coronavirus. Both Donald Trump and his most controversial coronavirus adviser Scott Atlas have been spreading misleading info on Twitter about Covid-19. Democratic vice-presidential candidate Kamala Harris is calling for an administration that is frank about racist police brutality in America. “There isn’t a Black man I know, be it a relative or friend, who has not had some sort of experience with police that’s been about an unreasonable stop, some sort of profiling or excessive force,” she said. She said Donald Trump “says people who are protesting are looters and they are violent, and talking about law and order, not understanding that peaceful protest is part of how this nation was founded.” Harris said peaceful protest is what has allowed her to become only the second Black woman elected to the United States Senate (hat tip to groundbreaker Carol Moseley Braun). “But there is still a lot of work to be done” not just to speak out about police brutality but to do something about it.” She said she had spoken out about Breonna Taylor, shot dead by police in March during a botched raid on her Louisville, Kentucky, apartment, “but there are many Breonnas and Georges”, referring to George Floyd who was killed by police in Minneapolis this spring when an officer kneeled on his neck on the ground for almost nine minutes, reinvigorating the Black Lives Matter movement. “There needs to be ban on chokeholds and carotid holds, across the board. Let’s have a national registry of police officers who break the law.” She added that there needed to be “accountability and consequences” not just for individual police but for “the system”. The latest CNN opinion poll in Ohio has Democratic candidate Joe Biden and Republican candidate Donald Trump in a statistical dead heat, with 46% of those surveyed backing Biden for the White House in November, 47% favoring Trump. No Republican in modern history has lost Ohio but won the White House. The 2020 race continues. Donald Trump is on his way to begin another rally in Circleville, Ohio, about a 30-minute drive from Columbus, and Joe Biden is speaking now in Dallas, north-eastern Pennsylvania. This Dallas is not far from Scranton, Biden’s birthplace. The Democratic candidate for president just said “maybe it’s the Scranton in me” that gives him “a bit of a chip on my shoulder” about Trump’s flaunting of and focus on his own wealth. Biden is at his most fired up on the campaign trail right now, he doesn’t have the oratory skills of Obama, but he is impassioned. After so many months in the basement, campaigning online, it’s truly exciting to see Biden, as well as Harris and Obama out on the trail in person talking to motivated voters - not leaving it all to Trump. Biden just said once again that he won’t ban fracking. And he’s slamming Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. He’s using what has become one of his standard lines, bringing up the revelation from Bob Woodward’s book Rage that the president told him very early on in the outbreak that he knew exactly how dangerous Covid-19 was but downplayed it to the public because he didn’t want to spread panic (instead his stance just spread coronavirus). “The American people don’t panic,” Biden said. “Donald Trump panicked.” He called the president’s approach to controlling the outbreak “weak and chaotic”. Biden said he is determined to shut down the virus if he is president, without shutting down the economy, although it’s not entirely clear yet how he would thread that needle for the nation. Biden said Trump “hasn’t delivered on a damn thing”. Voters honking their car horns and cheering. Supreme Court nominee Amy Coney Barrett won crucial backing this afternoon when one of the last Republican holdouts announced her support for Donald Trump’s pick ahead of a confirmation vote expected Monday. Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska said during today’s Senate session that while she opposed her party’s decision to push ahead with the nomination process so close to the November 3 presidential election, she supported the federal judge, who is on track to lock in a conservative court majority for years to come, The Associated Press reports. Barrett already appeared to have enough votes for confirmation from Senate Republicans who hold the majority in the chamber and are racing to install her on the high court before Election Day. But Murkowski’s nod gives her a boost of support. Only one Republican, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, is now expected to oppose the conservative judge. “While I oppose the process that has led us to this point, I do not hold it against her,” Murkowski said. The Senate opened the rare weekend session despite Democratic efforts to stall Trump’s nominee. Democrats mounted more procedural hurdles during the day, but the party has no realistic chance of stopping Barrett’s advance. Barrett, a federal appeals court judge from Indiana, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. The fast-track confirmation process is like none other in US history so close to a presidential election. Democrats, notably the vice-presidential nominee and California Senator Kamala Harris, who sits on the judiciary committee, call it a “sham” and say the winner of the presidential election should name the nominee to fill the vacancy left by the recent death of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Senators planned to stay in session Saturday and Sunday. Read the Guardian’s latest report on the Amy Coney Barrett. Not only is her confirmation process controversial but she is a controversial judge and individual. Here’s our last report on Barack Obama’s rally in Florida on behalf of Joe Biden today. In his speech, which lasted almost an hour, he worked through several major election issues, such as the economy and the pandemic and touched on others as he continued to lash Trump. “Let me just see a show of hands, how many people here have a secret Chinese bank account?” Obama asked, referring to a story that emerged in the week that Trump had paid more than $200,000 in taxes in China, weeks after it emerged his federal income tax liability in the US was far less. “His first year in the White House he only paid $750 in federal income tax,” Obama said. “You’ve got secretaries, you’ve got construction workers, you got your health care workers, nurses, who pay a lot more in income taxes than that.” There was a staunch defense of Obamacare, his signature Affordable Care Act, which provided millions more Americans with affordable health insurance, that Republicans have tried numerous times to dismantle during the Trump administration. “When they’re asked about it they say, ‘Well look, we’re gonna have a great replacement. It’s coming. It’s gonna be there in two weeks.’ They’ve never had a replacement. Nothing. Nada. Zero. Zilch. “They’ve attacked the Affordable Care Act and every time they’ve driven up costs, they’re driving up the uninsured. Now they’re trying to get the Supreme Court to take away your health care as we speak, in the middle of a pandemic,” referring to the high court’s hearing into the constitutionality of the ACA on 10 November. Appealing to Florida’s sizeable Hispanic demographic, Obama had harsh words for Trump’s handling of the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, which devastated Puerto Rico in 2017, and efforts by some among Miami’s Cuban and Venezuelan communities to portray Biden as an extreme socialist. “Listening to the Republicans, you’d think Joe was more communist than the Castros. Don’t fall for that garbage,” Obama said. “Folks would know if he was a secret socialist by now. What is true is he’ll promote human rights in Cuba and around the world and he won’t coddle dictators the way our current president does.” The former prescient ended on an upbeat note. “I’m here to report that America is a good and decent place. We just see so much noise and nonsense,” he said. “Sometimes it’s hard for us to remember but I’ve been all across this country. There are a lot of good people here. There are a lot of folks who share the values of looking out for one another and doing right by one another.” Here we go again with Donald Trump’s antipathy to the wearing of face masks to help prevent the spread of coronavirus. Having just arrived in Columbus, Ohio, for his next campaign trail event, the president had a few words with reporters and is talking utter nonsense. First he said there are so many cases of coronavirus being reported in Wisconsin, where the disease is surging, at the moment because of all the testing. So if no testing, then no coronavirus? This is a highly misleading and wrongheaded argument that the president of the United States has tried numerous times over the months in order to downplay the coronavirus pandemic. And at a question from another reporter, Trump barked: “I can’t hear you with your mask on” and moved to the next reporter without waiting for the person to repeat the question. The Texas state supreme court this afternoon temporarily reinstated the governor’s ban on multiple drop-off sites for mail ballots, in a short-term victory for Donald Trump. The ban will remain in effect while the state supreme court fully reviews a Friday appeals court ruling that overturned the order by Governor Greg Abbott, a Republican like the president, who faces Democrat Joe Biden in a race for the White House on November 3, Reuters writes. The Texas 3rd court of appeals had unanimously agreed with a lower court that limiting the number of drop boxes would lengthen lines, increase the risk that voters could get infected with Covid-19, and infringe on their right to vote. Trump has repeatedly criticized mail-in ballots, claiming - without evidence - they would lead to widespread fraud. Abbott issued his order limiting mail-in ballot drop boxes to one per county on October 1, saying it was aimed at preventing fraud. The move, which closed more than a dozen satellite locations in at least two counties, drew condemnation from Democrats and voting rights advocates. Texas, which Trump won by nine percentage points in 2016, has not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate in more than four decades. But opinion polls have suggested it might be in reach for Biden, in part because of dissatisfaction over Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. The Guardian’s Erum Salam noted in this story from earlier in the month that large, populous counties such as Travis and Harris county will be disproportionately affected by Abbott’s order. These counties includes Texas’s most diverse cities: Austin and Houston, respectively. Nine per cent of Travis county’s population are black and 33% are Hispanic. In Harris county, 20% of the population are black and 43% Hispanic. Harris county is the third most populous county in the country with more than 4.7 million residents. As of 2018, it has nearly 2.4 million registered voters. After Abbott’s new order, the vast county has gone from having 12 ballot drop-off sites to just one, located at the NRG Stadium in central Houston. Full story here. Richard Luscombe writes that Barack Obama is delivering a sparky speech at a drive-in rally for Joe Biden in North Miami, Florida. His event continues with him highlighting the difference between Trump’s “empty promises” for a second term and Biden’s plans for his first. “Tweeting… doesn’t fix things. Inventing conspiracies doesn’t make people’s lives better,” he said. “You’ve got to have a plan. You’ve got to do the work. And along with the experience of getting things done, Joe Biden has concrete plans and policies that are going to turn our vision of a better, fairer, stronger country into reality.” Seeking to heap blame on Trump’s lack of response for a coronavirus pandemic that has killed almost 225,000 Americans and cost millions of jobs, Obama pointed out that his own administration had left plans. “We literally left this White House a pandemic playbook that showed them how to respond before a virus reached our shores,” Obama said. “It must be lost along with the Republican health care plan. We can’t find it, eight months into this pandemic.” Also squandered, Obama said, was the nation’s strong economy: “Unemployment was steadily going down during the Obama-Biden presidency. And then he gets elected and it keeps on going down and suddenly he says, ‘Look what I did there.’ “He did inherit the longest streak of job growth in American history that we got started but just like everything else he inherited he fumbled it. “The economic damage inflicted by [his] pandemic response means that Donald Trump will be the first president since Herbert Hoover that actually loses jobs.” Obama also teased Trump for ending his interview early for 60 Minutes, with journalist Lesley Stahl, early. The interview airs tomorrow night, ditto one with Biden. A quick reminder that Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which they accuse the senior White House advisers of showing “indifference” to Americans suffering and dying under Covid-19. Saying the billboards would stay up, the group called Kushner and Trump “entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people”. My colleague Martin Pengelly has just updated the story with the following: In an email to the Guardian on Saturday, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said: “It does seem unlikely that Ivanka and Jared would actually sue the Lincoln Project, especially before election day, while after that hopefully they won’t care, can return to New York and stop pretending to be public servants. “Her father has honed litigation abuse as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias added, but “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Read the full story here: And here’s the latest tweet from the project: Barack Obama is wasting no time in mocking Donald Trump during the former Democratic president’s appearance in North Miami, Florida this afternoon. “He’s had a tough week. Everybody has been very unfair to Donald Trump, this week,” the former president said to joyous honks of car horns at a drive-in rally. Referring to the final presidential debate between Trump and Joe Biden on Thursday, Obama said: “Trump was asked, ‘What is your plan for the new phase of Covid?’ which is a pretty good question considering that we just saw the highest number of cases spike up yesterday. “So you think he’d be ready for a response. Instead, he just said it wasn’t his fault, he didn’t have one. He said, ‘It’s now gone and a bunch of states.’ Just as states are reaching new record highs nationwide he doesn’t have a plan. He doesn’t even acknowledge the reality of what’s taking place all across the country.” As he did earlier in the week at a rally in Pennsylvania for Biden, his former vice-president, Obama kept the focus firmly on Trump. “It’s a good idea to have an answer to this question. It’s a good idea if you’re running for reelection to say, ‘Here’s what I want to accomplish.” What did Trump say? He got mad and walked out of the interview,” Obama said, referring to an ill-tempered 60 Minutes due to air on CBS Sunday night but already posted on Trump’s Facebook site. “He thought the questions were too tough. If he can’t answer a tough question like, ‘What would you like to do in your second term?’ then it’s our job to make sure he doesn’t get a second term.” Obama said he didn’t know Biden very well when he picked him to be his Veep. But he said he got to know his character as their administration proceeded, and that Biden “made me a better president”. Also campaigning today in Pennsylvania is Bernie Sanders. He’s out on the trail for Joe Biden, who defeated him in the primary process this spring to become the Democratic nominee for president. Here’s a post from the Sanders event from the Democratic councilwoman at large for Allegheny county, Bethany Hallam. Hallam has become a little bit famous of late for her unique campaign to persuade voters in Pennsylvania to be careful to enclose their mail-in ballots in the privacy envelope issued by the state, inside the outer envelope, if you follow me. Read all about it here. And in North Carolina, former Democratic presidential candidate and New Jersey Senator Cory Booker is campaigning today to help get Joe Biden elected next month. More from Edward Helmore… Facebook has demanded that New York University stop collecting data about its political ad targeting practices, arguing the engineering project violates its terms of service. The argument between the social media giant and NYU’s Ad Observatory project, which launched last month with more 6,500 volunteers assigned to collect data about political ads, flared up on Friday, according to the Wall Street Journal. In a letter to the engineering department, Facebook said “scraping tools, no matter how well-intentioned, are not a permissible means of collecting information from us”. Facebook went on to say that if the university does not cease harvesting the data and delete it, it “may be subject to additional enforcement action”. Last month, Facebook said it would stop political advertising for a month ahead the 3 November presidential election, seeking to prevent the spread of misinformation. After the 2016 election of Donald Trump, Facebook was accused of allowing Russian disinformation and political profiling to flow almost unchecked. NYU has said the Ad Observatory is designed to provide the public, journalists, researchers and policy makers with the ability to search political ads floated to specific audiences and to see how those ads are funded. Facebook’s demand that NYU cease the program met with criticism. “Facebook is making it harder for Americans to get information about online political ads,” Democratic senator Amy Klobuchar, a sponsor of a bill called the Honest Ads Act, said in a statement to the Journal. Social media platforms, she added, have pledged to make online advertising more transparent – but Facebook’s threatened action “is further evidence that voluntary standards are insufficient”. After the Journal’s article was published, Facebook partially retracted its threat, signaling the sensitivity of the issue. It said it would not take any action until after the election. The Democratic vice-presidential nominee, Kamala Harris, is offering a searing view of the Trump presidency in Cleveland, Ohio, right now. She decries, loudly and in a sharply scathing tone, Donald Trump’s having politicized mask-wearing in relation to the coronavirus pandemic, when the president indicates that if you don’t wear a mask you’re for Trump, if you wear one then you are against him. “Can you imagine?” she asks rhetorically. She’s talking as Barack Obama just took the stage at a drive-in rally in North Miami, Florida, where the former president just jogged in wearing a “VOTE” mask. Harris, in the swing state of Ohio, went on to describe Trump as the kind of vain man “who looks in the mirror rather than looking into the faces of the American people.” “And so we find ourselves in this crisis,” she said. With the pandemic decimating the public health and the economy, Harris said that in Ohio right now, one in 10 families are concerned that they don’t have enough food, one in six families are concerned that they won’t be able to pay the rent next month, and one in five businesses have closed “with no prospect of being able to reopen.” “We are in the middle of a hunger crisis in America,” the California Senator said. She called the Trump presidency the greatest failure of an administration in US history. New Yorkers are jamming polling places and standing in line for hours to cast ballots on the state’s first day of early voting today. They are rushing to record their choices 10 days ahead of the November 3 presidential election, Reuters reports. Lines formed before polls opened across New York City and neighboring Long Island, videos on social media showed, as New Yorkers joined a flood of more than 56 million Americans across the country who have cast early ballots at a record-setting pace. Saturday was the first time that voters in New York, a reliably Democratic state where Democrat Joe Biden has a wide lead in polls over the Republican president, Donald Trump, have been allowed to vote early in a presidential election. A majority of New York voters haven’t supported a Republican candidate for president since Ronald Reagan’s re-election in 1984. Early in-person voting will continue in the state until November 1. “Patiently waiting for Mommy to vote early!” the New York City Board of Elections tweeted, showing a photo of a young girl sitting in line with a drawing book. About 56.1 million Americans already have cast early ballots across the country either in person or by mail, a pace that could lead to the highest voter turnout rate in more than a century, according to data from the US Elections Project. The high level of early voting has led Michael McDonald, the University of Florida professor who administers the US Elections Project, to predict a record turnout of about 150 million, representing 65% of eligible voters, the highest participation rate since 1908. Donald Trump’s long-sought after tax records, obtained by the New York Times, appear to show he may have given far less to philanthropic causes than he has claimed. According to the documents, the Times reports, Trump has given at least $130m since 2005. But the majority of that total, $119.3m, came from simply agreeing not to move forward on land development projects. In three cases the agreements, known as conservation easements, came after Trump had abandoned the projects but was permitted under US law to keep title and receive a tax deduction equal to their appraised value. Trump’s tax records, the Times also reported, show that much of his charitable giving has come during periods of financial or public-image duress, including as he faced high tax bills from earnings related to his long-running reality TV series, The Apprentice. One land deal, currently being investigated by the New York attorney general, involves land donated for a state park. The investigation focuses on whether the appraisal used to secure a tax easement was improperly inflated. According to an earlier report at least four Trump properties – the Trump International Hotel and Tower in Chicago, a 212-acre Seven Springs estate in Westchester county, New York, the Trump National Golf Club in Los Angeles and a skyscraper at 40 Wall Street in Manhattan – are being reviewed by state and federal authorities for potential tax, debt or insurance irregularities. The latest reporting contributes to a perception that Trump’s claims to philanthropic largesse are inflated or misleading at best. His charitable foundation was shut down two years ago. Former New York attorney general Barbara Underwood said at the time the foundation functioned “as little more than a checkbook to serve Mr Trump’s business and political interests”, and had engaged in “a shocking pattern of illegality.” The current New York attorney general, Letitia James, is investigating whether the Trump Organization falsely reported property values to secure loans or tax benefits. Investigators with her office this month deposed Eric Trump, the organization’s executive vice president, in what is currently a civil matter. The president’s son described the investigation as “the highest level of prosecutorial misconduct”. In response to questions posed by the Times about public philanthropic promises that appear either to have been exaggerated or non-existent, Trump Organization spokeswoman Amanda Miller said: “President Trump gives money privately. It’s impossible to know how much he’s given over the years.” Everyone’s on the move. Donald Trump is en route from North Carolina to his next campaign event, in Ohio, and Joe Biden has another rally in Pennsylvania, this one featuring rock god Jon Bon Jovi, who 10 years ago described himself to the Observer (the Guardian’s sister Sunday newspaper) as “overweight, drinking too much and bored to tears”! And very soon, Barack Obama is speaking at a drive-in rally in support of Joe Biden in Florida. Obama began hitting the campaign trail in person a few days ago, giving a blistering critique of Donald Trump’s presidency at a raucous rally in Philadelphia. The timing appeared very strategic - don’t campaign too early as if your former vice-president needs rescuing, but skid in for the closing when Biden has a strong lead in the polls but some of those last few swing voters in key states are still deciding which way to go.... Here’s Lauren Gambino’s report on that event in Philly. Richard Luscombe will bring us some reporting from Obama’s event in North Miami in a few minutes. Joe Biden is repeating that he has no plans to ban hydraulic fracturing in Pennsylvania, a critical battleground state where many jobs depend on the industry. Speaking at a drive-in rally on the grounds of a community college in Bristol, near Philadelphia, earlier The Assocated Press reports that he said: “Let me be clear, I’m not banning fracking in Pennsylvania or anywhere else.” People in about 100 cars blared their horns. Still, Biden noted that climate change could lead to more catastrophic floods in places like along the nearby Delaware River. “We can do something about it,” he said. “But we’ve got to come together.” Donald Trump has repeatedly accused Biden of supporting a ban on fracking. Biden mistakenly suggested during a Democratic presidential primary debate that he did, but his campaign quickly corrected that. The former vice president has promised to end fracking on federal land. Biden also said during this week’s presidential debate with Trump that the country would have to “transition away from the oil industry” to combat climate change -- something he didn’t mention at his rally today. Biden has since clarified that the process would be gradual and not cost people who rely on the energy sector their jobs. The comment pleased environmentalists but drew criticism from Republicans and even some national Democratic politicians in close congressional races in oil country. Jill Biden wore a “vote” mask to the rally this morning - here’s a reminder of the great Guardian piece from a few weeks ago about “vote” fashion. The war of words on the campaign trail is heating up. Donald Trump is still talking in North Carolina, about an hour in, in 82F heat under sunny skies (according to the pool report - your blogger is in the cloudy, cool Big Apple) and the president is mocking Democratic rival Joe Biden’s drive-in rallies and the focus on the coronavirus pandemic. Trump said all he hears about is “Covid, Covid, Covid” asserting that on November 4, the day after the election, the topic will disappear from headlines and Biden’s utterances. That seems unlikely as the autumn surge in cases continues across the country, and dire warnings from experts that the death toll, which is currently 224,000 in the US, could more than double to 500,000 in the next four months. Those attending Trump’s rally lined up for hours and can be seen on the television failing to keep social distance or wear a mask, while also hugging each other and cheering loudly. Biden held one of his drive-in rallies in Pennsylvania earlier, where voters listen from their cars and cheer, clap and honk in appreciation while keeping away from each other in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. “People in cars. People in cars!” Trump said sarcastically of Biden’s methods, getting his crowd chuckling. Some Trump supporters in cars made a point of creating a hullabaloo close to Biden’s rally, interrupting the candidate, who called them “chumps”. Just 10 days to go, folks. Meanwhile, Barack Obama is getting ready to hold a drive-in rally for Biden in North Miami within the hour. Meanwhile, top infectious diseases expert and the leading public health official on the White House coronavirus task force, Anthony Fauci, has suggested in his latest interview that it could be time to mandate mask-wearing across American in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. With the pandemic still out of control and infections rising, Fauci expressed exasperation. “If people are not wearing masks, then maybe we should be mandating it,” Fauci told CNN later yesterday. The doctor has been reluctant to talk about a national mandate, hoping that information campaigns, local efforts and facts about the effectiveness of masks would sway the public. Now he appears to be running out of optimism that common sense will prevail. “There’s going to be a difficulty enforcing it, but if everyone agrees that this is something that’s important and they mandate it and everybody pulls together and says, you know, we’re going to mandate it but let’s just do it, I think that would be a great idea to have everybody do it uniformly,” he said last night. Unfortunately, Fauci has been undermined all along the way by Donald Trump and now by the president’s newest official adviser, Scott Atlas (see previous post), whom Fauci has acknowledged is being allowed to edge him out and capture the president’s ear. Fauci also said late Thursday that Trump hasn’t met with the whole task force for months and whereas the White House coronavirus task force met daily earlier in the pandemic they are now only being convened about once a week. While the US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections that could exceed the grim threshold of 100,000 cases a day, Donald Trump’s most controversial official White House coronavirus adviser, Scott Atlas, has put out a tweet, backing up misleading information from the president. CNN’s ace fact-checker Daniel Dale is not having any of it. The country set a record daily number of new coronavirus cases on Friday at more than 83,000, eclipsing the previous high set on 16 July by more than 6,000. Dozens of states have reported their own surge in numbers, with the governor of Utah, Gary Herbert, warning that health services are at breaking point. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. “If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” Good afternoon, Joanna Walters in New York now taking over the reins from my colleague Bryan Armen Graham. Trump just arrived in Lumberton, North Carolina, and has begun addressing a rally there. He’s out of the gate with an entirely unsubstantiated assertion (and a split infinitive) that: “We are going to quickly end this pandemic.” Trump also remarks to the crowd that the sun is hot and he might have to cut his speech short because: “I’m going to be a lobster”. The crowd is having a whale of a time. And then, Christmas greetings. Joe Biden told a rally crowd in the key battleground state of Pennsylvania that he misses up-close campaigning, but doesn’t want his supporters to become “superspreaders”. “I wish I could go car to car and meet you all,” the former vice-president said at the top of his 25min remarks. “I don’t like the idea of all this distance but it’s necessary. I appreciate you being safe. What we don’t want to do is become superspreaders.” Biden’s speech at a drive-in event at Bucks County Community College in the Philadelphia suburb of Bristol came as Donald Trump embarked on a three-state, three-rally jaunt in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin as campaign season hurtles down the homestretch with early voting under way in all 50 states. A Rose Garden event in late September has been labeled a “superspreader” for the virus. More than two dozen people linked to the White House have contracted Covid-19 since the president’s reception on 26 September announcing Amy Coney Barrett as his nominee to the US supreme court. The US Senate has convened a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. Barack Obama was promising to step up for his former vice-president with an appearance in Miami on Saturday afternoon. The problem is nobody seems to know exactly when or where. Democrats have posted only vague details about the event on social media, leaving in the dark hordes of supporters keen to hear the most recent president speak. Not even the hometown Miami Herald appeared to be in the picture, noting only that Obama “planned a drive-in rally Saturday in North Miami”. “Does anyone know where in Miami Obama is going to be at,” one woman asked on Twitter on Saturday lunchtime, echoing dozens of similar messages from baffled supporters. Others speculated there were no details because the event was invite only. The Florida Democratic Party, meanwhile, isn’t saying either way. Florida, a traditional battleground state which Obama carried in his successful 2008 and 2012 campaigns, is crucial to both candidates’ hopes of winning the White House. Donald Trump flipped the state back red in 2016 but trails Biden in latest polls, albeit by a percentage inside the margin of error. National Guard soldiers in the North Dakota capital of Bismarck have helped notify 800 people who tested positive for the coronavirus but initially weren’t told due to a backlog of cases, the AP reports. The backlog was due to a recent sharp increase in coronavirus cases. North Dakota leads the nation with more than 1,272 new cases per 100,000 people over the past two weeks, according to the COVID Tracking Project. This week, North Dakota National Guard soldiers began telling people they tested positive for the virus. They previously were informing people who had contact with someone positive and should monitor their health for signs and symptoms of the virus. North Dakota reported 886 new infections on Friday, down from a record 1,038 cases on Thursday. Health officials reported nine deaths Friday, increasing the statewide death toll to 440. A surge of coronavirus cases in Wisconsin and the Dakotas is forcing a scramble for hospital beds and raising political tensions, as the upper midwest has emerged as one of the nation’s most troubling hotspots. Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new coronavirus cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. The World Health Organization (WHO) chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and WHO, probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Donald Trump has just cast his ballot in the 2020 presidential election at a library in West Palm Beach not far from his Mar-a-Lago resort. “It was a very secure vote, much more secure than when you send in a ballot, I can tell you that,” the US president says. “Everything was perfect. Very strict, by the rules. When you send in your ballot, it can never be like that. It could never be secure like that.” Early voting began in Florida on Monday. More than 52m Americans have already voted, according to the Election Project. Asked by a reporter which candidate he voted for, he smiles and says: “I voted for a guy named Trump.” A busy Saturday lies ahead with 10 days to do until election day: three rallies in three states (North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin). A fascinating and troubling read from Johnny Kaufmann in Georgia, part of our ongoing series The Fight to Vote: Tariq Baiyina has lobbied politicians, shaken hands with governors, set up a college program, and delivered dozens of sermons. Despite all this, the 42-year-old has never voted. And the reason is simple: since 2002, when he was convicted of a felony, he hasn’t been allowed. Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the group of anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which the White House advisers are accused of showing callous disregard for Americans suffering under the Covid-19 pandemic. On Friday, the Project posted to Twitter a letter from Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented Donald Trump. “I am writing concerning the false, malicious and defamatory ads that the Lincoln Project is displaying on billboards in Times Square,” Kasowitz wrote. “Those ads show Ms Trump smiling and gesturing toward a death count of Americans and New Yorkers, and attribute to Mr Kushner the statement that “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem” … with body bags underneath. “Of course, Mr Kushner never made any such statement, Ms Trump never made any such gesture, and the Lincoln Project’s representation that they did are an outrageous and shameful libel.” The Lincoln Project’s response, posted by members including the former GOP strategist-turned-bestselling author Rick Wilson, was typically pugnacious. “The level of indignant outrage Jared Kushner, and Ivanka Trump have shown towards the Lincoln Project for exposing their indifference for the more than 223,000 people who have lost their lives due to the reckless mismanagement of Covid-19 is comical,” a statement said. “…The billboards will stay up. We consider it important that in Times Square, the crossroads of the world, people are continuously reminded of the cruelty or density and staggering lack of empathy the Trumps and the Kushners have displayed towards the American people.” On 22 October, almost three weeks before one of the most consequential presidential elections in recent history, more than 6 million Californians had already voted. The number was several times that of the same point in 2016. The pandemic, massive wildfires and the ongoing fight against police brutality have galvanized voters in America’s most populous state. “We knew the Covid-19 pandemic would pose significant challenges, but elections officials have prepared and voters have responded,” said Alex Padilla, the secretary of state. California has sent mail-in ballots to 22 million registered voters, and the flood of votes that have been returned so far make up about 25%. It’s still unclear whether voter turnout will be higher than in previous years. But the early turnout is “shattering prior election returns”, said Paul Mitchell of Political Data, a bipartisan voter data firm based in California. “We’ve been tracking this kind of stuff for over a decade, and there’s just nothing that compares to how quickly voters have been returning their ballots this election cycle.” Here’s some of the Associated Press report on yesterday’s worrying coronavirus milestone in the US, a record caseload of more than 83,000 in one day. States from Connecticut to the Rocky Mountain West are reeling under the surge. The US death toll has grown to 223,995, according to Johns Hopkins University. The total US caseload reported on the site Friday was 83,757, topping 77,362 cases reported on 16 July. The impact is being felt in every section of the country – a lockdown at the Oglala Sioux reservation in South Dakota, a plea by a Florida health official for a halt to children’s parties, dire warnings from Utah’s governor, an increasingly desperate situation at a hospital in northern Idaho, which is running out of space and considering airlifts to Seattle or Oregon. “We’ve essentially shut down an entire floor of our hospital. We’ve had to double rooms. We’ve bought more hospital beds,” said Dr Robert Scoggins, a pulmonologist at the Kootenai Health hospital in Coeur d’Alene. “Our hospital is not built for a pandemic.” Utah governor Gary Herbert proclaimed Friday “a record day for Utah – but not a good one” as cases reached an all-time high. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” By public health order, masks are required in 21 counties, said Herbert, urging Utah residents to wear one whenever they are around someone outside their immediate household. The seven-day rolling average for new daily cases in the US surpassed 61,140 on Thursday, compared with 44,647 two weeks ago. The record was reached on 22 July when the rolling average was 67,293. The head of the World Health Organization warned that countries in the northern hemisphere are at a “critical juncture”. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. According to scientists at the University of Washington, things could be about to get much, much worse: Joe Biden’s remark in Thursday’s final debate that he would support a “transition” away from oil in the US, in favour of renewable energy, has given Trump an in – and he has tried to seize it. “That could be one of the biggest mistakes made in presidential debate history,” the president said on Friday at a rally at The Villages, a retirement community in central Florida where thousands of people gathered outdoors on a polo field – most not wearing masks. Later, in Pensacola, Trump recounted the moment with glee. “It looked like he made it, it looked like it was going to be OK. He got off the stage, going back to his basement, and then they hit him with the energy question. They hit him with a thing called oil.” Here’s what Oliver Milman, an environment reporter, wrote for us on Friday: Biden attempted to mend potential political damage after the debate when he told reporters he wanted to end subsidies for fossil fuels rather than the industry itself. But two vulnerable House Democrats in oil-producing states, Kendra Horn in Oklahoma and Xochitl Torres Small in New Mexico, quickly used Twitter to distance themselves from Biden’s remarks, perhaps mindful of the persistent attacks on Hillary Clinton in 2016 when she was portrayed as being happy to eliminate coalmining jobs. Climate activists have pointed out that a phase-out of the oil industry is simply a logical consequence of Biden’s climate action plan, which calls for 100% clean energy within 15 years and the negation of all planet-warming gases in the US by 2050. Even some major oil companies, such as BP, have embraced a similar goal of net zero by 2050. Scientists have warned that emissions must hit zero globally by mid-century to avoid the worst ravages of the climate crisis, including mass suffering and displacement of people due to heatwaves, flooding and wildfires. Biden’s comments on the oil industry “now count as the conventional wisdom”, said Bill McKibben, co-founder of the climate group 350.org. “That matters.” States such as Texas, which Democrats are trying to shift from being reliably Republican, have large numbers of workers in the oil and petrochemical industries. But the economic and political terrain is shifting – Texas is also the largest wind energy-producing state in the US while polls show that nearly eight in 10 Americans want the country to focus on boosting renewable energy rather than fossil fuels, including a clear majority of Republican voters. … and welcome to another day of coverage of the US presidential election, US politics in general and of course the coronavirus pandemic, ever a subject of political debate. There are 10 days to go until election day, and Donald Trump is trailing Joe Biden in most national and battleground polls, some deficits by more than 5%, suggesting that even polling inaccuracies of 2016 proportions might not see the president right the ship. This morning, Trump will vote in Florida, then travel to North Carolina. Here is a story about how one leading expert thinks turnout is heading to be the highest since 1908, early voting surging because of the pandemic – and perhaps because of Trump himself. More than 52m votes have been cast, with 100m or so more expected. It’s a three-rally day for Trump, with Ohio and Wisconsin after North Carolina. According to the fivethirtyeight.com averages, he’s a fraction ahead of Biden in Ohio, a fraction behind in North Carolina – and quite a long way behind in Wisconsin. Biden will be in Pennsylvania, where he also leads by more than 5%, for two drive-in rallies, one attended by … Jon Bon Jovi. “To continue our movementI am going to rely on you,” Trump told supporters in Florida on Friday. “Get out and vote. Vote early. Bring your friends, your family, your neighbors, your co-workers. Even grab your boss and say: ‘Come on, boss. You got to vote.’” Don’t, to put it efficiently, expect much evidence of Covid-19 mitigation measures at the Trump events today. Don’t expect much discussion of how case numbers have now hit record highs – and could reach terrifying levels, according to one new report. More to come, of course, from me and other Guardian writers. In the meantime, here’s something I helped Ed Pilkington write, about Trump’s dirty tricks …
3||Poll reveals steep rise in younger adults flouting UK's Covid restrictionsThe proportion of younger adults who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer showed the proportion of 18 to 34-year-olds who admitted breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35 to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. While the poll showed the overwhelming majority were complying with the regulations, the figures came as infections continue to rise ahead of a winter predicted to be very difficult for the NHS to manage. The survey also revealed that the public’s approval of the government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has dropped to its lowest levels since polling began. Currently, 50% disapprove of the government’s handling of the crisis, while 29% approve, down from 31% two weeks ago. Labour has a two percentage point lead over the Tories. The Conservatives are down two points from a fortnight ago, while Labour is stable. The public is split on who would make the best prime minister. Keir Starmer leads by just one point, the same as a fortnight ago. While 31% thought the Labour leader would make the best prime minister, 30% opted for Boris Johnson. Following the battle between the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, and the government over funding, Burnham has a net approval rating of +23 points among those living in the Greater Manchester area. The prime minister has a national net approval rating of -14 points. The public is divided on the clarity of the new tiered system of Covid restrictions. Half (50%) said they thought the system was clear, 44% thought the opposite. Nearly two in five (38%) thought the new measures had not gone far enough, 32% thought the measures were about right and 18% thought they had gone too far. A third (34%) said they were not confident they know what the rules are in their area. Opinium polled 2,002 adults online from 22 to 23 October. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the question over the first graphic; an earlier version said the poll results showed numbers of people abiding by the Covid-19 rules, rather than those who admitted breaking them.
2||Dustin Martin cements status as AFL great with another standout showingAs Richmond underlined their AFL dynasty with a third premiership in four years, the club’s talisman during its era of success, Dustin Martin, secured his status as one of the all-time greats of the game after adding a third Norm Smith medal to his collection. In a breathless finale on Saturday night to a season that will never be forgotten for its singular unpredictability, it was with a contrasting sense of inevitability that the Tigers star added to his individual wins of 2017 and 2019. Martin was the pre-grand final favourite to do what no other player has done before and win a third best-on-ground award in a premiership decider. And when it came to it, the man who seems to thrive on the biggest stage lived up to expectations. Having already kicked goals either side of half-time and with Richmond in the ascendancy as the full-time siren loomed, Martin iced back-to-back flags for the Tigers with a characteristic moment of magic, skidding a dribble kick through to open up a 22-point lead with just under eight minutes remaining. That was probably enough to hammer a nail into Geelong’s coffin – and to ensure he would go home with another Norm Smith medal around his neck. But Martin saved his best for last, snapping a fourth goal as time ran out, having won possession and fended off the attentions of Patrick Dangerfield. Added to his goal tally on a historic night under the lights in Brisbane, Martin had 21 disposals, 10 contested possessions, three tackles and four clearances in yet another outstanding grand final performance. There could have been no argument when the announcement was made on the Gabba stage. The vote was unanimous: each of the five judges put Martin top of their lists, giving him a maximum 15 points, well ahead of Jayden Short (six), Shane Edwards (four), Mitch Duncan (three) and Nathan Broad (two). The medal sees him move ahead of the already elite group of players to have won two Norm Smiths – Hawthorn pair Gary Ayres (in 1986 and 1988) and Luke Hodge (in 2008 and 2014), and Adelaide’s Andrew McLeod (in 1997 and 1998). Asked after the game in an interview with Channel Seven if the enormity of his feat had sunk in, Martin was as understated as ever. “It’s just surreal,” he said. “I can’t believe we’ve won three premierships and that’s just an added bonus. It’s pretty cool.” Tigers coach Damien Hardwick was more effusive. “He’s an incredible athlete isn’t he?” Hardwick told Channel Seven. “He’ll go down probably now as the best finals player of all time ... the way he just controls a game and knows where to be when to be, is incredibly important.” Martin had earlier played an important role in stemming the Geelong tide in the second quarter, breaking a run of five consecutive Cats goals with his first of the night to keep the Tigers in touch going into the major break. And an opportunistic snap from 50m with six minutes remaining in the third quarter gave the Tigers the lead and set them on the path to victory. Martin adds his record third Norm Smith to the Brownlow medal won in 2017 – and his three premiership rings. “It still doesn’t feel real,” he said. “I don’t know what to say. I’m just so grateful to be a part of such an unbelievable group. I’m lost for words to be honest. It’s been a tough road. I couldn’t be prouder of the way we faced a bit of adversity this year and the way we stuck at it. That’s why we’re a great club.”
0||Trump tells GOP donors that holding Senate will be 'tough' – reportShortly after Donald Trump insisted to reporters in Ohio he expected a “red wave” on election day, 3 November, it was reported on Saturday that he told Republican donors this week it would be “tough” for the party to hold on to the Senate. Trump trails Joe Biden in most national and battleground state polls. Democrats hold the House of Representatives and expect to keep it, while many forecasters think they have a good chance of re-taking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47, thereby achieving unified government. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” the Washington Post said Trump told donors in Nashville, Tennessee, on Thursday, before his last debate against Biden, according to an anonymous attendee. “The Senate is very tough.” The Post said Trump also insisted Republicans “are going to take back the House”. As Democrats hold that chamber by 232-197, few forecasters think there is much chance of that. Senate Republicans face defeat in Colorado, Maine, Arizona and perhaps North Carolina. Supposedly safer seats in Georgia, Iowa and Montana look far from secure. Trump reportedly told donors North Carolina would hold and Alabama would be taken back, but said there were “a couple” of senators he did not want to help. “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in,” the Post quoted him as saying. “I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” Trump has clashed with senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who offered harsh criticism and predicted “a Republican bloodbath in the Senate”. Sasse is among conservatives eyeing post-Trump presidential runs. Others usually loyal but under pressure at the polls, such as John Cornyn in Texas and Martha McSally in Arizona, have mounted cautious bids to be seen as independent. Even Mitch McConnell, the ruthless architect of the Republicans’ push to install federal judges under Trump, has said he thinks his party has a “50-50” chance of keeping control. The majority leader, 78, set for re-election despite a tough fight in Kentucky, has rebuffed questions about his health after he appeared with severe bruising to his hands and face. Control of the Senate has allowed Republicans to rush through the nomination of Amy Coney Barrett to succeed Ruth Bader Ginsburg on the supreme court, thereby tipping it 6-3 in favour of conservatives. If the White House and Senate are lost, a reactionary court would be Republicans’ bulwark against a Biden legislative agenda that could include reform to the court and the Senate. The court is due to hear a challenge to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, on 10 November. Trump has said he wants the justices to bring the ACA down, thereby depriving millions of healthcare in a pandemic and kneecapping his own drive to defeat HIV. One senator who initially stood against the push for Barrett said during debate on Saturday she would vote to confirm. When the nomination comes to the floor on Monday, said Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, “I will be a yes. I have no doubt about her intellect … I have no doubt about her capability to do the job.” Generally a defender of abortion rights Democrats say Barrett will threaten, Murkowksi had said no new justice should be named before the election.
1||England's Keira Walsh relishes her new-found freedom after strugglesManchester City’s Keira Walsh is preparing to anchor England’s midfield against Germany on Tuesday with a new-found freedom. It has been a long time coming. Despite a domestic cup double and an almost unbeaten season having meant that the 23-year-old travelled to the 2019 World Cup full of confidence, the pressure of her first major tournament hit hard and the criticism that followed even more so. She told the Guardian in January: “There were times when I thought: ‘Is this actually for me? Do I want to play football any more?’” and conceded that she still struggled on England camps even then, six months after the tournament. Whether it is having had time to settle or a new crop of young players alleviating the pressure that comes with being one of the least experienced, Walsh is starting to thrive “in my own head and my own mentality”, she said after England’s internal friendly on Friday. “I was playing a bit reserved. Now that I’ve taken the reins off a little bit and am not afraid to make mistakes I’m definitely playing a lot better and feeling a lot better on the pitch.” For that match, she was part of a formidable midfield trio with the Arsenal defender Leah Williamson and her City teammate Georgia Stanway and ran rings round England stalwarts Jill Scott, Izzy Christiansen and Fran Kirby, who picked up an ankle injury and is returning to Chelsea. “I definitely feel more comfortable,” Walsh said. “It makes it easier when you’ve got great teammates and players around you. They’re always there to encourage you and make you feel better if you make a mistake. That’s something the staff have spoken about, that if you’re making positive mistakes then they are not too bothered. If you’re trying to play forward and make something happen then they’re happy with that. That’s something I’ve been trying to work on.” Now it is about taking the next step. “I need to be scoring more goals and getting more assists. I play a slightly different role at England and City, I sit a little bit deeper at City, but especially with England there is no reason I can’t be getting in the box and adding more goals to my game.” Playing alongside her close friend Williamson in midfield was special because Walsh has “not played with her since I was about 12, in midfield”. She added: “We’re such good friends and it definitely makes it easier. We knew what each other wanted on the pitch, especially with Georgia in there as well, we spend a lot of time together off the pitch so in terms of the relationship there today we were playing a lot of one-two touches and it just clicked.” Phil Neville said his management team were looking at combinations when asked about the fresh partnerships on show. “We put two teams together two weeks ago and we wanted to change the dynamics a little, play some of the younger ones with different personnel to see if they could handle different scenarios and different systems. “We’re always looking for partnerships across the pitch, where we can get them playing together and gelling together and making sure there’s that connection in different units.” The FA has struggled to find opponents in this run of international breaks. With the Lionesses having no competitive fixtures, having qualified for the Olympics through their World Cup finish and for the Euros as the host nation, it has been hard to get teams to commit given the constantly changing Covid restrictions. That situation places even more importance on the games they do have, the first against Germany, ranked No 2 in the world behind the USA, on Tuesday and then Norway on 1 December. One method has been to take a smaller squad to Germany than they have had at St George’s Park to force players to play for a place in the travelling party. “We’ve 28 in the squad but we’re not taking 28 to Germany so there’s a decision to be had over the next 24 hours,” said Neville. “Every single player has trained really well, knitted in and deserves to go but unfortunately some won’t.”
1||Liverpool 2-1 Sheffield United: Premier League – live reaction!Premier League: Andy Hunter was at Anfield to see Liverpool come from behind to win against much-improved Sheffield United. Here’s how our man on Merseyside saw the action unfold. “It was hard, as expected,” he tells Sky Sports. “Sheffield United are a good side, they worked hard and made it difficult. They were in the game for long periods but we’re delighted that we kept going and got the three points in the end, which was important for us. On Liverpool’s centre-back pairing: “They were brilliant. It’s always going to be difficult against McBurnie up top, who’s very good in the air. I thought they worked the game out well, especially in the second half. We created some good chances and probably should have killed the game off with another goal or two. Overall, we’ve got to be delighted with the three points.” Have Liverpool answered a few questions from people critical of some recent results? “I’m not really interested in that, to be honest. I’m only interested in what I see in the dressing-room and I see hunger and desire every day to improve and win games. We’ve shown resilience and character tonight, digging in when we’re not playing as well as we should be.” The table: Liverpool go second, level on points with Everton having played one game more. Sheffield United remain second from bottom with just one point from a possible 18 but can take a lot of positives from their performance against the champions tonight. View the Premier League table Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeep! It was intriguing without being especially entertaining and Mike Dean draws proceedings to a close and Liverpool take all three points. They went behind to a controversially awarded Sander Berge penalty, but fought back to win courtesy of goals from Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota. 90+3 min: One suspects that was the chance for United. Liverpool have the ball back and are in no hurry to give it away. 90+2 min: Oli McBurnie wins a flick-on and puts the ball into the path of Oliver Burke. He shoots high and wide when he should have at least hit the target. He puts his head in his hands and berates himself in the strongest possible terms. 90+1 min: Ben Osborn is crowded out as he tries to drill the ball across the Liverpool penalty area. 89 min:Time is running out for Sheffield United, who are struggling to get a touch of the ball at the moment. There’s a break in play as Jordan Henderson takes a breath after coming out second best from an accidental collision with Oli McBurnie. 87 min: Sadio Mane leans back as he shoots from distance and the ball sails high over the crossbar. 85 min: Diogo Jota takes his place in the stand and has a big bag of ice taped applied to his right calf, strapped in place by a physio with far more Cling Film than is necessary. Won’t somebody please think of the environment?!?!?! 84 min: Liverpool substitution: Takumi Minamino and James Milner on, Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota off. 82 min: With his back to goal and the ball travelling towards him at speed, Mo Salah rolls John Egan and finds himself through on goal. He dinks the ball on to the upright and it bounces back into the grateful arms of Aaron Ramsdale. 79 min: Sheffield United remain in the game, with Ethan Ampadu playing a diagonal for Ben Osborn to chase. He gets in by the byline and looks up, but there’s nobody in a green shirt for him to pull the ball back towards. 76 min: Sheffield United substitution: David McGoldrick on for John Lundstram. The Republic of Ireland international almost has an instant impact, pouncing on a loose header from Fabinho and sending a half-volley wide of the upright. 75 min: Another header from Gomez, who puts the ball out for a throw-in as Sheffield United enjoy a spell of dominance. 74 min: John Egan plays a ball from deep down the touchline for George Baldock to chase. He picks out Sander Berge, who forces a smart save out of Alisson. 72 min: Ben Osborn sends in a half-decent cross from the left flank, which Joe Gomez thumps clear with a good header. 69 min: Going back to that disallowed Mo Salah goal - his two-touch finish was sublime, but the curtain-twitchers at Stockley Park got this decision right. He was marginally offside when he made his run to meet Alexander-Arnold’s cross. 68 min: As impressive as Sheffield United have been tonight, they’ll be ticked off that both Liverpool goals have come from preventable crosses sent in from the touchline. The first came from Jordan Henderson, the second from Sadio Mane. 67 min: Another corner for Liverpool as Sheffield United fail to clear properly. 66 min: Enda Stevens is booked for a foul on Jota and Liverpool have a free-kick wide on the right in a good position. Alexander-Arnold swings the ball in towards the near post and Firmino’s header is put out for a corner. Liverpool lead: Sadio Mane sends a cross to the far post from the left flank and Diogo Jota leaps to thump a header past Aaron Ramsdale. There was nothing wrong with that one! 63 min: Liverpool fans will love this - Salah’s goal has been ruled out for offside following a VAR intervention. Trent Alexander-Arnold picks out Salah with a cross from the right to the edge of the six-yard box. He controls it beautifully with his first touch, then turns and spanks it past Ramsdale with his second. 60 min: Past the hour mark we go and Sheffield United continue to play very well against the reigning champions. Oliver Burke takes on and beats Fabinho around his outside and scurries into the Liverpool penalty area. His shot from a narrow angle is blocked by Joe Gomez. 58 min: Jurgen Klopp effs and jeffs on the touchline, prompting Sky’s commentator to apologise for the Liverpool manager’s potty mouth. It’s after the watershed, there’s really no need. 55 min: Good play from Liverpool, as Jordan Henderson tries to play a low, curled pass from outside the area into the path of Sadio Mane, who was making a run to the far post. There’s a mite too much welly on it but Mane keeps it in play at the byline and pulls it back to Firmino. His shot from the edge of the penalty area is blocked. 54 min: Sheffield United substitution: Oliver Burke comes on for Rhian Brewster, who’s seen little of the ball and had a fairly quiet game. 51 min: Enda Stevens dives to head a Trent Alexander-Arnold cross out for a corner. From that set-piece, Liverpool win another. Alexander-Arnold’s inswinger is cleared by Oli McBurnie, but only as far as Mo Salah. He tries to arrow the ball into the top corner, but sends his effort high and wide. 50 min: Andy Robertson picks up a pass in space on the right flank but is quickly closed down by Ben Osbourn and forced to pass backwards. Liverpool are dominating but Sheffield United are doing a good job of keeping them at arm’s length. 48 min: Oli McBurnie has been making life very difficult for Joe Gomez and takes advantage of a poor touch from the central defender to win the ball in the Liverpool penalty area. It’s worked towards George Baldock, who tries his luck with a shot from distance. It’s a decent effort but fizzes wide of the left upright. 47 min: Liverpool begin on the front foot, dominating possession in the early stages of the second half, much like they did in the first. Diogo Jota dribbles across the face of the Sheffield United penalty area but has the ball nicked off his toe. 46 min: Play resumes, with Liverpool getting the ball rolling as they play into an empty Kop for this second half. There are no changes in personnel on either side. An email: “I assume that we will see those fine sportsmen from Liverpool vociferously protesting that the Blades should get a penalty for that trip,” writes Jonathan Leiper. “Given that they have invested so much emotional capital in Mane’s offside and all that.” Sheffield United have been excellent in that first half, with George Baldock standing out in a team full of players who are having good games. How on earth have they only got one point from their first five games? Peep! The sides traipse off with a goal apiece. Liverpool started in the ascendency but went behind after Sander Berge slotted home a penalty awarded when Fabinho was penalised for a fould on John Lundstram right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area. Bobby Firmino equalised for Liverpool shortly before the break, tapping into an empty goal after Sadio Mane had forced Aaron Ramsdale into a decent save. 45+3 min: ANother Baldock cross - the man is relentless on the right flank for Sheffield United - is cleared at the far post. 45 min: Another cross from Baldock is cleared by Fabinho, as Lundstram charges into the Liverpool penalty area with a late run. The ball drops for Basham, whose shot is blocked. 43 min: A tip of the hat to Jordan Henderson for his role in the build-up to that goal. His cross from the right touchline was a beauty and at the far post, Mane got a powerful header on the ball. Ramsdale kept it out but couldn’t hold on to it and Firmino’s task couldn’t have been simpler. The sides are level. Roberto Firmino taps in from a few yards out on the follow-up after Aaron Ramsdale could only parry a Sadio Mane header from point-blank range. 40 min: Yup, replays show that Jota tripped Berge but no spot-kick was awarded. Perhaps Andre Marriner and his VAR officials have gone for their half-time cuppa early. 38 min: Chris Basham intercepts a cross from Firmino from the left, with Mo Salah and Jordan Henderson lurking with intent behind him. Moments previously, Sander Berge was denied what looked a clear penalty for a trip on him by Diogo Jota inside the Liverpool penalty area. 37 min: Another George Baldock cross into the Liverpool penalty area is cleared by Jordan Henderson. 34 min: Trent Alexander-Arnold and Andy Robertson aren’t getting forward down the wings as much as usual this evening, with Sheffield United’s wing-backs keeping them pinned back as much as possible and forcing them to play the ball inside. As I type that, young Trent makes an eejit of me by getting forward and playing a raking pass into the Sheffield United penalty area, where Mo Salah tries to lift the ball over Aaron Ramsdale. Enda Stevens does well to distract him and the ball goes out for a corner from which nothing comes. 32 min: Joe Gomez plays a wonderful crossfield pass to Mo Salah on the right flank and the Egyptian jinks inside. He runs into traffic, turns and tees the ball up for Jordan Henderson, whose shot from just outside the penalty area is blocked by Enda Stevens. 30 min: Liverpool get the ball back to Alisson courtesy of headers from Fabinho and Robertson, while Rhian Brewster tracks both players waiting to pounce on any mistakes. 28 min: Nothing much to report as the game settles into something of a lull following periods of dominance from both sides. 24 min: Sheffield United have certainly found their groove now. A crossfield pass from George Baldock is caught on the volley by Ben Osborn. His ferocious rasper from about 12 yards is saved by Alisson. 23 min: Replays of that most recent Sheffield United penalty appeal show that George Baldock’s cross from the right definitely struck Andy Robertson’s arm. It wasn’t outstretched or in an “unnatural” position, which is probably why no spot-kick was awarded. 22 min: Alisson wins a free-kick as Sheffield United take a corner. He was being shoved as he tried to fist the ball clear. 20 min: Oli McBurnie squanders a glorious chance to put Sheffield United two up after beating the Liverpool offside trap, running on to a glorious cross-field pass, controlling with a wonderful first touch and then sidefooting wide of the far post from a narrow angle. 19 min: Another penalty shout from Sheffield United as a George Baldock cross from the right appears to hit an arm. The appeal goes unheeded. 17 min: Diogo Jota drifts into the centre from the right and picks out Salah with a pass before being fouled. Free-kick for Liverpool, in line with the right side of the United penalty area, a long way out. Trent Alexander-Arnold sends the ball into the penalty area, it finds its way to Gini Wijnaldum and he shoots high and wide. 14 min: Fabinho looks very aggrieved about that penalty decision that went against him. He stuck his foot in right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area, getting a little bit of ball and a little bit of John Lundstram’s foot. Mike Dean didn’t consult his pitchside monitor, choosing to take his VAR official Andre Marriner’s word for that the Brazilian had committed the foul. Sheffield United lead! Alisson dives to his right, Sander Berge shoots down the middle. Mike Dean signals for a penalty following a consultation with his VAR official. 9 min: John Lundstram is tackled by Fabinho on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area and goes down. That might be a penalty. 8 min: Liverpool have settled into the game quickly and are bossing the game, while Sheffield United have yet to find anything resembling a groove. 6 min: The foul that led to that free-kick was a daft one by John Lundstram on Mo Salah, which earned the Sheffield United midfielder a yellow card and almost cost his team a goal. 3 min: Liverpool win a free-kick inside their own half and Trent Alexander-Armstrong spots Ramsdale off his line and shoots for goal. The Sheffield United is almost embarrassed but backpedals furously enough to stretch and tip the ball over his crossbar. That was a great effort from Alexander-Arnold. Nothing comes from the corner. 2 min: John Egan is forced to slide in and prevent the ball reaching Mo Salah in front of an empty net after Aaron Ramsdale charged off his line to chase a long ball from Andy Robertson. Sadio Mane got to it first and squared it, only for Egan to get back and intercept. 1 min: Sheffield United get the ball rolling, their players wearing green shirts, yellow shorts and yellow socks. Liverpool’s players wear their usual home kit of red shirts, shorts and socks. Not long now: The teams are out on the pitch, Sheffield United trouping out first, closely followed by Liverpool. Alisson points to the sky, getting a quick prayer in before lining up with his team-mates in a socially responsible fashion. It’s all about the optics - they’ll be getting up close and personal in just a minute or so. Jurgen Klopp speaks: “Having ALisson back is good news,” says Liverpool’s manager, upon being asked the alarmingly stupid question: is having Alisson back good news. “It was his decision and he’s old enough and experienced enough to make it.” Chris Wilder: “He’s a talented young player and we’re delighted we brought him to the football club,” says Sheffield United’s gaffer upon being asked about Rhian Brewster. “I’m looking forward to watching him play tonight. Elsewhere in the Premier league In torrential rain, Manchester United and Chelsea have just played out a very boring stalemate in a match both managers seemed more intent on not losing than winning. Manchester United were lucky to survive a first-half penalty shout, when Harry Maguire clearly grappled Cesar Azpilicueta at a corner. Those teams: Jurgen Klopp makes three changes to the side that drew with Everton last weekend, two of them enforced. Gini Wijnaldum comes into midfield in place of Fabinho, who drops to fill the Virgil van Dijk-shaped hole in Liverpool’s defence alongside Joe Gomez. Thiago Alcantara has not recovered sufficiently to make the matchday squad, which means Diogo Jota is in. Joel Matip is also out injured, but Alisson returns to the side. A liverpool player until recently, Rhian Brewster makes his full debut for Sheffield United. Max Lowe appears to have been stood down after suffering a blow to the head against Fulham last week, while Oliver Norwood drops to the bench. Ethan Ampadu and Ben Osborn come into the side. Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Gomez, Fabinho, Robertson, Henderson, Wijnaldum, Salah, Firmino, Jota, Mane. Subs: Adrian, Milner, Jones, Minamino, Shaqiri, Phillips, Williams. Sheffield United: Ramsdale, Baldock, Basham, Egan, Ampadu, Stevens, Berge, Lundstram, Osborn, McBurnie, Brewster. Subs: Verrips, Sharp, Burke, Jagielka, Norwood, McGoldrick, Robinson. Tonight’s match officials Referee: Mike Dean Assistants: Darren Cann and Mark Scholes Fourth official: Andy Madley VAR: Andre Marriner Early Sheffield United team news Having scored just twice in five Premier League thus far, Sheffield United are in dire need of goals and former Liverpool player Rhian Brewster could be the man to provide them if he is handed his full debut for the club following his recent move. Left-back Max Lowe got a bang on the head against Fulham last week and was due to be assessed before the blades boarded their bus to Merseyside. Early Liverpool team news It’s flown below the radar so you may have missed the news, but Liverpool are going to be without Virgil van Dijk for the foreseeable future after he tore his ACL during last weekend’s Merseyside derby. The victim of an ludicrous Jordan Pickford challenge that went unpunished and has prompted no end of Liverpool supporters to call for the Everton goalkeeper to be brought to the Hague and tried for crimes against humanity, Van Dijk could miss the rest of the season and we wish him well as begins his recovery. Also clattered in that game, Thiago Alcantara will be assessed before kick-off. Having been out with a shoulder injury, Alisson Becker is reported to be returning to full fitness and may return tonight. Midfielder Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and defender Konstantinos Tsimikas are both out, while Naby Keita and Joel Matip are major doubts. Sheffield United’s bad start to the season could be about to get a whole lot worse as they travel to Anfield to take on the reigning champions. A revelation last season following their promotion from the Championship, Chris Wilder’s side picked up their first point of the current campaign in a slightly fortuitous draw against fellow strugglers Fulham last weekend. They’ll have their work cut out to take anything home today, but will fancy their chances against a team that have been imperious at times, but occasionally bang average and – against Aston Villa – downright awful. Kick-off is at 8pm (BST), but stay tuned in the meantime for team news and build-up.
3||Welsh government to review ban on sales of non-essentialsThe Welsh government is to review how the ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the 17-day lockdown is working, Mark Drakeford has said. The move followed growing calls to reverse the ban in the nation, with a senior police figure saying it benefits only Amazon and more than 30,000 people signing a petition calling for a U-turn on the restriction, which had led some shops to seal off shelves housing children’s clothes and books with clingfilm. “We’ll be reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets and making sure that common sense is applied,” the first minister tweeted. “Supermarkets can sell anything that can be sold in any other type of shop that isn’t required to close. In the meantime, please only leave home if you need to.” His announcement on Saturday evening came after he said the ban was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retailers have to close during the period, which began at 6pm on Friday. However, North Wales police and crime commissioner Arfon Jones said the move would only enrich online internet giants at the expense of high street retailers – concerns echoed by the Welsh Conservatives. “Personally I think the Welsh government decision to ban the sale of non-essential goods in shops that also sell essential goods is wrong and the only people that will benefit will be online sellers like Amazon,” he tweeted. “Bad move on this occasion by Mark Drakeford.” Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”, and it defended the ban on Saturday. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. “Supermarkets can keep selling items you can find in other essential shops – such as stationery/greeting cards,” it tweeted. “The purpose of selling essential items only during firebreak is to discourage spending more time than necessary in shops and to be fair to retailers who have to close. This is not for the sake of being difficult – we need to do everything we can to minimise the time we spend outside our homes. This will help save lives and protect the NHS.” A video posted on social media appeared to show a man ripping down plastic sheeting that was covering clothing aisles in a supermarket. “We do not agree that this is a prudent or rational measure, and will create more harm than good,” the petition stated. “We do not agree for example that parents should be barred from buying clothes for their children during lockdown while out shopping. “This is disproportionate and cruel, and we ask that the decision be reversed immediately.” On Saturday, Andrew Davies, the Welsh Conservatives’ shadow health minister, called for the ban to be “dropped immediately” and has written to the presiding officer of the Welsh parliament calling for members to be recalled to discuss the ban. “I have never witnessed such a fierce backlash against a decision from the Welsh Labour government,” he said. “This ludicrous ban has caused real anger across Wales and it’s not fair on those staff working in our supermarkets, and the general Welsh public who are already at their wit’s end with a difficult fortnight looming. “The Wales-wide lockdown is disproportionate, unnecessary and biting our economy hard. I’d rather see people being able to buy items in shops in their communities that provide employment to local people than see millions spent at online internet giants.”
1||Diogo Jota completes Liverpool's comeback win over Sheffield UnitedAnother Saturday, another dose of VAR torment for Liverpool; only this time Jürgen Klopp’s champions would not be denied victory by strange goings-on at Stockley Park. Diogo Jota’s header lifted Liverpool level on points with Everton at the top of the Premier League after VAR had awarded Sheffield United a dubious penalty and disallowed a sublime goal from Mohamed Salah. Despite the interventions that are driving Klopp to distraction his team extended their unbeaten run at Anfield to a remarkable 62 league games. The 9,999th goal in the club’s history means Liverpool can equal their record of 63 home league games unbeaten – set between 1978 and 1981 – when West Ham visit next Saturday. Klopp will be seeking improvement in his team’s performance, this was more hard-fought and dogged than slick and stylish, but their focus and resilience was faultless yet again. Jota’s winner, coming two minutes after Salah’s disallowed volley, was the hallmark of a single-minded side. The wait for a first league win of the campaign continues for Chris Wilder, although there was plenty to encourage the United manager here. Oli McBurnie and Oliver Burke, a second-half replacement for the former Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster, caused all manner of problems for the home defence but did not find the composure in front of goal to capitalise. Alisson, returning to the side after missing four games with a shoulder problem, was gainfully employed all evening as United created enough chances to claim a point. “They had more possession and control of the game but it wasn’t one-way traffic,” Wilder correctly stated. “We could have done better with the positions we got into in the final third. They did that and we didn’t. This league is ruthless and cruel and it is a cruel one to take tonight.” Jota brought even more quality and adventure to the Liverpool attack as Klopp made a rare formation switch to 4-2-3-1 with the Portugal international on the right and Salah leading the line. Jordan Henderson in particular relished the extra options ahead of him while Sadio Mané flourished as usual on the left. Mané almost put the champions ahead on 67 seconds when he latched on to Andy Robertson’s fine pass and beat Aaron Ramsdale as the United goalkeeper unnecessarily rushed from goal. The covering John Egan, one of several impressive defenders in the visiting ranks, cleared before Salah could tap into an empty net. Moments later Trent Alexander-Arnold almost scored with an audacious free-kick from inside his own half but the back-peddling Ramsdale tipped over to deny the defender one of the goals of the season. Liverpool were dominant from the start. United had not constructed an attack of note before they were awarded a penalty that altered the complexion of the first half. As with the finale at Goodison Park last week, when Henderson had a 92nd minute winner ruled out for a fractional offside against Mané, Klopp was left aghast at the intrusion of VAR. It looked a harsh decision to the naked eye when Mike Dean penalised Fabinho for a foul on McBurnie. The Brazilian appeared to win the ball just outside the area as he attempted to atone for a poor clearance. The VAR official, Andre Marriner, however, ruled that contact was made on the 18-yard line and upgraded Dean’s decision to a penalty. It was the first spot-kick awarded against Liverpool at Anfield for two years. Sander Berge sent Alisson the wrong way from the spot and United were emboldened by their lead. George Baldock’s crosses were a constant source of danger. McBurnie should have doubled United’s advantage from a superb crossfield ball by the wing-back but his shot lacked any conviction and sailed well wide. Another Baldock delivery teed up Ben Osborn for a volley that the Liverpool keeper pushed away and United had three more penalty appeals dismissed before the interval. Two – for a handball by Robertson and a push by Alexander-Arnold on McBurnie – were rightly ignored but Jota was fortunate VAR chose not to review his challenge on Berge when the midfielder darted into the box. Baldock and Osborn were effective in denying space to Liverpool’s marauding full-backs but Alexander-Arnold was involved in the hosts’ equaliser late in the first half. His lay-off was swept towards the far post by Henderson and Mané, somehow left unmarked, met the excellent cross with a powerful header. Ramsdale saved but the ball dropped kindly for Firmino to tap home his first goal of what by his elevated standards has been an underwhelming season so far. Salah thought he had edged Liverpool ahead with a stunning strike as pressure mounted on the visiting defence in the second half. The striker’s first touch to control Alexander-Arnold’s cross into the area was beautiful. His second was even better, volleying beyond Ramsdale in the same movement for his 101st goal in Liverpool colours. But no, it was back to 100 when VAR spotted he was just offside when the cross was played. Liverpool were not deflated by their latest slap from technology. Two minutes later the irrepressible Mané crossed from the left and Jota, left in too much space by Enda Stevens, steered an unstoppable header beyond Ramsdale. Salah could have given his team the comfort of a two-goal lead when he turned Egan inside the box but chipped against a post from close range.
3||'This song is the struggle': Vanuatu's treehouse troubadour on love, loss and languageVanuatu singer-songwriter Tio Bang Massing writes from a place that few still remember. He tries to live there too, with an almost Buddha-like simplicity, in a makeshift home tucked among the roots of a sprawling banyan tree. Massing has been performing most of his adult life, as a founding member of Vanuatu’s renowned fire dance troupe, and as one of the anchors of Dropvkal Groove, a roots music collective. But now he has emerged – from his first ever visit inside a recording studio – with a debut album, Sorousian, drawing inspiration from his volcanic home island of Ambrym, as well as his new arboreal place on Efate island. The album was produced by Wantok Records, a Brisbane-based label that specialises in fostering indigenous talent from Melanesia and Timor. Studio head David Bridie was one of Sorousian’s producers. Massing, he says, “is an effortless artist, in the way he sings and plays guitar ... he comes up with these very textured vocal layers, adds in overdubs of shakers and tam tam and percussion”. Black Butterfly, Massing’s first single, is about, ostensibly, a black butterfly. But the metaphor runs deeper, invoking the fleeting evanescence of the creature’s existence when he sings: “I’m still living, so I must sing, for the voices that can’t be heard any more.” Is Massing the black butterfly? “Maybe I am one of the black butterflies, one of the people who dream to live free with the land,” he tells the Guardian. “But you know it doesn’t really work today. It’s a dream … everyone loves it, they’re talking about it, but I’m not living it. Something we all claim to love, something we all say we want. Something we don’t have the courage and the frailty to be,” Massing says. “That’s the life I named black butterfly.” Living in Vanuatu, the country ranked the most vulnerable on earth to natural disasters and the impacts of climate change, the environment, its decay and its fragility, are recurrent themes. “I have to do something for this earth, as well as for the next generation: for my kids and their kids, you know?”, Massing says. He finds music – or rather music finds him – everywhere. “What is happening around inspires me to share my world through music. And I’m representing communities of other people as well,” he says, such as in Morning Star Bae Kam, a paean to Melanesian neighbour West Papua’s struggle for independence, where he urges a continued resilience: “This song is the struggle/The struggle is this song.” On the outskirts of Port Vila, Massing has built himself a single tiny room out of bamboo and cast-off timbers tucked into the roots of a towering banyan tree, known in Vanuatu as a nambanga. It’s an unhurried existence in his treehouse, an atmosphere that informs his songwriting. Massing’s songs shift from line to line between Vanuatu pidgin Bislama, Ambrymese, and English. Is he worried that his magpie lyrics will leave people behind? “It’s what I believe in, what I’m seeing.” But will people understand? “Maybe, or maybe not… like, if I get one person out of the crowd, then that’s alright, you know? If someone is trying to think of what I’m trying to see, then that’s all right. And if it’s no one, that’s all right.” He smiles broadly, “This album is kind of like an experiment of the local music of Vanuatu.” In polyglot Vanuatu, language is a potent bearer of history, and custom, and place. Mumbwe, Massing’s second single, is derived from from the custom of his home island of Ambrym. The bare bones melody is a reworking of a song used in the Rom customary dance Massing used to watch as a child. The language used in the song is lost from everyday use, but preserved in song. “That,” Massing says quietly, “is the kind of experimenting I’ve been doing.” Recording Sorousian was Massing’s first ever time in a studio, and there is quaint juxtaposition to the album that time has produced. The album, now, lives everywhere, on streaming services to every corner of the globe: Massing remains at home, under the banyan tree, just living.
2||British & Irish Lions could tour Japan in wake of sides meeting at MurrayfieldThe British &amp; Irish Lions have opened the door for a future tour of Japan after announcing only the third “home” match in their illustrious history against the Brave Blossoms next summer. Warren Gatland’s side will face Japan at Murrayfield on 26 June – the same day as the Premiership final – and while they will do so without any England players, the fixture will serve as a key part of the Lions’ preparations before facing the world champions. The trip to South Africa will be the first since the San Francisco agreement in 2017, when it was decided by the game’s powerbrokers that tours would be cut to eight matches. That meeting was controversial because the Lions were not properly represented and while the Murrayfield match increases the number of fixtures to nine, the Premiership clubs’ refusal to make any of their players available demonstrates further how the Lions are becoming increasingly marginalised. Their place on the international schedule is at least guaranteed up to 2032, according to the San Francisco agreement, but the global calendar is up for debate with a number of unions eager to move the existing summer window to October. Should that happen, a tour of Japan – which cemented itself as rugby’s biggest new broadcast market during last year’s World Cup – could move closer to becoming reality. The Lions’ managing director, Ben Calveley, said: “We’re developing a relationship here with Japan, this is the first time that the Lions has played against Japan and it will be a historic Test. My view is that the Lions can offer an awful lot to the growth of the global game and we should consider how best it can do that. “I will absolutely continue to represent the Lions as best I can within those global negotiations when they take place, whereas the Lions may not have been directly represented in the room previously, we are now directly represented and I make all the points that I need to make as any of those global season negotiations take place.” Calveley also revealed that Gatland, who has spent the past month attending a host of club matches, will delay naming his assistant coaches until the new year but confirmed discussions had opened with the home unions. Four years ago, Gatland wanted Gregor Townsend, who had just been appointed Scotland’s head coach, to be part of his backroom staff but he could not secure his release. Calveley, though, is optimistic no such problems will happen this time. The Ireland head coach, Andy Farrell, has been part of the coaching team for the past two tours and while he recently said he has not been approached by Gatland he did not rule out a third Lions trip. Calveley also said club coaches will also be considered, raising the prospect of the Crusaders’ Scott Robertson, who has expressed an interest, Stuart Lancaster from Leinster or Exeter’s Rob Baxter being involved. Calveley said: “What Warren and I have been doing is getting round the head coaches and the chief executives from each of the four unions and I can confirm they’re all incredibly supportive, as you would expect them to be because they absolutely understand the value of the Lions. “I don’t think there’s any assumption the coaches have to come from within the union constructs, they could come from a club environment. “We’re very open we’re interested in appointing coaches that can help us win in South Africa and that’s the main criteria. Anyone that can help us win these Test matches would be interesting to Warren and ultimately it’s his call.”
2||Henry Slade the rock as unstoppable Exeter roll on to cherished doubleNo scorching May heat or packed stands, just damp autumn leaves on a windblown concourse and a soaking, empty colosseum. On the face of it this was as far removed from grand theatre as a small flapping tent on a sodden campsite but Exeter are increasingly a team for all seasons and stages, whatever the opposition or the weather throw at them. It was properly Hitchcock shower-scene wet by the end but, when it absolutely counted, the Chiefs’ grip on a cherished double proved impossible to shake. They are in excellent company with only Leicester (twice), Wasps and Saracens (twice) having previously won the European Cup and Premiership in the same season. None of those fine sides had to contend with the unique challenges of this prolonged campaign, nor were they playing in the second tier of English rugby just a decade previously. It is not just what Exeter are achieving that sets them apart but where they have come from. Once again, though, they kept their absent supporters on edge, only a crucial late lineout steal by Jonny Gray and a concluding penalty by Joe Simmonds, his 33rd consecutive successful kick dating back to the end of August, finally relieving the suffocating pressure. Not for the first time in recent times, an English club clad all in black simply refused to be denied. Wasps also deserve massive credit, especially considering the Covid-disrupted buildup that cost them the services of four of their first-choice 23. At times Jacob Umaga played as if it were a midsummer night in the tropics, which was some feat, while Jimmy Gopperth played the angles beautifully alongside him. Until the Chiefs scrum finally began to ratchet up the pressure in the second half, it was anybody’s game. Did the conditions play into the hands of Exeter’s big forwards? Maybe to an extent but at times it was virtually impossible for anyone to do anything beyond the absolute basics. There is a reason why union administrators prefer their finales to be played in late spring or early summer, on hard, fast tracks rather than inside the equivalent of a dishwasher halfway through its cycle. The elements, though, could not stop Henry Slade displaying the class that makes him an increasingly sharp attacking threat. Ball in two hands, he was swift to spot a mismatch with two rather less mobile Wasps forwards and a little step took him over for another important big-game contribution. It is reaching the point where England need to think about building their starting midfield around Slade rather than endlessly agonising about where he might fit in. Over the next few weeks, however, Eddie Jones will have to do without Jack Nowell, who was on the field here despite having severed ligaments beneath his big toe. The injury will rule him of autumn international consideration but there was no way he was going to miss out on a second major final in eight days. Even on one tattooed foot, the winger is still guaranteed to give everything and, one day, he will enjoy the prolonged run of injury‑free rugby his Cornish fan club is yearning for. There will be no more active outings, though, for Exeter’s other backline totem, Gareth Steenson, for whom this was the final game before retirement. Along with Phil Dollman and others he helped set the tone for what has followed back in the Championship days, not least an instinctive ability to rise to the biggest occasions. This time there was no need for the extra-time penalty winner that sunk Wasps in the 2017 Premiership final but, had there been, the Ulsterman would not have flinched. Perhaps the only unanswered question is this: what would have unfolded had Saracens’ salary cap misadventures not removed them from this season’s equation? None of us will ever know but this is now a more confident, wiser Exeter team than the one overtaken in the closing quarter of last year’s Premiership final. Where Saracens faltered at the death in their European semi-final against Racing 92, too, the Chiefs have now twice held firm when it really mattered. This has been a season like no other and yet still, 12 months on, they remain tougher to shift than a superglued barnacle. Their key men all have plenty more mileage in them, Devon is suddenly a magnet for any ambitious player and they will be even harder to beat when their besotted fans are finally allowed back in Sandy Park. Assuming they can find a way to celebrate over the next few days without joining the Barbarians on the naughty step, it would appear the West Country feelgood factor will endure for a while yet. Exeter have just won a double and still have a good deal of improvement in them. If that is not the definition of club rugby heaven, nothing is.
22||Strictly Come Dancing 2020: week one – as it happenedAnd that’s IT for Week One of Strictly! So great to be back on the dancefloor. I’m predicting Jacquie and Anton to go next week, and a four-way final featuring Clara, Maisie, Nicola and HRVY. Feel free to make your predictions in the comment box, I’m hoping it will stay open a little longer than last week. Thank you for joining in and being hilarious as always - there’s no Halloween Spooktacular next week as it’s a bit early in the season for a theme week, but don’t let that stop you putting on fishnets and bat wings if that’s your thing. It all kicks off at 7.15pm on Saturday; in the meantime you can find me on Twitter @heidistephens, so please come and say hello. Have a great week, and I’ll see you then! Hx Bruno is on Zoom! DRINK. He’s been to the same hairdresser as Jamie, Karen and Gorka. It Takes Two is back throughout the week, maybe this will be the year I FINALLY get an invite. Summary of this VT: there is a great deal of Strictly content available if you’re so inclined. Scores: 8,8,9 - a total of 25 for HRVY and JNTT. Craig though it was spectacular, and Shirley thought it was fierce, fast and furious and HRVY is definitely one to watch. Motsi thought it was the best first dance she’s ever seen, and asks where we go from here. Well, quite. HRVY is humping a microphone, which just made me shout ‘EW NO’ like an absolute mum. His toes are very turned in but he’s definitely got some moves. Great timing and energy, that’s a pretty good outing for Week One. Good work, consonant boy. And finally it’s HRVY and JNTT! Their first dance is the Jive to ‘Faith’ by Stevie Wonder feat. Ariana Grande. Getting your Jive out on Week One is either genius or insanity, what happened to the days when everybody did a Cha Cha or a Waltz and eased themselves in gently? Next week in the bingo: ‘this is the favourite song of *insert relative here*’. Scores: 3,6,6 - a total of 15 for Bill and Oti. THREE, Craig? That’s just RUDE. ‘You two are a whole mood, guys,’ said Motsi. Great commitment but the technique needs work. Craig thought Bill created a whole new dance genre, like dancing on hot coals after a dozen double espressos. Shirley thought it was inspiring for every man watching, but his posture needs work. Everything about this is amazing. Oti is a goddess, Bill has amazing rhythm and some pretty decent footwork, despite it all looking a bit clunky in places. I don’t care, it’s pure joy and I want to watch it again. MORE PLEASE. Next up it’s BILL AND OTI! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Pata Pata’ by Miriam Makeba. Bill looked very promising in the group dance last week, and I suspect he’s going to throw himself into this Cha Cha with both barrels. Wouldn’t you if you got the chance to dance with Oti? You’d have to tie me down. Only two couples left! Hooray, but also boo. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Nicola and Katya. Shirley thought it was a partnership she’s really going to enjoy watching, and Motsi wasn’t disappointed either - Nicola needs to work on getting her upper body more stable, however. Craig though it was absolute dynamite, a fantastic partnership. Already this is incredibly cool, and Nicola and Katya look great together. Some nice footwork too, although a bit tentative from Nicola in places and the transitions need work. Nice timing though - another couple with bags of potential, can’t wait to see what they bring to the dancefloor in the coming weeks. It’s time for NICOLA AND KATYA! Their first dance is the Quickstep to ‘Get Happy’ by Ella Fitzgerald. I can’t wait to see these two dance together for the first time, it feels like such an exciting step for Strictly and I’m really intrigued to see what Katya is going to do. That said, a Quickstep in Week One feels…bonkers. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Ranvir and Giovanni. How do we feel about Gio’s hair? I can’t decide. It’s a bit One Direction. Part of me wants to brush it lovingly out of his eyes, the other part wants to take a pair of kitchen scissors to it. Craig thought Ranvir used her dress like a diva drag queen, it was a great first dance. Shirley thought Ranvir’s hands were exquisite, and she was a superstar. Motsi thought Ranvir has really improved since the launch show, she adored it. Ranvir looks absolutely FIERCE in her red Paso dress, I love it. Some nice skirt work to open, and some good footwork in hold. Giovanni is prancing about trying to steal the limelight, but Ranvir is giving it both barrels. I thought that was a really nice job for a Week One Paso. Next up it’s RANVIR AND GIOVANNI! Their first dance is the Paso Doble to ‘End of Time’ by Beyoncé. I love this song, and I love a Paso, and I have high hopes for this pairing. This show seems very long considering there are three fewer couples than usual. Is everyone still with me? Maybe I’m just out of practice. Scores: 4,6,6 - a total of 16 for Jason and Luba. Jason is quite...enthusiastic, isn’t he? Motsi loved the joy that Jason brought to the dancefloor, but Craig wasn’t fond of the Jackson 5 thing going into the Foxtrot. Shirley thought Jason gave 100% and didn’t hold back, and his footwork was fantastic - lots of potential. AGREE. Jason has some lovely performance skills for a sportsman, and this has bags of charm - his footwork and posture definitely need work but he’s another one that could go on a journey this year. It’s time for JASON AND LUBA! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘My Girl’ by The Temptations. It’s quite early for cutesy faux-romance that makes your teeth hurt, but I’ll let it go just this once because maybe cheesy love stories are what the world needs right now. Scores: 8,8,8, - a total of 24 for Maisie and Gorka. Rein it in Maisie, go on a journey. It’s the only way to win. Shirley thought Maisie was an absolute firecracker and Motsi loved the authenticity of it. Craig thought it was a-may-zing. Maisie’s dress is some kind of flamingo/peacock hybrid, and Maisie is shaking those tail feathers like she’s got ants in her knickers. It’s a proper full-on Samba and I love everything about it; it’s my favourite kind of chaotic party Latin. Maisie is clearly a great dancer, which means she’ll make the final but won’t win. Such is the way of Strictly. It’s time for MAISIE AND GORKA! Their first dance is the Samba to ‘Samba (Conga)’ by Gloria Estefan. Last year Kelvin and Oti did a Samba in Week One that was really quite special, I feel like that set quite a high bar. That said, Maisie strikes me as the kind of woman who would drink Woo Woos out of a fishbowl then shake everything she has on the dancefloor, so why the hell not. Scores: 6, 6, 7 - a total of 19 for JJ and Amy. Families on Zoom! DRINK. Craig thought there was gapping and it needed more drive, but had some nice rise and fall. Shirley agrees with Craig about the drive but it was simple, beautiful and lovely. Motsi got a bit emotional, it had lovely atmosphere and great chemistry. I’ve just realised what Motsi’s dress reminds me of. She looks like she’s got a full body plastercast, like they were supposed to fix her arm but somehow did the rest of her body instead. This is a lovely Waltz and it’s impossible not to find JJ a bit dreamy, although he’s got a few posture issues. But there’s a nice connection between these two and I’m looking forward to seeing his dancing journey. Liked that very much. Next up it’s JJ AND AMY. Their first dance is the Waltz to ‘What A Wonderful World’ by Louis Armstrong. This is next level 2020 denial and I can’t even be annoyed about it. Scores: 3 (drink),5,5 - a total of 13 for Jacquie and Anton. Motsi thought Jacquie looked comfortable on the floor, but needs to express herself more. Craig thought it lacked musicality and looked a bit lumpy, but on the bright side it was ten times better than Theresa May. Shirley was pleasantly surprised, it was a huge improvement compared to the launch show. This has a random election theme that means the first 30 seconds are spent faffing about with a ballot box. It’s a very odd song for an American Smooth, but Jacquie’s doing her absolute best despite hats and canes and superfluous props. No killer moves, but also not the worst partner Anton’s ever had by a country mile. It’s time for JACQUI AND ANTON! Their first dance is the Foxtrot to ‘Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life’ by Monty Python. Does anyone else feel like Anton has resigned himself to the early bus home next Sunday? Last week’s group dance would suggest Jacquie isn’t the world’s most natural dancer, although it would be kind of amazing if that was the biggest ruse of all time and she’s actually got killer moves. Scores: 5,6,7 - a total of 18 for Clara and Aljaz. Bit mean, Craig. I didn’t think that was stompy at all. Shirley loved the rhythm and the chemistry between Clara and Aljaz and Motsi loved the determination and the energy. Craig thought it was stompy and needed straighter legs, although he loved the disco elements. Clara looks incredible in electric blue fringing and has legs to die for. This is a great Cha Cha with lovely energyfrom Clara and some really nice footwork. She has loads of attitude and I think these two are going to be real contenders. LOVED that. Next up it’s CLARA AND ALJAZ! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Don’t Start Now’ by Dua Lipa. Am very glad to see they’ve binned off Week One ‘let’s do a song about your job’, because all the songs about DJs are rubbish. Apart from ‘God Is A DJ’ by Faithless, which I’m not sure quite works as a Cha Cha. Scores: 6,5,6 - a total of 17 for Max and Dianne. Am getting the feeling that the music brief this week was DO SOMETHING UPLIFTING EVERYTHING IS AWFUL. Not that I’m complaining, I’m very much here for happy happy joy joy on my telly every weekend. I think we can all agree that nobody ever needs to hear the Dave Arch version of Roxanne by The Police again. Craig didn’t like the free arm placement and Max needed to lead the dance more, but he’s very watchable and left Craig wanting more. Shirley thought Max has great chemistry and potential, but she wanted a traditional Tango without sections out of hold. Motsi thought Max had a beautiful neck and a good frame but Max was overthinking it and it inhibited Max’s energy. What’s the obsession with Max’s neck? It’s just a neck. We’ve all got one. So this is definitely a Tango, but lacking drive and thrust from Max. He’s got some half-decent timing, but his top line is all over the shop. Great effort for Week One though, feels like he could improve a lot over the coming weeks. It’s time for MAX AND DIANNE! Their first dance is the Tango to ‘Best Fake Smile’ by James Bay. My best fake smile wore out some time in April. Now it’s just a grimace. Some days I wake up looking like the Joker from Batman. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 31 for Caroline and Johannes. Motsi didn’t see a dancer, she saw a dancing queen. Caroline had lovely attention to detail. Caroline is WEEPING, and it’s only Week 1. Craig thought her feet were a bit turned out but Caroline’s musicality was sensational. Shirley thought it was graceful, charming and elegant, albeit her lower half needed some work. Honestly, I think that might be one of Tess’s worst outfits ever. Those wet look flares are just horrible, what was she thinking? I LOVE Caroline’s yellow dress, and she has lovely musicality and performance. A few balance issues in hold but some good solo sections. All rather charming and entirely joyous, enjoyed that very much. Next up it’s CAROLINE AND JOHANNES! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘9-5 (Morning Train)’ by Sheena Easton. What a song, and what a coupling; definitely one of my favourites this year. Becks has also worked with her a few times and confirms she is LOVELY. The emotion in training is all a bit overwhelming, I want to give her a hug. Scores: 4 (drink), 5,5 - a total of 14. Anyone else (whisper it), not really missing Bruno? Shirley thought it was a nice performance and full of enthusiasm. It needs work, but Jamie has potential. Motsi, who appears to be wearing a towel, thought it needed better technique. Craig thought it was stiff and flat-footed, and agreed that it was restricted due to the tightness of the trousers. But he loved the energy and commitment. Poor Tess, forced to socially distanced so she can’t manhandle the couples. What will she do with her hands? OK this is the campest thing I’ve ever seen, and Jamie is joyously terrible. Although I have no idea how he’s supposed to perform any kind hip action in white jeans that tight. This is not a great Cha Cha Cha by any standards, but I love Jamie’s enthusiasm and effort levels. Good work. First up tonight it’s JAMIE AND KAREN. Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Think About Things’ by Daði og Gagnamagnið. This was the Icelandic song that would have won Eurovision had it not been cancelled this year, and I can’t tell you how thrilled I am to see it on Strictly. It’s like my two liveblog worlds have collided, and honestly it feels like Christmas. Out come the stars! Nobody seems to have upset Wardrobe yet, but it’s early days. Bubble DRINK! Also many fake tans, so keep drinking. Out come the judges! Shirley has got tangled in some tights. Send help. TESS AND CLAUDIA DRESS WATCH: Tess has been dipped in tar, and Claudia is in a spotty prom dress. One of these outfits is quite nice. And we’re off! Time for a slow-mo intro VT with some washed out filters. Everyone is scared but excited, and can’t wait to get on the dancefloor. Ah, it’s good to hear that theme tune again. Ooh, pro dance! We don’t normally get one of those on a Saturday night. It’s a hectic latin hot mess with some truly hideous outfits, but it features Shakira and that’s never a bad thing. And Lionel Richie! Love a bit of Lionel. This week’s Strictly Come Bingo – a swig of something medicinal for any occurrence of the following: Zoom-based relatives Fake tans Craig giving a 4 or lower Mentions of tallness The word ‘bubble’ Also I’ve got HOUSEGUESTS this weekend, which is very exciting. My friend Becks is staying; she’s a huge Strictly fan and lovely to have company while I tap away madly. We’re also making room for a dog and a cat between us, so it’s quite busy on my liveblog sofa. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing liveblog! After last week’s launch it’s time for our couples to take to the floor for the first time, so we can make wild predictions about who’s going to make the final and who will be leaving the Strictly bubble next Sunday. There’s no elimination or Sunday results show this week, so let’s just enjoy a joyous evening of dancefloor fun. I’ll be analysing every flailing arm and pigeon toe from up here, so please feel free to join in in the comment bubble below, but only if you’ve quarantined for two weeks, had two Covid tests and are adhering to all government guidelines. Kick off is at 7.25pm, so join me then!
1||Frank Lampard makes case for the defence as forwards take back seatSplurge on the attack. Make yourself the envy of the world by signing Hakim Ziyech, Timo Werner and Kai Havertz in one wild summer. Make the journey to Old Trafford, where Manchester United were last seen losing 6-1 to Tottenham, and pick a back-five. Take Werner and Havertz off with 20 minutes left. Give Ziyech 10 minutes at the end. Settle for a second consecutive goalless draw. Flip the narrative on its head. By the end of a grim match it was clear Frank Lampard had no interest in another defensive aberration from his leaky Chelsea side. He will not apologise for setting out to contain United. Attacking cohesion can wait: for a manager accused of failing to focus on shape and resilience during his time at Chelsea, a shutout inspired by Thiago Silva’s serenity in central defence represented another step forward. Both sides played as though they were spooked by visions of a defensive calamity on a slick, treacherous surface. The handbrake was on, as Arsène Wenger would say. Chelsea wanted to suffocate, United wanted errors and wonky defending from the visitors. The result was a stalemate for 45 minutes, notable mainly for loose touches, misplaced passes and a host of gifted attackers waiting in vain for a defensive midfielder to give them the ball. It seemed fitting the half ended with Havertz picking up a booking after a frustrated tug of a red shirt. Perhaps he just wanted to get involved, to make his presence felt, to remind the world he does exist. Otherwise the opening period passed him by, although at least he could console himself with the knowledge the same was true for United’s creators, with Bruno Fernandes searching in vain for space. Nobody wanted to break the structure. Chelsea set the tone with their system, bringing to mind José Mourinho’s jibe that they always go to a back-five when results are indifferent. With Mason Mount dropping to the bench, César Azpilicueta came in to provide an extra defensive bolt, sweeping behind Reece James on the right, leaving Marcus Rashford so deprived of service for long spells that the United forward probably had time to log into his Twitter account to embarrass a Tory MP. Had Lampard channelled his inner José? Conscious no Chelsea manager in the history of the Premier League has conceded at a higher rate than him, had he set out to kill the spectacle? Maybe – or perhaps he knew United, back to 4-2-3-1 after defeating Paris Saint-Germain with a back three, like teams who attack them. The risk for Lampard was that ceding the initiative risked negating the effectiveness of his attack. Chelsea controlled the ball but lacked menace. United bided their time, waiting for the errors. Édouard Mendy almost obliged, screwing a pass just wide of his own goal as Lampard congratulated himself on including Petr Cech in his Premier League squad to provide emergency goalkeeping cover – you know, just in case. Mendy redeemed himself with a couple of fine saves before the interval. The second came from a curling effort from Juan Mata, the first after United had managed to catch Chelsea cold. It came from a sudden spurt of pressing from United, exposing slackness from Jorginho and Thiago Silva, resulting in a loss of possession that would have led to Rashford scoring but for Mendy saving with his feet. At the other end Werner waited in vain for a chance to stretch his legs and run beyond Harry Maguire. Bar a few surges from Havertz in the second half, Chelsea were pallid in the final third. Yet they were happier with the draw. United made the attacking changes, introducing Paul Pogba and Edinson Cavani, but there was no change of shape from Lampard when he brought Tammy Abraham and Mount on. His priorities were clear.
6||Children’s doctors attack Tories over free school mealsThousands of Britain’s child-health specialists have joined forces to condemn the government for its refusal to fund free meals for disadvantaged children in England over the school holidays, amid a spreading grassroots campaign on the issue led by England and Manchester United footballer Marcus Rashford. With a growing number of councils and businesses this weekend offering to provide free meals, more than 2,000 paediatricians across the UK have signed a letter expressing their shock at the decision. They state that ensuring children have enough to eat is one of the “most basic human responsibilities”. The letter, co-ordinated by the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health and seen by the Observer, says: “Every day, we see the impact of hunger and malnutrition in our work as paediatricians. It is not unusual for us to care for children who don’t have enough to eat or who don’t have access to a substantial meal outside of what is provided in school. “We call on the UK government to match the pledges of the Welsh and Scottish governments and the Northern Ireland Executive, to continue to provide children from low-income backgrounds with free meals over the coming weeks and to then extend this at least until the Easter school holiday.” The letter praises Rashford as a “source of inspiration” for his campaign, which continued to attract a groundswell of support last night. Hundreds more businesses have signed up to help provide meals this weekend and scores of councils, including prominent Tory-led authorities, have agreed to fund local programmes. An online petition set up by Rashford now has more than 700,000 signatures, while Labour is planning to embarrass the government by holding another Commons vote on the issue. Russell Viner, president of the Royal College, told the Observer that he had “rarely seen such anger among our members”. He added: “We care for children who don’t have enough to eat. We see far too many of them. It is heartbreaking that it has become a normal part of our jobs and hunger is all too common for millions of families in the UK. There is an opportunity to put this right. It is pointless to talk about levelling up the country, an ambition which we support, while refusing to offer temporary relief to children and families.” The intervention comes amid frustration among many Conservative MPs, who want the decision to be reversed before the Christmas holidays. One senior figure said ministers were making a “massive mistake” by refusing to back Rashford’s campaign. Rashford’s successful campaign to provide food vouchers during the summer holidays is estimated to have cost £126m. However, other Tory MPs caused anger by criticising the free meals drive. Ben Bradley, the Mansfield MP, was accused of linking free meals with “crack dens” and “brothels” in social media comments. He said his remarks had been taken out of context. North Devon MP Selaine Saxby apologised after appearing to criticise businesses giving away free food. Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley, also faced a backlash for a withering response to a 16-year-old constituent who had questioned his opposition to extending free school meals. Ministers are also facing criticism after it emerged that schools in some of the most deprived areas of the country were told they will not now receive the laptops to help pupils learn remotely. Allocations of laptops for disadvantaged pupils have been slashed by around 80%. A Department for Education spokesperson said allocations of laptops were being “more effectively” targeted to the children, schools and areas of the country that have “greatest need”. The Scottish and Welsh governments have already extended free meals during school holidays until next Easter. In Northern Ireland, children will be given meals over this month’s half-term break. Official figures from earlier this year suggested 1.4 million disadvantaged children were eligible for free school meals in England, but that is thought to have increased during the pandemic. The concern among child health experts heaps further pressure on ministers. Dr Max Davie, officer for health improvement at the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said: “We’re a rich country. We shouldn’t have to fight for food vouchers when we’re in the middle of a pandemic.” Dr Liz Whittaker, consultant paediatrician at St Mary’s Hospital, London said: “Missing meals isn’t just about going hungry on an individual day, it has a lasting impact on a young person’s life. It is impossible to justify any argument that this saves the state money.” Meanwhile, Covid cases continue to mount. A further 23,012 positive tests were announced on Saturday, along with 174 more deaths. A further 1,139 were admitted to hospital. Robert Halfon, the Tory chair of the education select committee, called on the government to rethink and overhaul food provision for poor children. “The government has got to sort this,” he said. “They need to sit down with people like Marcus Rashford and his taskforce, which has got some of the biggest food companies involved. They need to set out a long-term plan to combat child food hunger, not only looking at rolling out free school meal vouchers at Christmas temporarily during the coronavirus pandemic, but also rolling out breakfast clubs, introducing a holiday activities programme, and examining [the level of support in] universal credit.” Late on Saturday, former children’s minister Tim Loughton became the latest Tory to call on the government to change course. “I will now lobby ministers to reverse this decision for the Christmas break,” he said. However, ministers insisted that there was a “better way” to deal with the issue of child hunger. Baroness Barran, the civil society minister, told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: “The government has made over £200bn available to protect people’s incomes and people’s livelihoods. We have worked very closely with charities who operate food banks across the country. There are different approaches to how we do this but we have used all the levers possible to try to make sure that people are safe and well as we go forward. “We have provided more money through universal credit, we have provided more money to local authorities and we believe that is a better way of approaching this problem.”
0||Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump threaten to sue Lincoln ProjectJared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which they accuse the senior White House advisers of showing “indifference” to Americans suffering and dying under Covid-19. Saying the billboards would stay up, the group called Kushner and Trump “entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people”. More than 8.4m cases of Covid-19 have been confirmed in the US, according to Johns Hopkins University, with a record high of 83,757 on Friday. As the virus surges, with the presidential election only 10 days away, the death toll has passed 223,000. Last month, the virus reached the White House, infecting Donald Trump, his wife Melania Trump, their son Barron and senior members of staff. The president spent time in hospital. Kushner and Ivanka Trump did not announce positive tests. The Lincoln Project is staffed by Republican operatives supporting Joe Biden, the Democratic nominee. It announced itself in February at Cooper Union in New York, where Abraham Lincoln gave a famous speech in 1860. Then, group member Rick Wilson cited “the great political philosopher Liam Neeson” when he said his team had “a particular set of skills, skills that make us a nightmare for people like Donald Trump”. In August, Sarah Lenti, the executive director of the Lincoln Project, told the Guardian a key aim was simply to distract the president. “Some of these ads have an audience of one,” she said. “That’s always been part of the strategy. Because every time he gets off message, spewing grievances, he’s not campaigning. The idea is to get him off message again and again and again.” Trump is currently staging rallies at which coronavirus mitigation measures are not observed, and claiming the US is “rounding the turn” in containing the surging pandemic. But with its billboards in Times Square, a stone’s throw from Trump Tower, it seems the Lincoln Project may have succeeded in distracting the president’s daughter and son-in-law. On Friday, the Project posted to Twitter a letter from Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented Donald Trump in cases involving allegations of fraud and sexual assault, in which he spelled out the billboards’ message. “I am writing concerning the false, malicious and defamatory ads that the Lincoln Project is displaying on billboards in Times Square,” Kasowitz wrote. “Those ads show Ms Trump smiling and gesturing toward a death count of Americans and New Yorkers, and attribute to Mr Kushner the statement that ‘[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem’ … with body bags underneath.” In September, Vanity Fair reported that at a meeting on 20 March, as the pandemic accelerated, Kushner railed against Governor Andrew Cuomo and said: “His people are going to suffer and that’s their problem.” Ivanka Trump’s gesture on the billboard is taken from a controversial picture, tweeted in July, in which she promoted Goya black beans. Kasowitz wrote: “Of course, Mr Kushner never made any such statement, Ms Trump never made any such gesture, and the Lincoln Project’s representation that they did are an outrageous and shameful libel. If these billboard ads are not immediately removed, we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages.” The Lincoln Project’s response was typically pugnacious. “The level of indignant outrage Jared Kushner, and Ivanka Trump have shown towards the Lincoln Project for exposing their indifference for the more than 223,000 people who have lost their lives due to the reckless mismanagement of Covid-19 is comical,” a statement said. “While we truly enjoy living rent-free in their heads, their empty threats will not be taken any more seriously than we take Ivanka and Jared. It is unsurprising that an administration that has never had any regard or understanding of our constitution would try to trample on our first amendment rights. But we fully intend on making this civics lesson as painful as possible. “Jared and Ivanka have always been entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people. We plan on showing them the same level of respect. The billboards will stay up. We consider it important that in Times Square, the crossroads of the world, people are continuously reminded of the cruelty or density and staggering lack of empathy the Trumps and the Kushners have displayed towards the American people.” In an email to the Guardian on Saturday, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said: “It does seem unlikely that Ivanka and Jared would actually sue the Lincoln Project, especially before election day, while after that hopefully they won’t care, can return to New York and stop pretending to be public servants. “Her father has honed litigation abuse as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias added, but “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.”
0||Arsenal v Leicester City: Premier League – live!18 mins: Leicester break and Barnes crosses from the right, but it goes just behind Justin and his is the only blue shirt in the penalty area. 15 mins: Arsenal have really thrown themselves into this game, and have shown plenty of attacking endeavour. They win another corner, but it’s not a good one and it bounces out of play on the far side of goal. 13 mins: Now Arsenal cross from the right, and Gabriel attempts an overhead that becomes a clearance, sending the ball out to the left. Arsenal cross again, and Gabriel gets up, dusts himself down and tries another overhead, which is only marginally better than the first. 11 mins: Chance for Arsenal! Bellerin is played through by David Luiz. He brings it under control and he need only square the ball to give Lacazette a tap-in, but Evans slides in to block! 9 mins: It’s a deeply rubbish free kick, hit slowly into the knee of someone in the wall. 9 mins: Lacazette is tripped, 23 yards from goal or so, and Xhaka will fancy his chances of influencing play again. 7 mins: I’m not sure anyone touched the ball after Lacazette flicked it on, so it must have been disallowed for Xhaka influencing play by standing in front of the goalkeeper. 4 mins: Goal! Bit it’s disallowed! Arsenal win a corner, flick it on at the near post, and it goes in at the far! There were three Arsenal players offside when it was flicked goalwards, and at least one of them in Schmeichel’s path, so the question was what the goal would get disallowed for rather than whether it would get disallowed at all. 3 mins: Good spot, this: 2 mins: Shot! Leono hits a limp clearance straight to Madison, who tries to lift the ball into the empty net from 40 yards or so, but it floats just wide. 1 min: Peeeeeeep! Leicester get the game started! The players come out! While we wait for kick-off, here’s Brendan Rodgers on Jamie Vardy: He’s trained the last couple of days and looked good, so that’s means he’ll be a possibility from the bench. With so many games ahead we didn’t want to take a risk, but I’m sure he’ll play a part. And here’s Mikel Arteta on Leicester: I think they are a very complete side, and tricky to deal with, because they are really good on the ball in positional play, but they are really good in transition as well. They can go high press, they can defend really deep as they did against City. I think they’ve come a long way, they’ve improved a lot as a team and it will be really tough tonight. I’m very much looking forward to this game, but while I waited for Sky’s expensive pay-per-view service to kick in I discovered that Groundhog Day is on Dave and I have a bit of a thing about it, and now I’m going to miss the end. I’m so annoyed I’m going to refuse to make the obvious joke about Leicester’s trips to Arsenal. Three changes for Arsenal, who bring in David Luiz, Alexandre Lacazette and, for a first league start since moving to the club, Thomas Partey. Two changes for Leicester, who bring in Christian Fuchs and James Maddison and leave out Ayoze Perez and Kelechi Iheanacho. The big news, though, is that Jamie Vardy is back in the squad but not in the starting line-up, restricted as he is to the bench. The team sheets have been handed in, and the key names tonight are these ones: Arsenal: Leno, Bellerin, Luiz, Gabriel, Tierney, Ceballos, Xhaka, Thomas, Saka, Lacazette, Aubameyang. Subs: Runarsson, Maitland-Niles, Pepe, Mustafi, Elneny, Willock, Nketiah. Leicester: Schmeichel, Fofana, Evans, Fuchs, Castagne, Tielemans, Mendy, Justin, Praet, Maddison, Barnes. Subs: Morgan, Vardy, Albrighton, Ward, Iheanacho, Under, Choudhury. Referee: Craig Pawson. Leicester haven’t won at Arsenal in any competition since 1973, and most recently lost to them in the Carabao Cup a month (and two days) ago. That strikes me as statistically unlikely. I mean, that is a seriously rubbish record, a history so dismal there is no sensible explanation except witchcraft. Arsenal haven’t lost a home league game in October in 32 matches since 2002, which also smells suspiciously like witchcraft. So though the teams start the game tied on nine points, the Gunners have history and some kind of magical protection charm in their favour. In addition, the Foxes have lost their last two league matches, at home to West Ham and Aston Villa, which isn’t encouraging, though they did win their last away game at Manchester City, which is. At stake today is a place in the top four, which will be enjoyed by whoever wins the game, if indeed anyone does. Welcome! Kick-off: 7.15pm GMT
1||White House chief of staff says 'we're not going to control pandemic', after Pence staffers test positive – liveVladimir Putin has made it clear that he’s happy with Donald Trump’s coziness with Russia, but the Kremlin today contradicted Trump and said that he doesn’t believe Joe Biden’s ties with Ukraine are criminal. Trump used Thursday’s debate with Biden as an opportunity to accuse Biden’s son of having unethical ties to Ukraine, accusations that have not been verified and that Biden has denied. According to Reuters, Putin said today that he is willing to work with any US leader, but noted that Biden has “sharp anti-Russian rhetoric”. Here’s more from the Reuters report: Putin appeared less friendly towards Trump in remarks broadcast by Russian state TV on Sunday. In what may be seen by some analysts as an attempt to try to curry favour with the Biden camp, the Russian presdient took the time to knock down what he made clear he regarded as false allegations from Trump about the Bidens. “Yes, in Ukraine he [Hunter Biden] had or maybe still has a business, I don’t know. It doesn’t concern us. It concerns the Americans and the Ukrainians,” said Putin. “But well yes he had at least one company, which he practically headed up, and judging from everything he made good money. I don’t see anything criminal about this, at least we don’t know anything about this [being criminal]”. Mike Pence, who as vice president is technically the president of the Senate, is coming under criticism from Democrats for planning to come into the chamber to preside over the vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s confirmation to the Supreme Court. At a rally in Florida yesterday, Pence said “I wouldn’t miss that vote for the world”. Pence’s appearance would be symbolic as he does not need to be physically present in the Senate for the confirmation to go through. Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer denounced Pence’s plan to attend the vote tomorrow, saying it sets “a terrible, terrible example for the American public”. “It is clear to me that their closing message is that they’re going to personally deliver Covid to as many people as possible,” Brian Schatz, a Democratic senator for Hawaii, told a reporter. At least five people close to Pence, including his chief of staff, have tested positive for Covid-19. A White House official said Sunday that Pence and his wife have tested negative for the virus. His office said that the vice president does not plan to quarantine. Guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) say a person should quarantine for 14 days if they were in close contact with a person who tested positive, even if they themselves do not have symptoms or tested negative. Pence, who is head of the White House’s coronavirus task force, has said that he can bypass CDC guidelines because he is an essential worker – a claim that has been questioned by health experts. Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York state, is having a field day over the comments of the White House chief of staff Mark Meadows this morning. In a rare moment of transparency, Meadows admitted to a Sunday political talk show that the Trump administration had no intention of containing coronavirus, saying: “We’re not going to control the pandemic”. Cuomo said that thinking was tantamount to giving in to the virus. “They surrendered without firing a shot. It was the great American surrender,” he said on Sunday, as reported by the Daily News. The New York governor said that the Trump administration’s approach to Covid was summed up from the start by such capitulation. “They have believed from the beginning that they can’t control the virus,” he said. By contrast, Cuomo prides himself on having wrestled coronavirus to the ground. After a bad start to the pandemic, which saw New York City become the world’s top hotspot, the rate of infection has been reduced to one of the lowest in the country through an aggressive program of testing and contact tracing. There have been a total of almost 500,000 confirmed cases in the state, and 25,730 deaths. About 120,000 New Yorkers are being tested every day. “What we learned in New York was, if you put up a fight you will have won. Because New York won,” Cuomo said. After the Senate voted to move forward with the final vote to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court, Mitch McConnell spoke on the Senate floor, celebrating the lasting influence of the vote for posterity. “By tomorrow night, we’ll have a new member of the United States Supreme Court,” he told the chamber. McConnell acknowledged that this election could change the tide in Washington but said that not much could be done to change the nature of the court “for a long time to come”. One Capitol Hill reporter noted that it appears the bruising on McConnell’s face and hands that were seen on Friday appeared to have gotten better. Apparently, getting three judges onto the Supreme Court in four years can do wonders to one’s health. The Senate just made a 51-48 vote to move forward with the final vote for Amy Coney Barrett’s nomination to the Supreme Court. Republicans overrode a Democratic filibuster with today’s vote, and the final vote for her confirmation will take place tomorrow night. With the Republican majority in the Senate, Barrett’s nomination is pretty much a guarantee, despite weeks of criticism from Democrats about a Supreme Court nomination weeks before the presidential election. The NFL has fined the Tennessee Titans $350,000 for violating protocols leading to the league’s first Covid-19 outbreak during the season, multiple outlets are reporting. The Titans had 24 people, including 13 players, test positive for the coronavirus between 24 September and 11 October. The outbreak led the NFL to postpone two Tennessee games and the rescheduling of a game against Pittsburgh from 4 October to today and the second against Buffalo from 11 October to 13 October. The league and its players association sent officials, including infectious disease experts, to Nashville where they reviewed video and interviewed players, coaches and other personnel. ESPN reports the NFL informed the Titans last week that their review had concluded and the organization would face a potential fine. Individuals would not be disciplined and there was no discussion of forfeiture of draft picks. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). The US Senate has started day two of a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. More from Richard Luscombe… Joe Biden’s deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield, was grilled on NBC’s Meet the Press about the Democrat nominee’s “light physical footprint”. To the backdrop of a graphic comparing Biden’s appearances since September in four key battleground states – North Carolina, Arizona, Florida and Pennsylvania – to Trump’s (the president leads 19-14), host Chuck Todd wanted to know why Biden was concentrating heavily on Georgia instead of more northerly swing states. The answer: Biden is “focused on maintaining as many paths to 270 electoral votes as we possibly can.” Bedingfield also pointed out that at a scheduled appearance in Warm Springs, Georgia, on Tuesday, Biden would deliver his closing arguments at a place “which obviously has historical significance in this country”. Warm Springs is the resort town where the 32nd president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, built his Little White House, a cottage he used while suffering from polio in the 1930s. “Vice-President Biden has visited all of these battleground states multiple times,” Bedingfield said. “He was in Pennsylvania yesterday, doing two events, along with Dr [Jill] Biden. So no, we have been very aggressively campaigning. “Here’s the difference between what we’re doing and what Donald Trump is doing, we’re doing it safely.” Bedingfield noted that the president’s rallies feature large, mostly maskless crowds with no social distancing. A new CBS poll, meanwhile, showed Biden tied with Trump in Georgia and holding narrow leads in other southern battlegrounds, including Florida and North Carolina. Todd also pressed Bedingfield on Biden’s comments at last week’s final debate about the oil industry. Why, he wondered, would oil workers in Texas or elsewhere support a candidate who supports a transition away from the industry at a risk to their jobs? “There is only one person in this country who Joe Biden thinks should lose his job and it’s Donald Trump,” she said. “Joe Biden … is not going to end the fossil fuel industry, he’s going to end subsidies for the oil industry. He believes your taxpayer dollars should go to education. Donald Trump believes they should go to Exxon. That’s a conversation we’re willing to have any day.” A CBS News/YouGov poll of three southern battleground states finds Joe Biden in a dead heat with Donald Trump in Georgia with slight edges in Florida (by two points) and North Carolina (by four). Some other key findings from CBS News: • Early voters in each told us they favored Joe Biden, but those who have not yet voted favor Donald Trump, setting up a key turnout test running now through Election Day for both parties. • Very different views on the coronavirus outbreak still shape the race in all these states. In all, most Biden voters are very concerned about getting it, and Trump’s voters, by comparison, are far less concerned. Biden also gets better marks overall on how he would handle the outbreak. • Biden voters are more likely to say the outbreak and a candidate’s personal character are major factors in their vote. For Trump voters, the economy and immigration are the biggest factors. • In splits among key demographic groups, Biden currently leads among White women with college degrees in Florida and North Carolina; and across all three states it’s shifts from 2016 that are helping Biden. In Georgia, White voters without college degrees – both men and women – tend to like how Trump handles himself personally and dislike Biden’s approach. Biden is cutting into Trump’s 2016 margins with seniors in Florida and Georgia, cutting Trump’s 2016 advantage in half. In North Carolina Biden has a two-point edge with seniors. Last week Trump was forced to play defense when he staged a prime-time rally in Georgia, which no Republican presidential candidate has lost since George HW Bush in 1992 – a far cry from his original designs on expanding the map into Democratic-leaning states. After Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said there were some senators he could not and did not want to help, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Joe Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. In fact senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have recently sought to put daylight between themselves and the unpopular president as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour; McSally dodged attempts to make her express support for Trump during a campaign debate; and Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on key policy issues. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election in Nebraska but McSally faces defeat in Arizona and Cornyn is in an unexpectedly tight race in Texas. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday. “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeated statements that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” McDaniel also said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Calmer seas returned to CNN’s State of the Union studio following the tempest of the Mark Meadows interview. House speaker Nancy Pelosi told host Jake Tapper she remains “hopeful” of a coronavirus relief bill perhaps this week, despite Republicans “moving the goalposts”. A week ago, Pelosi insisted only 48 hours remained for Democrats and Republicans to strike an agreement that would bring relief before election day. That didn’t happen, but Pelosi said they are still open to talking. “We’re ready. We can change some words in the bill, should they come back with some modifications,” Pelosi said, claiming her side was still waiting for answers over some of the differences. “Why would we even be talking to each other if we didn’t believe that we could reach an agreement? So again, it could happen this week, but that’s up to Mitch [McConnell, the Senate majority leader] as to whether it would happen in the Senate and go to the president’s desk.” Republicans in Congress have been trying to negotiate downwards the $2.2tn Democrats are proposing, and saw their $500bn bill blocked this week. Donald Trump, meanwhile, has said he’s open to more. “It only takes more money,” Pelosi said, referring to a key aim of the relief bill, namely the safe reopening of schools. “That is for separation, for ventilation, for technology, for more teachers and the rest. Children learning, parents earning. Education is another policy piece where we have some disagreement, otherwise we can negotiate. “We’re waiting. Every time they say we move the goalposts, that means they’re projecting what they did, but let’s just be hopeful. We’re nine days before an election. We’re trying to unify the country and one way to do it is to come together to crush the virus, so that we can open our economy, open our schools and feed 17 million children who are food insecure in our country.” The speaker said she sent questions to McConnell on Friday, and is expecting answers Monday. “In our bill, science dictates what we do,” she said. “We can lower the incidence of the virus in certain areas, open schools, open businesses and the rest. If we don’t, we’re just giving money to the president to spend any way he wants, and that has not been in furtherance of crushing the virus.” Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behavior,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. White House chief of staff Mark Meadows has just made one of the most revealing comments to emerge from Trump’s inner circle about the president’s historic mishandling of the coronavirus crisis. On a Sunday political talk show, Meadows admitted that the federal government was not focusing on trying to control the pandemic. “We’re not going to control the pandemic,” he told Jake Tapper on CNN’s State of the Union. “We are going to control the fact that we get a vaccine, therapeutics and other mitigation.” Tapper pressed Meadows to explain why the administration was not going to control Covid-19, given the massive surge that is pummeling the Midwest and mountain states. He replied: “Because it is a contagious virus.” Meadows’ statement would be astonishing at any time during the pandemic. It gives an unusually candid insight into the mindset of a White House that from the outset has played down its role in marshalling a federal effort to bring the virus under control. The remark was all the more astounding given it’s timing. Marc Short, chief of staff to vice president Mike Pence, has just tested positive for coronavirus, as have three other VP staff and an adviser. Yet Pence continues to travel the US, unmasked, holding campaign events, the White House avoiding the recommendation to quarantine set out by the administration’s own public health agency, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, by calling the vice-president an “essential worker”. Pence is in charge of the White House coronavirus task force, which a key member, Anthony Fauci, said on Friday has seen its meetings “diminish” while President Trump has not attended in “several months”. Around the country, confirmed cases are on a steep upward curve, with Friday and Saturday recording the highest levels since the pandemic began. Hospitalisations and deaths have also begun to rise. In a heated exchange with Tapper, Meadows repeatedly sidestepped the administration’s responsibility for this surge in numbers just nine days before the presidential election. He kept on stressing the role of therapeutics and a future vaccine in “mitigating” the number of deaths, while implying the federal government had no responsibility for the rampant spread of the virus. Tapper asked why the vice-president continued to travel to campaign events without wearing a mask, despite having been exposed via his closest staff. Meadows tried to redirect the blame to China as the source of the virus, but Tapper continued to challenge him. “Would you agree this is very serious, people need to take precautions?” Tapper asked. “I agree it is very serious, but we continue to test more and more so the cases will go up,” Meadows replied. In fact, the number of new confirmed cases is rising significantly faster than the quantity of testing. Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff, is currently conducting a fiery interview with Jake Tapper of CNN, voices raised about the White House’s attitude to coronavirus mitigation measures and campaigning instead of steering efforts to combat the pandemic. It’s not going well. More soon. In the meantime, here’s the White House pool report: It’s a brisk, rainy fall day at the White House. White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows spoke to reporters briefly in the driveway after a Fox News interview. He was asked about VP Pence chief of staff Marc Short’s positive coronavirus diagnosis, and was very brief in his remarks. He said only: “We wish him well – he’s been quarantining these last few days…” Another reporter shouted: “Why is Pence traveling – that seems insane?” And another asked: “Should anyone who is in close contact with the vice-president be quarantining?” Meadows ignored the questions. We’re expecting a 10.30pm Trump departure, traveling to New Hampshire and Maine. He is scheduled to be back at the White House for a Halloween event at 6.15pm. This pooler was tested for coronavirus and is awaiting results. The Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards the group put up in Times Square. The billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, showing apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president in cases involving allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing among other things their first amendment rights of free speech. In a legal response released on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson wrote: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticize freely”. Sanderson cited supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting on 20 March, as the pandemic gathered terrible speed, New York reeled and Kushner attacked Governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”, Sanderson wrote. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” Sanderson also said “This isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian, that seems unlikely. Ivanka Trump’s “father has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Barring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? More from the Associated Press: “A day after the US set a daily record for new confirmed coronavirus infections, it came very close to doing it again. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Close to 8.6m Americans have contracted the coronavirus since the pandemic began, and about 225,000 have died. Both statistics are the world’s highest. India has more than 7.8m infections but its daily numbers have been declining. US health officials have feared the surge of infections to come with colder weather and people spending more time indoors, especially as many flout guidelines to protect themselves and others such as mask-wearing and social distancing. The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington currently forecasts that the country’s death toll could exceed 318,000 by 1 January.” …and welcome to another day on the campaign trail, nine days out from election day now, with Joe Biden holding his polling leads, Donald Trump campaigning hard at rallies which do not adhere to Covid-19 mitigation measures and Mike Pence… seeing multiple members of his team, including chief of staff Marc Short, test positive for the coronavirus. The VP is not altering his schedule: This while Covid case numbers are shooting to record levels nationally and in many states, and as one study predicts a death toll of 500,000 by February. As the AP reports, “Oklahoma, Illinois, New Mexico and Michigan were among states announcing new record highs in daily confirmed cases on Saturday, a day after a nationwide daily record of more than 83,000 reported infections, according to Johns Hopkins University. “Dr Joneigh Khaldun, Michigan’s chief medical executive, said it’s ‘now more important than ever that people take this seriously.’ The 3,338 new Covid-19 cases in her state topped the old record by more than 1,300. Michigan is of course a swing state, fought over by Trump and Biden – who is more than seven points up there. Kamala Harris, Biden’s running mate, will be in the state today. The same Johns Hopkins count now puts the caseload at 8.5m and the death toll at more than 224,000. Trump had a four-state campaign day on Saturday, voting in Florida before staging rallies in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin. Today he’s speaking in New Hampshire – where the fivethirtyeight.com average puts Biden more than 11 points ahead. Trump has a habit of speaking in places where it might not seem worth the bother – he is also having to campaign in states, such as Georgia, where no Republican president would usually have to tread. More to come, of course. In the meantime, here’s David Smith with hopeful news for Democrats:
2||Outsider Nuts Well brings big success to Ann Hamilton's small stableThe romance of jump racing was on full show here as the plucky, prolific but nevertheless unsung Nuts Well battled his way to victory in the Old Roan Chase for the tiny Northumberland stable of Ann Hamilton. This was the biggest success in the long career of the 73-year-old Hamilton, who still schools horses over fences at her base in the village of Capheaton, about 20 miles north-west of Newcastle. “It means the world to us,” Hamilton said, “because he’s been so good to us and we just thought he couldn’t do it, with all that weight on his back. We thought we didn’t have a chance, so to beat the top trainers is amazing. “We thought he might struggle in this ground. He’s really taken us by surprise.” That thought will have been shared by almost everyone who had a bet on the race, as Nuts Well was returned at odds of 18-1. Though he has improved since Danny McMenamin became his regular jockey, a series of wins at Wetherby, Musselburgh and Kelso cut little ice with punters when weighing up a major handicap like this, in which the opposition was trained by the likes of Paul Nicholls, Colin Tizzard and Jonjo O’Neill. After a short chat with reporters, Hamilton insisted on rushing off to attend to her horse, leaving her husband, Ian, to fill in the blanks. The pair are sheep and cattle farmers, he explained, and she has enjoyed training five or six horses on the side since about 1980. There have been some fallow spells, like the six consecutive seasons in the 1990s when their stable had not a single winner. But it was worth it for well-remembered days like the one in April 2003, when Divet Hill won the Fox Hunters over the Grand National fences, despite his jockey’s breeches splitting at the rear as they cleared The Chair. “It’s always been a lucky place for us, Aintree,” Ian reflected. “Absolutely brilliant.” But he was not tempted by the thought of trying Nuts Well over the famous green fences here, in a race like the Topham in the spring. “He’s not very big, you know. We wouldn’t put him over the big ‘uns.” Finding the right target for Nuts Well might now be the biggest problem facing the Hamiltons’ training operation, as opportunities are scarce for highly rated animals and he will be just outside the top 20 in Britain after this. It is an unusual sort of problem for a stable whose staff amounts to “two great girls” who help out in their lunch breaks. How will the couple celebrate this notable victory? “Go to bed early, I suppose. I’ve got cattle to feed when I get back, Ann’ll have six horses to see to. Then we might have a drink.” Robbie Power, who was unseated from Vision Des Flos during the Old Roan, hopes to be back in action this week, despite initial fears that he might have suffered serious injury. “I’m fine,” he reported. “I’ve just got a bit of soft-tissue damage in my knee, but it feels all right. I’ve got plenty of movement in it, just plenty of bruising. Hopefully, it will be fine in a couple of days or so.”
3||Coronavirus live: daily infections exceed 50,000 in France; global cases reach new recordFrance registered 52,010 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, following a record 45,422 on Saturday, the health ministry said in a statement on Sunday. It also said that 116 people had died from coronavirus infection over the past 24 hours, compared to from 137 on Saturday, taking the total confirmed death toll to 34,761. The new cases brought the total to 1,138,507, putting France now ahead of Argentina and Spain to become the country with the world’s fifth highest number of cases, after the US, India, Brazil and Russia. Turkish Airlines will be putting foreign national pilots on unpaid leave to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on its finances, Bloomberg reported on Sunday. Turkey’s national carrier informed some of its foreign crew staff by email that they are to go on leave from 1 November, and that the decision would be reviewed after six months. It wasn’t immediately clear how many pilots will be affected, and whether Turkish nationals would escape the cost saving measure. A spokesman for Turk Hava Yollari AO, as the airline is officially known, declined to comment. The company reported a loss of 2.23bn liras ($280m) in the second quarter, with passenger numbers down by almost two thirds this year. Israel will begin human trials for a potential Covid-19 vaccine developed by a research institute overseen by the Defence Ministry on 1 November after receiving regulatory approval. The Israel Institute for Biological Research (IIBR) began animal trials for its “BriLife” vaccine in March. The health ministry and an oversight committee have now given the green light to take it to the next stage. Eighty volunteers aged between 18 and 55 will be monitored for three weeks to see if virus antibodies develop, the ministry said in a statement. A second phase, expected to begin in December, will involve 960 people over the age of 18, Reuters reports. Should those succeed, a third, large-scale phase with 30,000 volunteers is scheduled for April or May 2021. If successful, the vaccine may then be approved for mass use. The vaccine, the ministry said, has already tested well on a number of animal models and the IIBR has produced more than 25,000 doses for the first and second phases of the clinical trials. “Our final goal is 15 million rations for the residents of the State of Israel and for our close neighbours,” said IIBR director Shmuel Shapira. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc, Johnson &amp; Johnson, AstraZeneca Plc and Moderna. Israel, with a population of 9 million, has begun easing a second nationwide coronavirus lockdown after a steady decline in the rate of daily infections. The country saw 692 new cases on Saturday - down from a peak of more than 9,000 several weeks ago. It has reported 2,372 deaths from the pandemic. The US saw its highest ever number of new coronavirus cases in the past two days, keeping the pandemic a top election issue as Vice president Mike Pence travels the country to campaign despite close aides testing positive. The US reported 79,852 new infections on Saturday, close to the previous day’s record of 84,244 new cases, as we reported earlier. Hospitalisations are also rising and have hit a two-month high and deaths are trending upwards, according to a Reuters tally. So far in October, 29 states have set records for increases in new cases, including five considered key in the 3 November presidential election: Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Hospitals are strained in several states including North Dakota, which is the hardest hit based on recent new cases per capita, according to Reuters. The city of El Paso in Texas is asking residents to stay at home for the next two weeks and the wider El Paso County closed its parks and recreational facilities for 14 days. Over the last three weeks, the number of hospitalised Covid-19 patients in the El Paso area has tripled to a record 786, according to state data. “If we continue on this trend, we risk detrimental effects to our entire healthcare system,” the city’s public health director, Angela Mora, said in a statement. “For the sake of those hospitalised and the frontline healthcare workers working tirelessly each day to care for them, we ask you to please stay home for two weeks and eliminate your interactions with those outside your household until we can flatten the curve.” The Czech government will almost certainly have to tighten its anti-coronavirus measures again as current curbs have not halted a surge in infections, prime minister Andrej Babis said on Sunday. Cases are up across Europe, but the Czech Republic has recorded the sharpest rises in infections on the continent in recent weeks, Reuters reports. The government on Wednesday ordered most shops and services to close and sought to limit movement to essential trips only. “The measures which we have taken, aren’t working yet,” Babis said in a video message on his Facebook page. “The next week will be the key one, and unless a miracle happens, we won’t have any other choice than to tighten our measures further,” he said. Babis said that he wanted Christmas to be celebrated as normal, but that he could not promise anything for now. “I don’t know what will happen with the virus. I don’t know,” he said. The total number of coronavirus-related deaths doubled to more than 2,000 over the last two weeks. The Philippines’ coronavirus tally surpassed 370,000 on Sunday with 2,223 new confirmed infections, while the death toll edged nearer to the 7,000-mark. The department of health said confirmed cases now stand at 370,028 in total, of which 35,015 or nine percent are active cases. Of these currently ill patients, 82% experience mild symptoms, 11.3% have no symptoms, 2.4% are severe cases, while 4.2% are in critical condition, the latest report detailed. The department clarified, however, that 16 laboratories were not able to submit their case reports on time and were not yet included in the latest count. The Philippines is now joining countries such as the United States, the UK, France, Saudi Arabia and Finland in starting to train specialist sniffer dogs to identify Covid-19 carriers, CNN Philippines reports. “Based on the study from other countries, the accuracy rate of Covid-19 detection dogs is 95 to 97%,” said Ryia Tabares, a representative of Universal K-9 Training and Services Inc, the company working to replicate the same efforts in the country. His colleage Gerry Tabares said the company is currently training at least 12 dogs to detect the virus by sniffing. Gerry said while such a task isn’t limited to certain kinds of dogs, their students are of the Belgian Malinois, Labrador, and German Shepherd breeds. “Those are the current breeds that we are training right now. So far, we are successful,” Gerry said. “As you can see in the demonstration, they can really detect the face masks of Covid-19 infected patients.” The UK recorded 19,790 new coronavirus infections and 151 deaths on Sunday, official data showed. New cases dipped from Saturday’s 23,012, and the number of deaths within 28 days of a positive test was also down slightly from 174 the previous day. The Welsh government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. Health minister Vaughan Gething told The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday that the restriction, which has seen aisles cordoned off and plastic sheeting placed over products, had been applied differently in stores across Wales. Guidance previously published by the Welsh government said certain sections of supermarkets selling electrical goods, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares, among others products, must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public” during the lockdown. More than 50,000 people have signed a petition submitted to the Welsh Parliament calling for the ban to be immediately reversed. Supermarkets have been told they must only sell essential items to discourage people from spending more time than necessary in shops and be fair to retailers selling non-essential items only who had to shut shop. The ban on selling non-essential items was announced in the Senedd on Thursday after Conservative MS Russell George said it was “unfair” to force independent clothing and hardware retailers to shut while similar goods were on sale in major supermarkets. Gething told the BBC the Welsh government had worked with supermarkets on the ban and discussed which items were affected by it. “It’s also about reducing the opportunity for contacts. That’s what we’re really trying to do – we’re asking people to stay at home to stay lives, that really is right back where we are,” he said. The Welsh Retail Consortium called for the ban to be “dropped quickly” and warned it could result in the “safe flow of customers” being undermined due to changes in store layouts, the PA reports. Italy reported a new daily record of 21,273 coronavirus cases with 128 deaths, health ministry figures showed on Sunday, up from the 19,644 new infections reported on Saturday. Earlier, the Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, announced a package of new restrictions to combat the pandemic. Hello everyone, I’ll be bringing you the latest key developments in all things Covid-19 for the next few hours. As ever, don’t hesitate to get in touch if you have relevant updates or comments to share, either via Twitter @JedySays or via email. I won’t always be able to respond, but I read everything. That’s it from me this Sunday - my colleague Jedidajah Otte will take over shortly. Here’s a summary of events so far today: •The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. •An official from China’s Xinjiang health commission said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. •The United States saw 83,718 new cases reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the reord 83,757 infections reported on Friday. •The prime minister of Italy Giuseppe Conte announced a raft of new restrictions and warned that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. •Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. He said: “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic.” •The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas in the United States said it was “extremely disappointed” after the Trump administration pulled out of a deal offering the Christmas legends early access to a Covid-19 vaccine in exchange for promoting it. Earlier reports from Kashgar in the Chinese province of Xinjiang described flights being cancelled in and out of the region, with 15 new cases across the country and 405 asymptomatic patients under observation. Now an official from Xinjiang health commission has said that 137 new asymptomatic cases have been detected in the region. All of the new cases were linked to a garment factory. The parents of a 17-year-old girl who was found on Saturday to have the virus but showed no symptoms worked there, an official from Xinjiang health commission told a press briefing. Kashgar launched a testing programme on Saturday night covering the region’s 4.75 million people. As of Sunday afternoon, more than 2.84 million people had been tested and the rest would be covered by Tuesday, the city government said in a statement. Four towns in the Kashgar region were identified as “high-risk” areas, according to a statement from Kashgar city authority on Sunday night, and stringent controls such as travel restrictions are expected. 1,104 new cases of Covid-19 have been diagnosed in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 42,681. Public Health Wales said five further deaths had been reported, with the total rising to 1,777. The Welsh government has imposed a 17-day “firebreak” lockdown which started on Friday in an attempt to slow the spread of the virus. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boiko Borisov, has become the latest political figure to test positive for the new coronavirus. “After two PCR tests from today I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page, adding that he had mild symptoms and would quarantine at home. Borisov, 61, self-isolated on Friday evening when a deputy minister of regional development he had been in contact with five days before tested positive for the virus. Bulgaria, a country of under 7 million people, weathered the first wave of the coronavirus relatively well, but the number of cases and hospitalisations surged over the past weeks, reaching a total of over 37,500 cases and 1,084 deaths on Sunday. On Thursday, the government made masks mandatory in crowded outdoor spaces, in addition to all inside public areas and transport in a bid to curb the number of infections that threaten to break the country’s severely understaffed medical system. The World Health Organization’s coronavirus dashboard on Sunday showed a third consecutive daily record high in the number of new confirmed cases. AFP reports that the WHO’s complete figures for Saturday showed that 465,319 cases were confirmed to the UN health agency during the day, topping the 449,720 recorded on Friday and the 437,247 logged on Thursday. The WHO has warned that some countries are on a “dangerous track”, with too many witnessing an exponential increase in cases. According to the WHO’s figures, there have been more than 42.3 million confirmed cases of the respiratory disease, while nearly 1.15 million people have lost their lives, including 6,570 on Saturday. Nearly half of Saturday’s new cases were registered in the WHO’s Europe region, which logged a one-day record high of 221,898 cases. In total, more than 9m cases have now been registered in the region. “We are at a critical juncture in this pandemic, particularly in the northern hemisphere,” WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on Friday. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track.” Qatar has signed an agreement with drugmaker Moderna Inc to buy its potential Covid-19 vaccine as soon as it is approved and released for global use, state news agency QNA reported on Sunday. There are no internationally approved vaccines yet, but several are in advanced trials, including from Pfizer Inc , Johnson &amp; Johnson and Moderna. “Negotiating early and securing a number of agreements enhances our chances of getting sufficient quantities of the vaccine early,” Reuters quoted Abdullatif al-Khal, chair of a national Covid-19 health group, as saying. He did not say how many doses Doha was requesting. Earlier this month, al-Khal said Qatar signed an agreement with Pfizer and BioNTech to supply Qatar with their vaccines. Moderna said last month it was on track to produce 20m doses of its vaccine by the end of the year, while maintaining its goal of readying 500 million to 1 billion doses in 2021. One of the more surprising headlines of the day comes from the Wall Street Journal in the United States: Health Agency Halts Coronavirus Ad Campaign, Leaving Santa Claus in the Cold. The WSJ reports that the Trump administration offered Santa Claus performers a deal: if they agreed to promote a Covid-19 vaccine, they would get early access to it. The story says that performers playing Mrs Claus or elves would also have been included. But the plan has now been called off. The article continues: Ric Erwin, chairman of the Fraternal Order of Real Bearded Santas, called the news “extremely disappointing”, adding: “this was our greatest hope for Christmas 2020, and now it looks like it won’t happen.” You can read more of this belter at the Wall Street Journal (although it’s behind a paywall). Hospitals in the Swiss city of Geneva on Sunday issued a call for medically trained volunteers and recently retired staff to help tackle a record number of Coronavirus patients anticipated in the coming days. AFP reported that Geneva University Hospitals (HUG) said the number of coronavirus patients was expected to be “far higher” than at the peak of the pandemic’s first wave in March. According to the latest figures released Friday by the Swiss health ministry, 5,057 new cases of the respiratory disease were registered in Geneva over the previous 14 days - an incidence of 1,012.5 per 100,000 people. Cases, hospitalisations and deaths in Switzerland have doubled from one week to the next throughout October. The government is expected to decide Wednesday on new measures to control the spread of the virus. “It is highly likely that the peak of 550 hospitalised Covid-positive patients that we recorded during the first wave will be greatly exceeded in the coming days,” said HUG director-general Bertrand Levrat. “We anticipate that the number of beds and professionals needed to treat Covid and non-Covid patients will be far higher than what we experienced this spring.” •This post was corrected at 3:25pm. A previous version said that Geneva is Switzerland’s capital. Still in the UK, NHS chiefs have denied claims that thousands of frail, elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic, Denis Campbell reports: NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts.” The newspaper claimed that the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. You can read the story in full here: In the UK, the Royal Mail has announced that around 33,000 temporary jobs will be available this year over the Christmas period - over 10,000 more than its usual seasonal average. The postal service typically employs between 15,000 and 23,000 extra staff between October and January to help sort the additional Christmas volumes of parcels, cards and letters. Royal Mail says that such a high number of workers is needed this year because of elevated parcel volumes due to an increase in online shopping caused by the coronavirus crisis. The United States came close to setting a single-day record of coronavirus cases in the latest figures, having already done so 24 hours earlier. Data published by Johns Hopkins University showed that 83,718 new cases were reported nationally on Saturday, nearly matching the 83,757 infections reported on Friday. Before that, the most cases reported in the US on a single day had been 77,362 on 16 July. Read more on that story here: In Italy, Conte also said that taking strict measures now would allow for a relaxation before Christmas. “We think that we will suffer a bit this month but by gritting our teeth with these restrictions, we’ll be able to breathe again in December,” he said. Italy’s prime minister has now given his press conference (see earlier post) announcing new restrictive measures and warning that the country’s escalating coronavirus infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals. Giuseppe Conte’s government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums will stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been strongly advised not to leave their homes unless for work, health or education purposes. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the new decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the new measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. Still in Spain, Sánchez said that his government will use the state of emergency to impose an 11pm-6am nationwide curfew, except in the Canary Islands. The prime minister says that Spain’s 19 regional leaders will have authority to set different hours for the curfew as long as they are stricter, close regional borders to travel and limit gatherings to six people who don’t live together. “The reality is that Europe and Spain are immersed in a second wave of the pandemic,” Sánchez said after meeting with his Cabinet. The leader added that he will seek the endorsement of the Parliament this week to extend the state of emergency for six months, until May. Spain’s prime minister Pedro Sánchez has declared a new nationwide state of emergency (see earlier post) in the hope of stemming a resurgence in coronavirus infections. The Socialist leader told the nation in a televised address that the extraordinary measure will go into effect on Sunday, AP reported. Sánchez had called a cabinet meeting to prepare the measure, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. The number of new coronavirus cases in the Netherlands has risen by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, according to newly released official data. The National Institute for Public Health reported 10,203 confirmed cases of Covid-19. The daily case count in the country has risen steeply since the beginning of September. This is the first time the figure has been above 10,000. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Here’s a clip of Anthony Fauci’s interview with Andrew Marr which we reported on earlier. Here’s a summary of the key developments of the last few hours. •The US’s top infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told the BBC that he expected news on whether a vaccine is safe and effective by December, but noted that a wide rollout was unlikely “until the second or third quarter of [next] year”. He also acknowledged that Donald Trump’s public statements on several key issues had not “followed the science”. •In Indonesia, the health ministry reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths, bringing the totals to 389,712 cases and 13,299 deaths – the highest totals in south-east Asia. •In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. •The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections. •In Italy, the government was reported to have agreed a raft of new measures to combat the spread of the virus, with prime minister Giuseppe Conte due to make a statement at 1.30pm local time. •In Poland’s capital, Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus. •In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. He also said the government was reviewing the length of the 14-day isolation period for travellers coming to the UK from abroad. A second firebreak lockdown could be required in Wales by January or February next year, Wales’ deputy minister for economy and transport has said. Lee Waters said the Welsh government was trying to “flatten the curve” of the second wave of Covid-19 but could not stop the virus from spreading entirely. Waters told BBC Wales’ Sunday Supplement: “This is not the last lockdown we’re likely to see. I think the projections in the papers we’ve published on our worst-case scenarios shows it’s likely we’re going to need to have another firebreak in January or February. “It’s important that we can show that we are being rational, we’re being evidence-based and we are being transparent. We are trying our best to do that.” Earlier, Welsh health minister Vaughan Gething told the BBC’s Andrew Marr show that the Cardiff government will review the “understanding, clarity and policy” of a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items. “We’re reviewing with supermarkets the understanding and the clarity and the policy because there’s been different application in different parts,” he said. Waters echoed those remarks, saying: “We’re going to sit down with the supermarkets to review how this has gone over the weekend. “We’re not reviewing the requirement for supermarkets not to sell non-essential, we’re going to review how it’s working in practice because clearly there are some bumps.” The government in Italy has now agreed on measures (see 10:01am) to limit the spread of coronavirus, reports in Italy suggested. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is due to make a statement at 1:30pm local time. Reuters said that measures agreed between Conte’s government and regional authorities ordered bars and restaurants to close by 6pm and shut public gyms, cinemas and swimming pools. The decree encourages people not to go out and to limit contacts at home with anyone outside their immediate family, but does not impose a mandatory nationwide curfew or lockdown and allows shops and most businesses to remain open. However, service in bars and restaurants will be subject to a series of controls to limit contagion, and cinemas, theatres, gaming halls and discotheques will be closed. The decree also directs that up to three-quarters of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in school buildings. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah rejected on Sunday a proposal by prime minister Muhyiddin Yassin for him to declare a state of emergency in response to the coronavirus crisis, saying that he did not see the need. Critics say Muhyiddin’s request for emergency rule, which would include suspending parliament, is an attempt by the premier to stay in power amid a leadership challenge. Malaysia is experiencing a resurgence in virus infections and on Saturday saw its biggest daily jump in cases with 1,228 new cases, Reuters reported. The palace said Muhyiddin made the request for emergency rule to deal with the coronavirus pandemic, but that the government has been handling the crisis well. “Al-Sultan Abdullah is of the opinion that there is no need at the moment for His Majesty to declare an emergency in the country or in any part of the country of Malaysia,” the palace said in a statement. “His Majesty is confident in the ability of the government under the leadership of the prime minister to continue to implement policies and enforcement efforts to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic.” The constitution gives the king the right to decide if an emergency should be declared, based on threats to security, economy or public order. Muhyiddin has been in a precarious position since he took office in March with a two-seat majority. Uncertainties deepened after opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim said last month he had the parliamentary majority to form a new government. In Poland’s capital Warsaw, police detained 278 people on Saturday after thousands protested against new curbs aimed at containing the spread of the coronavirus, a police spokesman said. Police said demonstrators had attacked policemen, throwing stones, glass bottles and fire crackers during the demonstrations. Police used tear gas on several occasions during the protests in Warsaw in which people demanded that new restrictions be repealed. “We have 278 detainees … We were dealing with a clear manifestation of aggression, these people came to fight us,” Warsaw police spokesman Sylwester Marczak told reporters on Sunday, according to Reuters. The demonstrations also broke a ban on gatherings of more than five people, which came into effect on Saturday as part of new measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus. Despite the ban on gatherings, Poland also separately continued to see demonstrations on Saturday against a ruling on Thursday by the Constitutional Tribunal that imposes a near-total ban on abortion in the Catholic country. Poland is seeing a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases, with new infections on Friday hitting a daily record of 13,632. New curbs imposed on Saturday include a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. Schools will remain open for children up to third grade, with older students moving to distance learning. Older people can leave their homes only in special cases. The health ministry reported 87 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, taking the total death toll from Covid-19 to 4,438. The country recorded 11,742 new cases on Sunday, with total infections approaching 253,700. France’s new Covid-19 contact-tracing app needs to be downloaded by at least 20% of the population to be effective but is far from reaching that level for now, the minister for digital affairs said on Sunday. On 22 October, France relaunched its “StopCovid” tracing app and renamed it “Tous Anti-Covid” (all against Covid), which has since seen an additional 1.2m downloads for a total number of about 4m. “For the application to be efficient, about 20% of the population, or 15 to 20 million people, need to download it,” digital affairs minister Cedric O said on FranceInfo radio, according to Reuters. He said similar apps were working well in Britain, Germany and Canada but gave no examples of successful contact tracing in France with the app. Many in France have been reluctant to download the app over privacy concerns, despite the government’s reassurances that the data will not be used for any other purpose than stopping the pandemic. The prime minister of Spain, Pedro Sánchez, has called a cabinet meeting on Sunday to prepare a new state of emergency to stem surging coronavirus infections, a move that could impose curfews and other restrictions across the country. AP reported that Sánchez’s government said on Saturday night that a majority of Spain’s regional leaders have agreed to a new state of emergency and the meeting on Sunday was to study its terms. The state of emergency gives the national government extraordinary powers, including the ability to temporarily restrict basic freedoms guaranteed in Spain’s constitution such as the right to free movement. Spain’s government has already declared two state of emergencies during the pandemic. Health minister Salvador Illa has said his agency and regional health officials are studying how to apply nightly curfewssimilar to the curfews already in place in France’s major cities. Spain this week became the first European country to surpass 1m officially recorded Covid-19 cases. But Sánchez admitted on Friday in a nationally televised address that the true figure could be more than 3m, due to gaps in testing and other factors. Spain on Friday reported almost 20,000 new daily cases and a further 231 deaths, taking the country’s death toll in the pandemic to 34,752. In Hungary, there were 3,149 new cases of coronavirus reported on Sunday, the highest single-day tally and jumping above 3,000 for the first time. The total number of cases rose to 59,247 in the country of 10 million, with 35 new deaths taking the total to 1,425, Reuters reports. Although coronavirus cases have been rising sharply since late August, Hungary’s nationalist Prime Minister Viktor Orban is seeking to avoid a repeat of the spring lockdown that sent the economy crashing by 13.6% in the second quarter. Hungarian schools are operating as normal, and apart from closing borders to foreigners, the government has not imposed significant limitations on events. Orban’s cabinet chief Gergely Gulyas said on Thursday that the government planned no new restrictions to curb the spread of the virus. In Italy, the government has been accused of “playing with fire” ahead of the announcement of new Covid-19 restrictions that will heavily penalise the hospitality industry. Hospitality workers will protest outside parliament on Sunday as ministers debate measures that could include the closure of bars and restaurants from 6pm. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte is expected to announce the restrictions, which might also include the closure of gyms and swimming pools, on Sunday afternoon. People will be “strongly advised” not to travel beyond their home towns unless strictly necessary, according to a draft of the decree. The plan to close restaurants and bars from 6pm has been hotly contested by regional administrations. “We ask that they close us down completely and give us the famous financial support that Conte keeps talking about,” said Paolo Bianchini, a restaurant owner in the Lazio town of Viterbo and spokesperson for MIO, the hospitality movement organising the protest. “It’s useless staying open at all, and being left to have an agonising death – our companies are dying. There will be civil war as people no longer have money – [the government] is playing with fire.” There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the whole Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme right group, Forza Nuova, also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew also in place since Friday. Italy registered 19,644 new coronavirus infections and 151 more fatalities on Saturday. The virus is rapidly spreading in Lombardy, Campania and Lazio. There are 1,128 people currently in intensive care with Covid-19 across the country, more than double the figure of two weeks ago. Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in the US, has given an interview to the BBC’s Andrew Marr. He tempers Donald Trump’s claims that there will be a vaccine by the end of the year, calling the statement correct but noting that a wide rollout will take “several months into 2021” and early use will focus on vulnerable populations and healthcare workers. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” Fauci said. “When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be until the second or third quarter of the year.” He also says it’s “very important” for politicians and public figures to follow the science. “You can positively or negatively influence behaviour,” he says. “It would really be a shame if we have a safe and effective vaccine but a substantial portion of the people don’t want to take the vaccine because they don’t trust authority.” He also says it’s “obvious” that the idea of injecting bleach, notoriously raised by Trump earlier this year, is not following the science. When asked whether Trump’s suggestion that he is now immune and could “come down and start kissing everybody” is following the science, he says “you know the answer to that, no it isn’t.” He says that Trump is also not right that listening to scientists would lead to a massive depression, adding that he believes that “if we did things in a prudent way… you could follow the science and public health measures without shutting down the economy.” And he denies saying, as Trump recently suggested, that the virus “is going to go away soon”, explaining that remarks he made in January before person-to-person transmission began have been taken out of context. When asked about Joe Biden’s claim that wearing masks could save 100,000 lives by January he says “I’m not sure about the number” but that it is true that wearing masks can save a lot of lives. In Ireland, the Irish Independent reports that any move towards a third national lockdown would be heavily resisted by ministers with the government coalition. The newspaper reports that “senior Fine Gael ministers have insisted everything must be done to avoid the need to impose the highest level of Covid-19 restrictions for a third time”. It quotes one minister as saying that Taoiseach Micheál Martin “needs to be careful with this rush for a third lockdown, the people might not buy it”. You can read the full story here. Here’s the latest edition of the Guardian’s tracker of coronavirus cases and deaths around the world. The US continues to have the highest number of total cases and deaths, and cases and deaths in the last fortnight. In the UK, Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has rejected calls for Dido Harding, who runs the government’s much-criticised test and trace programme, to resign. Speaking in response to an article by Tory MP Bernard Jenkin and an interview in which he said the programme should be led by “a very senior military person”, he says she has done a “very good job” and that the programme has “come on so much”. Another of Ridge’s interviewees, shadow mental health minister Rosena Allin-Khan, says that Harding’s position is “untenable”. Lewis also says that reports that the government is looking at cutting the 14-day isolation period for travellers returning to the UK from abroad are accurate. But he says that “we’re not ready to make a final decision or announcement on that yet” and the decision will be “scientifically led”. He denies an accompanying claim that business leaders will be exempt and says that any changes “will apply to everybody”. In Indonesia, the health ministry has reported 3,732 new coronavirus infections, and 94 deaths. The total number of infections now stands at 389,712, with 13,299 – on both counts, the highest totals in south-east Asia. The government of Indonesia’s capital city Jakarta said in a statement earlier on Sunday that it will extend mass social restriction measures introduced to curb the spread of the virus until 8 November. Meanwhile, the Jakarta Post reported that more than 100 inmates at a prison on the island of Bali had tested positive. There have been 11,000 cases in total in Bali, which has seen its economy devastated by the sharp decline in tourism. • This post was amended at 8.37am to correct the total infection count. Good morning from London, where I’m picking up from Helen Davidson. You can reach me on Twitter or email with any comments, tips or suggestions. If you’re looking for some Sunday morning reading, you could start with Robin McKie’s report for the Observer on fears in the scientific community that the early adoption of an only moderately effective coronavirus vaccine could hinder attempts to find a better one: Or take a look this piece, also by colleagues at the Observer, about the danger that a sense of arbitrary restrictions could contribute to ‘Covid fatigue’ in the UK: I’ll be handing over to my colleagues in London shortly. Here is a quick round up of the most recent developments: Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. US vice-president Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus. Pence and his wife tested negative, his office said. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for Covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup horse race. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as police clashed with far-right protesters in Rome. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases and 229 deaths on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired teargas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. Russia reported 16,710 new coronavirus cases on Sunday, including 4,455 in Moscow, bringing the national tally to 1,513,877 cases since the pandemic began. Authorities said 229 people had died in the last 24 hours, bringing the official death toll to 26,050. AP: Just weeks after India fully opened up from a harsh lockdown and began to modestly turn a corner by cutting new coronavirus infections by near half, a Hindu festival season is raising fears that a fresh surge could spoil the hard-won gains. Nearly 1 billion Indians will soon celebrate Diwali, the Hindu festival of light, and the country’s biggest. Socializing is key part of the most highly anticipated event of the year, with malls and markets buzzing with shoppers. It also traditionally brings in a massive increase in consumer spending across India. Even though the government is expecting the festival to help resuscitate the ailing economy, it is also worried about people packing together, foregoing social distancing and masks. Such concerns prompted Prime Minister Narendra Modi to address the nation in a televised speech earlier this week, warning people of “any laxity” during the festive season that “could strain India’s health system.” India is second to the United States with the largest coronavirus outbreak. Last month, the country hit a peak of nearly 100,000 cases in a single day, but since then daily infections have fallen by about half and deaths by about a third. Some experts say the decline in cases suggests the virus may have finally reached a plateau but others question the testing methods. India’s testing rate has remained constant but it is relying heavily on antigen tests, which are faster but less accurate than traditional RT-PCR tests. Even as the reasons behind the decline are not fully clear, India is still clocking more than 50,000 cases a day, making any new surge all the more important. These fears stem largely from India’s initial success story — until it wasn’t. In June, the southern coastal state of Kerala was cheered for flattening the curve, generating worldwide appreciation, even from the United Nations. But in a stunning reversal, it now fares as the second-worst state in active coronavirus cases in the country. Health Minister Harsh Vardhan blamed “gross negligence” during the 10-day Onam festival celebrations in late August for Kerala’s virus surge. Since then, reported infections there have jumped by five times, far outpacing the nationwide trend. Kerala’s story has alarmed health experts who fear similar problems in the runup to Diwali that could reverse the gains. “If we don’t avoid socializing during the upcoming festival season, I fear we will be back to where we started,” said Dr. T. Jacob John, a retired virologist. “There is a significant risk ahead of us.” More than 1,000 test results have come back from the northern suburbs of Melbourne, finding no new cases of the virus. It’s significant because the area is the site of a current outbreak which prompted premier Dan Andrews to delay announcing reopening dates for the city’s retail and hospitality sector. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 are understood to be included in the 1,135 tests returned today. 1400 tests conducted taken today are in the labs and testing will proceed throughout the evening, the health department said. “This testing enables us to get a very clear picture of how many cases there are and ensure there is a plan in place for everyone who tests positive along with the close contacts,” said Jeroen Weimar, the state’s head of testing and community engagement. “There will at times no doubt be delays as more people come forward, but we are so appreciative of everyone making the effort, particularly during these colder spring days.” Tasmania will on Monday reopen to much of mainland Australia, with the island state’s government insisting it is well prepared to handle any coronavirus cases. The state was the first Australian jurisdiction to close its borders in March and hasn’t recorded a case in more than 70 days. It will open to low-risk regions Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia, the Northern Territory and ACT, plus New Zealand. It remains closed to Victoria and is slated to open to NSW on 2 November, with a firm call on that date to be made this week. All arrivals at airports and sea ports will be health screened and anyone with virus symptoms will be tested and ordered into quarantine until their result is known. “While it’s exiting to be able to see restrictions ease and life getting to a Covid-normal, we also need to remember there is always a risk of coronavirus in our community,” health minister Sarah Courtney said. She said “extensive work” had been put into the state’s contact tracing systems and aged care preparedness. Ms Courtney said social distancing and personal hygiene were critical in the weeks ahead. “It’s important that we continue this vigilance so our healthcare workers remain safe and we have capacity in our hospitals,” she said. Tasmania has more than 200 ventilators and is planning to acquire another 100. A rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccines, scientists have said. Scientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Read more here: The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany increased by 11,176 to 429,181, data from the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases showed on Sunday. The reported death toll rose by 29 to 10,032, the tally showed. In Australia, the Victoria Racing Club has announced there will be no spectators allowed at this year’s Melbourne Cup “in light of the ongoing situation around government restrictions”. “While we are very disappointed not to be able to welcome our members and racegoers to Cup Week, we understand the government’s commitment to keeping our community safe. We also recognise the need for certainty and clarity for our patrons, being only six days out from Derby Day,” said VRC chair Amanda Elliott. “We are still in discussions regarding the potential return to the track for a small number of owners, as is currently permitted in regional Victoria,” Mrs Elliott said. “We will play our part in supporting Victoria’s emergence from this pandemic as Melbourne moves closer to a normal environment over summer.” The VRC will run an interactive Cup website for people still wanting to enjoy the festivities of Australia’s famous race day. The testing of entire cities whenever there is a new outbreak in China is overkill, the country’s chief epidemiologist has said. About 11 million people were recently tested in just five days in Qingdao, after 12 new cases were linked to a hospital. But the testing regime found no new cases, and Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist with China Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, told China Newsweek the transmission would have been confined to the hospital. “Qingdao has the determination to [test everyone], but it’s overkill,” Wu said. Mainland China has avoided seeing more massive outbreaks since it got control of the original Wuhan epidemic, even as new clusters have emerged in cities and provinces as populous as Beijing, Qingdao, and Jilin. As well as swift lockdowns, strict contact tracing, and travel restrictions, authorities in each case also embarked on ambitious drives to test every single resident. Wu said while citywide testing may be reassuring to officials and residents, “the social cost was too big and unnecessary”. A harrowing report from CNN on the rise of child trafficking in India during the pandemic. In recent years, India has strengthened its lawson child labor, but in the past six months - with Covid-19 taking a toll on the economy - that work has started to unravel. “Children have never faced such crisis,” said 2014 Nobel Peace Prize winner Kailash Satyarthi, whose organization Bachpan Bachao Andolan (Save the Childhood Movement) works to protect vulnerable children. “This is not simply the health crisis or economic crisis. This is the crisis of justice, of humanity, of childhood, of the future of an entire generation.” When India went into a strict lockdown in March, schools and workplaces closed. Millions of children were deprived of the midday meal they used to receive at school and many people lost their jobs.Traffickers have exploited the situation by targeting desperate families, activists said. See the full report here. Still in Australia, the country’s prime minister, treasurer and health minister have again criticised the Labor government in Victoria for the continuation of lockdown measures in Victoria. In a joint statement they said the decision to keep some businesses closed was a “profound disappointment”, and called on the Victorian government to utilise mirror tracing and restriction measures used by the neighbouring state of New South Wales. At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave. Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening. This is a profound disappointment. Of course, Victorians do not want to face another lockdown and of course they don’t want all of this to have been for nothing. That is why ensuring the state government’s capability to deal with outbreaks through their public health response is so essential. This is what you need for Victoria to open up safely and stay safely open. Borders and closures are not indicators of public health success. They are the opposite. The Australian state of Western Australia has reported three new cases recorded on Saturday. The one male and two females all aged in their 20s had all returned to Perth from overseas. WA is monitoring 57 active cases remaining from its total of 760. Brazil has registered 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours and 26,979 new cases, the health ministry said on Saturday. The South American nation has now registered 156,903 total coronavirus deaths and 4,817,898 total confirmed cases. The diagnosis of Pence’s chief of staff has been confirmed by their office. “Vice-president Pence and Mrs Pence both tested negative for Covid-19 today, and remain in good health,” said Devin O’Malley, a Pence spokesman, on Saturday, adding that Donald Trump’s running mate would maintain his schedule “in accordance with the CDC guidelines for essential personnel”. Full report here. Mike Pence’s chief of staff has tested positive for the coronavirus, Bloomberg is reporting. The diagnosis of Marc Short, the closest advisor to the US vice president, follows that of another senior staffer Marty Obst earlier on Saturday. Pence delivered a campaign speech in Florida on Saturday evening. Bloomberg reported he was aware of Obst’s positive test result prior to departing, and that Obst was not seen on the plane with him. Despite being a close contact of Short, Pence is not quarantining and is maintaining he schedule as an “essential employee”. More than 100 inmates have tested positive for covid-19 at Indonesia’s Kerobokan prison, on the island of Bali. The Jakarta Post reports today on a growing cluster inside the notorious prison, detected after complaints of symptoms by some inmates prompted mass testing earlier this week. Of 106 positive test results so far, 84 are men, the Post reported. They have been moved to an isolated block of the prison, it said. “[The number of confirmed cases] might still be increasing because we are still waiting for more test results,” said I Putu Surya Dharma, spokesman for the law and human rights ministry’s Bali office. The prison is under lockdown and receiving no visitors or new prisoners. Bali has recorded more than 11,000 cases of Covid-19 during the pandemic, which has also devastated the island’s economy which depends almost entirely on tourism. Indonesia has recorded more than 380,000 cases. Here is our full report on the latest from Victoria, Australia, where the country’s largest outbreak and which sparked one of the world’s strictest lockdowns, is being brought under control. From Calla Wahlquist: Daniel Andrews has delayed an announcement about easing coronavirus restrictions in Melbourne pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs, prompting criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. In a heated press conference, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. Read more: From the wire services in Europe: Italy saw a second night of street protests against curfews as it reported another daily record on Saturday. After clashes in the southern city of Naples on Friday night, police again faced off against dozens of masked protestors in the centre of Rome after the far-right Forza Nuova group called for a protest against the curfews. Some 200 masked militants belonging to the neo-fascist group hurled projectiles at police and set rubbish bins alight in the second night of street protests. Police arrested seven protesters and reported two officers injured, according to the Repubblica daily. The government is planning further restrictions to contain a resurgence of the pandemic, and prime minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a repeat of the blanket lockdown earlier in the year. But a number of regions - including Campania, the area around Naples, Lazio around Rome, and Lombardy - have imposed overnight curfews. The northern region of Piedmont and Sicily in the south will follow next week and other regions are expected to match them. The central government is expected to announce more measures soon. Earlier, health ministry data showed 19,644 new Covid cases and 151 dead as the disease surged in areas like Lombardy, Milan, Campania and Lazio. Conte pledged to speed up help for businesses suffering in the crisis but said the weeks ahead would be very difficult. “We cannot lower our guard,” he added. According to a draft decree circulated on Saturday, public gyms and swimming pools may be closed and bars and restaurants told to shut from 6 p.m., while people will be encouraged not to travel outside their home districts. Like many authorities across Europe, the Italian government is desperate not to close down the economy completely but is facing growing public anger at renewed restrictions being imposed to limit public gatherings. With public health services coming under strain, authorities have reopened temporary intensive care facilities built during the first phase. Despite this, Italy’s top public health body warned on Friday services were approaching crisis point. Mainland China reported 15 new cases on Saturday, all imported from other countries. There are 405 asymptomatic patients currently under observation, including a teenage girl in Kashgar. The city has imposed travel restrictions while health authorities test the population. The South China Morning Post cited an unnamed official, saying residents are allowed to leave the city if they have a negative test result. Overnight there was a bit of confusion among Kashgar residents and visitors, as flights in and out of the Xinjiang region city were suddenly cancelled, and police authorities posted and then deleted a social media message reminding people to wear masks. “Everyone wear your masks properly and pay attention to personal safety. Don’t believe or spread rumours to avoid unnecessary panic. All is subject to official notification,” the Weibo post said. Videos shared online also appeared to show traffic banking up at checkpoints. Xinjiang health authorities announced on Saturday night that an asymptomatic case had been found during a routine screening in Shufu county, and the patient - a 17-year-old woman - had been transferred to hospital. The case would be the first inside Xinjiang since mid-August, when an outbreak sparked a “wartime state” of lockdown in the capital Urumqi. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Saturday 6,025 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 431 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 886,800 and the death toll to 88,743. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. Malaysia recorded its highest ever daily total on Saturday, with 1,228 new cases in the preceding 24 hours, surpassing last Sunday’s record of 871 cases. The country has recorded at least 700 daily cases for eight consecutive days. The health ministry said more than 72% of the new cases were in the state of Sabah, the centre of the current spike in cases. Much of the blame for the current surge has been focused on the East Malaysian state, after people spent two weeks campaigning for an upcoming election before returning to other parts of the country, the Straits Times reported. At around the same time there were outbreaks in Sabah’s detention centres for illegal migrants. The UK’s National Health Service (NHS) is preparing to provide vaccinations for frontline staff to start before Christmas, the Mail on Sunday has reported. Citing an email from a NHS Trust chief to his staff, the report said a national vaccination program rollout was being accelerated, with healthcare workers prioritised. Writing to staff earlier this month, the head of a hospital NHS Trust in Warwickshire said they and other NHS organisations nationally had been told “to be prepared to start a Covid-19 vaccine program in early December”. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff priorities prior to Christmas,” the email said, adding that the vaccine was expected to be given in two doses 28 days apart. The Mail also reported that the UK hopes to fast track production if a vaccine is ready before the end of December. •This post was edited at 10:31am to remove an extraneous reference to European medical approvals. Hello, this is Helen Davidson here to take you through the next few hours of global updates. Thanks to Calla for everything so far. First, a quick look around the world for the latest top line developments, with more to follow: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Brazil has registered 26,979 new cases and 432 additional coronavirus deaths over the last 24 hours. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. With that, I’ll hand over to Helen Davidson who will take you through the day. The press conference in Victoria has become a series of reporters putting agree/disagree statements to the premier, and Daniel Andrews rejecting the premise of the question and saying, on repeat: “That is not a question, that’s a statement.” I won’t repeat them here, because there isn’t a lot of information to be gleaned. The gist: reporters are attempting to get Andrews to comment on the frustration felt by business owners, and the broader community, that the roadmap is not being followed and that the end of the lockdown has not been announced on the day the announcement was promised. Andrews is getting frustrated, challenging the premise of questions, and then repeating the line of the day: we have to wait until the test results come back. However the date of opening up has shifted forward. Andrews said he will have “more to say tomorrow and Tuesday” and “we will be opening up before the weekend”. And, after 80 minutes, the press conference is over. A clarification from the premier: Just going back to a question James asked. I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt. November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening, have opening up before then, by on that day, in fact, earlier than then. We had intended to be able to make announcements today, but it’s just not appropriate while we wait for these test results, to be assuming we know what the results are. We don’t know how many positive cases, we don’t know whether they are going to be linked, but we’re still well on track to announcements and begin the process of opening up before the first. Reporter: Why didn’t you say that an hour ago, as directly as that? Andrews, with a deep sigh: Well ... James, I’m sorry if I have not been as clear as I tried to be, it was a very long night and a very early morning and I have been trying to find an opportunity to come back to the podium, as your question indicated to me I perhaps have not been as clear as I should have been. The Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, was asked if it was awkward that his advice was that Victoria could not yet announce details of a reopening, when the former Victorian health minister, the Australian health minister, the NSW premier and the WHO were suggesting it could be reopened. Sutton said: Amongst that list of individuals and organisations, none of them are in the tent. All of the data we have come up with all the understanding we have of each and every case, who the close contacts are, how they are linked, the specific complexities of each household, they are of a united view that as frustrating as this is, this is an appropriate 24-hour period to go through. Reporter: Did you mislead Victorians? Andrews: I did not. A reporter asked Andrews: “You said in your opening remarks that this is not a setback. People when they woke up this morning believed it would be at worst on November one but you are not committing to that so we have gone backwards today.” Andrews: I don’t believe we have. In any event, we have no choice but to wait for these results and they will be here well before November 1. Some results will come through later today and some will come through on Monday, well into the evening. On that basis we will be able to call it and be confident that these are linked cases, not a large number of mystery cases which would speak to the fact that it was much more widespread than we believe it is. Again, we have asked these people to come forward and be tested for a very good reason. They have done that and the lab does take time. It is not a matter of workflow, the test just takes time. We’ll get those tests done as quickly as we can and then analyse the results and update you. Is it fair to call it a “cautious pause” when thousands of [businesses] have been closed for months? But they were not to open today. They were opening Tuesday night at the earliest and we still may be able to make that deadline. It is not appropriate for me to pretend I have a test result I do not have. It is not responsible ... I cannot announce things and I cannot speak to the scope of the opening until we get these test results back and we know exactly the enemy we are facing and the challenge we are facing. Andrews said it was not his strategy that every outbreak should result in a new lockdown, but said Victoria has “an opportunity to essentially get ahead of this virus”. Asked if Melbourne was “just lucky” to already be under lockdown when this outbreak occurred, Andrews said: I don’t think that is right at all. What we would have to do for a long period of time is manage and live with this, but it will be easier, it will be much easier the lower the numbers are at the point you open up. And, as well, the more you know about those cases the more confident you are that you have a public health response around all those people. As it stands now we do not have the complete picture because the labs are processing test. Other tests will be taken through today which will come to us tomorrow. This is nothing more than simply waiting to get the results before ... Put it another way, waiting to get results instead of pretending we know what the results are. We do not and that would not be responsible nor a safe thing to do. And if we are criticised for that, so be it. A reporter said that NSW had been open for months with daily average cases hovering around 10. “If our contact tracing is as good as they are and we have as much faith in the Victorian community as the New SouthWales government has, why can’t we reopen?” Andrews: I don’t accept the conclusions you are drawing at all ... This is a pause, nothing more than that and it is appropriate that we wait to get those results. The reason we have literally hundreds of people locked in homes at the moment is because of the work that contact traces are doing, so I do not accept that criticism at all. Another reporter asked Andrews to acknowledge that “the way the public is feeling must be a rollercoaster. You have mentioned that you understand that people are frustrated, do not think it has gone past frustration today? Today is a different level for the community in terms of what they thought would happen and what has happened.” Andrews said he knew that it was frustrating. Of course people are frustrated and of course everyone would like these rules to come off as quickly as possible but we only get one chance to do this properly and we intend to wait for those results to come back from the laboratory. Once they have we will be able to make further judgment and then we will be able to update people tomorrow and hopefully make some announcements if not tomorrow then Tuesday and then push on from there. Back to Victoria, where this press conference is still going on. Premier Daniel Andrews was asked to respond to his former health minister Jenny Mikakos’ comment that not going ahead with a planned easing of restrictions today was an example of “paralysis in decision making”. Andrews said: I have nothing to say about those comments. Reporter: “She has been a respected member of your government.” Andrews: I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them. That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything. Another reporter asked if it would not have been “less unsettling for Melbournians” if Andrews had stuck to the initial roadmap dates, set out in September, rather than announcing they would be brought forward, then pushing them back again. The reporter called it a “rollercoaster effect”. Andrews: There has not been a rollercoaster. Numbers have come down steadily and we are all about making sure we get them to the lowest level before we open up safely. But what I say to every Victorian is that people have given and done too much for us to ignore the fact that there are thousands of results that have been processed in laboratories as we speak and we need to wait and see those results, we will get them today and tomorrow and hopefully we are able to make, not only announcements but to take the big steps safely around the middle of this week ... We cannot make decisions appropriate to the challenge if we do not have the results and we have not seen them. We don’t know what stories they will tell. Until we get that, which is today, tomorrow and potentially into Tuesday, it is just not safe and responsible for us to say we think we know better. We think that these will all be negative. And if there are some positives they will be linked to known cases. We cannot be certain. What does Andrews think about federal health minister Greg Hunt’s comments, that the only reason you would hold off reopening if you didn’t have faith in the contact tracing system. Andrews says that “is completely wrong”. New South Wales has recorded no new locally-acquired cases for the third consecutive day. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. Some 12,465 tests were conducted in the past 24-hours. Andrews was asked what he would do if this outbreak had occurred after pubs and retail stores were reopened. Would Melbourne be locked down again? Isn’t dealing with outbreaks just the way it’s going to be? Andrews initially didn’t respond, saying he was doing “exactly what we intend to do”. Then he said he would “not necessarily” put the state back into lockdown if an outbreak like this occurred after the state had opened up. But you only get one chance to get it to the lowest point possible and then it will be a management and containment task every day, every week, every month until we get a vaccine. Reporter: So what is the lowest point possible? Andrews: Lowest point possible is difficult to know but the lowest point possible in the northern suburbs will be waiting to see these tests and make sure that they are all linked cases and that there is not some wildfire burning out there that is not visible to us. It is the absolute key. While the Victorian government has been holding its press conference, the former health minister Jenny Mikakos, who resigned last month following the premier’s appearance before the hotel quarantine inquiry and later hit back at premier Daniel Andrews and suggested she had been made a scapegoat, has tweeted that she thinks the easing of restrictions should go ahead. Mikakos said that with the target of less than five cases per day met, and six of the seven new cases connected to known outbreaks, “the set reopening is gradual &amp; safe so any delay is unnecessary”. It’s paralysis in decision-making. The chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, said Mikakos was “entitled to that opinion”. Andrews refused to comment on it, becoming short with reporters. He said: We will not open up today, there has never been a suggestion that we would. We were to make announcements today that would come over the following days. I’d don’t quite know the point you are making. One reporter said Andrews had promised that he would announce an easing of restrictions today every day for the past week, except for yesterday. “You dangled a carrot at Victorians and today it feels like you have produced a stick,” one reporter said. Andrews said he rejected that characterisation. What I would say to you is that I think in this room and across the state there has been a perfectly legitimate request to have targets and dates, and all the way along I have tried to be as clear as I can be that nothing can be guaranteed. Nothing can be guaranteed, except the fact that we will be guided by the data and the science. We have come a long way, we all have in the last thing any of us need to do now is to ignore the fact that there are cases in the northern suburbs, there are results that are pending and we do not have those processed tests. As soon they are and as soon as we can establish that they are cases linked to each other, rather than some much bigger problem, potentially across the northern suburbs, then we will be able to not only announce the next steps, we can confidently take them and rather than that being midnight Tuesday, it may be midnight Wednesday. As soon as we can confirm that we absolutely will. Ducking to the UK for a moment, PA has this report: Officials on the UK government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. There were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” Last week Test and Trace hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. Senior Tory backbencher Sir Bernard Jenkin launched a scathing attack on the performance of the system, saying public consent and co-operation was “breaking down”. Writing in The Sunday Telegraph, he said there was a “vacuum of leadership” at the top of the organisation and called for a change that was “visible and decisive” with a senior military figure being put in charge like they did with the foot and mouth crisis. In response, the Department of Health and Social Care acknowledged there were areas where the service needed to improve, but said people should be “talking it up, not down”, and the leadership had built “the largest diagnostic industry the UK has ever seen”. Weimar rejected the suggestion, made by Australian federal health minister Greg Hunt this morning, that the decision to delay the easing of restrictions was a sign of no confidence in the testing and tracing system, which he manages. Weimar said: I refute that. If you look at the swiftness and comprehensive nature of what we are dealing with, and I think it is right that when we are about to make a momentous decision to ease restrictions, that we have to have confidence that we do not have any active unknown cases in our community. Asked if he recommended the delay to government, Weimar said: When I was asked a question, is there value in seeing more evidence and do you understand every dynamic of the outbreak, my advice was we need at least one more day to make sure we have tracked down so we have another big day ahead of us today and I want to see the results from today. They will come out through the day tomorrow and that is what I have asked for. Weimar said there were five public health teams targeting the close contacts of known cases and of the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school communities. Those teams are knocking on the doors of known contacts and encouraging them to get a test. People who refuse to get a test have been ordered to quarantine for longer. We’ll be asking to test them and the people they were with because they are most directly associated with the cases we know about. And that is how we identified three or four of the cases we saw yesterday through the close contact group. Weimar said public health teams contacted 250 close contacts yesterday to get those door-to-door tests, and have a list of 60 people to contact today. We are very interested in the close contacts because we want to establish if there are any positive cases in that group because they are the ones most likely to, if we’re going to find any more cases, that is the area where we are most likely to find them. The purpose of the wider community testing approach ... [is] we want to understand if there are any other index cases out there or any other links that have not been established. And that is why the wider test program is so important. There are now 20 households that are quarantined in alternative accomodation, the rest are quarantined at home. Weimar said he needed several thousand people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne to get a Covid-19 test today. We saw a fantastic response yesterday with 3,500 people getting tested. I need to see a similar number coming out today that we have got enough depth of understanding about any cases that might be out there. We want to be confident that we understand these chains of transmission and that it doesn’t jeopardise any other activity we want to do in the state. Victoria’s commander of testing and community engagement, Jeroen Weimar, says almost 2,500 tests were conducted in the northern suburbs of Melbourne yesterday. He said there had been a “strong community response”. Testing numbers are up 60% on last week, and he urged anyone in the northern suburbs with any symptoms, and anyone connected with the two schools even without symptoms, to get tested. We are now also really following up the close contacts. We tested, again, four close contacts yesterday who were associated, potentially, with three schools. I am pleased to say this, close contacts of all tested negative twice. And that means we are no longer regarding Dallas Brooks Primary School, Ilium College and Sirius College as part of this outbreak. They are part of no chain of transmission that we have identified between households we are focusing on these three schools, and these three schools are now disassociated ... That means many hundreds of families, many hundreds of people now associated with those three schools are now free to continue on as before. We also tested 250 close contacts, primary and secondary contacts of this cluster yesterday by visiting them at home. A lot of underground activity over the last two days to reach those people at home, to test them and their household members, all those results are coming in overnight. We have some of those results in already and more results are coming in during the course of this morning. So far we have identified one positive contact out of that come out of those close contacts. He added: We have also identified a link to the Regis MacLeod aged care facility with two staff members there testing positive. They are associated with this cluster in the northern metro area that we have been working on. We tested all staff and residents of that facility yesterday, all 108 and all of those results have come back negative. We will continue to watch that facility very closely of the coming days and we will speak about that later if necessary. This continues to be a very complex and rapidly developing case. We now have 11 households [and] chains of transmission between those households. There has been significant progress in the last 24hours as we have identified two new households as part of that 11, and some of the linkages that sit between them. We also have five children at East Preston Islamic College were tested positive. They are well and have all been a part of the initial close contact circle. So this has not spread out, the case any further. Weimar said they had set up a special testing station at Croxton Specialist school, in partnership with the Royal Children’s Hospital specialist paediatric team, to help test its 120 students. We now have 17 [testing] sites across the northern suburbs that are ready to go. They will be open for business and will be ready for you and open today. It’s very important that we establish if there are any remaining positive cases in the community so we can ensure that you are safely isolated and get the treatment you need and protect your family and friends from any further transmission. We are confident that we understand how this work but there is more work to do. Andrews did announce some changes for regional Victoria, which is already several steps ahead of Melbourne in terms of easing of restrictions. From 11.59pm on Tuesday: Gyms in regional Victoria will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with space rules applying. A maximum of 20 people, again with spacing rules, will be allowed to attend a religious service with one faith leader. Outdoor funerals will be allowed to have 50 attendees. Indoor non-contact community sport for people under the age of 18 will be allowed. Indoor swimming pools will be open for all ages, to a maximum of 20 people. Greater Shepparton, which had a coronavirus outbreak earlier this month, will be brought back in line with the rest of regional Victoria from midnight tonight. Daniel Andrews said they had found “linkages” and “chains of transmission” between new cases in the northern suburbs. He also said hundreds who were under self-isolation orders have now been allowed to leave their home after testing negative. The system is working, the processes are working, we just have to wait until we get the results. It is no good doing targeted testing if you then don’t wait to see what the results of those tests are. I do hope to make definitive announcements about opening up metropolitan Melbourne in a couple of days’ time. We will keep people updated today, tomorrow, and those test results will come back and hopefully what they will show us is not just some additional cases and there are bound to be a few in that mix, but that those cases are linked, and that we know that there is a chain of transmission and we have our arms around those people and they are not spreading it to anybody else. He added: If they are random, if they are not linked to each other, if they are mysteries, that will be a real cause for concern. We are hopeful, more than that in fact, we are confident that we have found many linkages. There may be others, there may be other cases that come forward as a result of those tests that are in the labs right now. Andrews said he was not in a position to announce an easing of restrictions today, as promised for several weeks, because they are awaiting at least 1,000 Covid-19 test results from contacts of the outbreak in northern Melbourne. He said: We had hoped today to be able to announce that metropolitan Melbourne would take significant steps, not from today but from mid-week, round retail, hospitality and a whole range of other, important next steps. We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs. We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and they will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there are, whether there is more virus there than we think. Ultimately, if we can link these cases together, if we can link different outbreaks, then we have confidence that we have contained it and we can move forward. This is not a setback. It is simply waiting and being led by the data, being led by the science, and following public health advice. That is what has seen these numbers go from thousands of active cases to now, 100 active cases. That is the approach that has seen us go from 700 plus cases per day to seven cases. He said he hoped to be in a position to make an announcement in “a couple of days” and said he knew the delay would be frustrating. Andrews says there are now 100 active cases in Victoria, that’s seven new cases since yesterday. Eight of those active cases are in healthcare workers, four are in aged care. There are seven people in hospital, none in ICU. 12,894 tests were conducted yesterday. Back on the UK’s test and trace system quickly. PA reports: Contacts of people infected with coronavirus may have to self-isolate for as little as seven days amid concerns in Whitehall about the levels of public compliance with the Test and Trace system. Officials on the Government’s Covid-19 taskforce are understood to be examining the case for reducing the current fortnight period of isolation to between 10 days and a week. The move — which would not apply to those who test positive for the disease - comes amid growing dissatisfaction with the performance of the system from ministers and MPs. Boris Johnson was said to have become “disillusioned” with statistics provided by the service after they proved to be wrong, according to The Sunday Telegraph. At the same time, there were said to be concerns that the prospect of a lengthy period indoors if they are contacted by Test and Trace is deterring people from co-operating. The Telegraph quoted a No 10 source as saying: “Compliance is not as high as we would like and self-isolation is key if we are going to beat the virus.” It comes after Test and Trace - headed by the Conservative peer Baroness Harding - last week hit a record low with just 59.6% of the contacts of people who tested positive for the disease being successfully contacted and told to self-isolate. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, says the only reason the Victorian government would hold off opening up would be if the state did not have confidence in its contact tracing system. He made the comments just before the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is due to announce (or not announce) a change in restrictions. Andrews is due to begin speaking in a few minutes. After months of increasing tension between the two levels of government – and with the state premier due to front the media shortly – Hunt said the case levels in Victoria were low enough to justify an easing of restrictions. At a press conference in Canberra this morning, Hunt was asked what his reaction would be if the Victorian state government did not announce a significant easing of restrictions today. He said: I think many people would be deeply disappointed given the mental health impacts, given the health impacts, given the profound consequences for people who have invested their life savings. We’ve reached the time when Victoria said that they were looking to move forwards, their own timeframe, their own timetable. We always said that there’s a commonwealth definition of 10 cases, according to the chief medical officer, a rolling average. It’s below five cases, on the rolling average, which is the Victorian government’s own definition. The only reason they wouldn’t open up is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system. We have confidence that the Victorian contact tracing system has improved significantly. It could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine depending on the type required, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews, the minister for industry and science, said CSL would be able to immediately start making a vaccine if a protein-based candidate proved to be safe and effective. However, she said “significant work” would be required if it was another type known as an mRNA vaccine. Pressed during an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program to give a timeframe to get production up and running if it was an mRNA vaccine, Andrews said: I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe. But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range. Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades. In the United Kingdom, a senior conservative MP has called for Baroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the UK government’s test and trace program, to be removed and replaced. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, he said: Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace. You can read more on this story here. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, has urged the Victorian government to ease restrictions to bring the state in line with neighbouring New South Wales. Hunt, whose electorate is in Victoria, was speaking in Canberra ahead of Victorian premier Daniel Andrews’s announcement. He urged the state: ... to take the next step to opening up safely, and we hope and commend to Victoria that the commonwealth will support them in moving to those next levels of reduced restrictions, in line with New South Wales. We have seen how a strong testing, tracing and isolation system can allow a state to manage through the challenges of this. [There have been] over 400,000 cases a day for the last four days, consecutively, globally. In Australia, seven states and territories, zero community cases, yesterday. One state, with seven. And that means we are in a strong position, and there should be no barrier to Victoria taking those steps in line with New South Wales. And they have improved their systems and we want to commend and acknowledge that improvement. Obviously there is more to go, but they have significantly improved to a level where, in our view, they are capable of managing small case numbers, because if we do not do that, then we see the risks to mental health and health which have been so sadly evident in the numbers. But all up, it is a day of great hope. Moreland City Council, which covers an area of Melbourne’s northern suburbs, this morning sent an alert to residents warning that coronavirus cases had been identified in the suburbs of Fawkner, Preston, West Heidelberg, Dallas, Roxburgh Park and Broadmeadows. Anyone who lives or works in that area is urged to gets tested if they experience even mild symptoms. The council alert also urged anyone connected to the East Preston Islamic College and the Corxton school in Northcote to get a test even if they had no symptoms. Fifteen testing sites have been set up in the area. It added that Sirius College (Meadow Fair campus), Ilim College, and Dallas Brooks primary school “have also been identified as potential risk sites. Anyone from these school communities who is a close contact or who is experiencing symptoms needs to get tested and stay home”. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and health minister Martin Foley, will give a press conference at 10.30am Melbourne time (so in 30 minutes). A reminder that according to the roadmap released back in September – which has since been significantly re-written – Melbourne was due to get the following freedoms from tomorrow if the rolling 14-day average had fallen below five and there were no more than three “mystery cases” in that period. As of today, the rolling 14-day average in metropolitan Melbourne is 4.6, and there were nine cases with an unknown source in the 14 days to 22 October. So, according to that roadmap, there would from tomorrow be no restrictions on reasons to leave your home, no travel limit (Melbournians are currently not allowed more than 25km from their home without a permit), up to five visitors from another nominated household allowed in your home, and a reopening of retail stores and hospitality for outdoor seated service. Let’s wait to see what’s actually announced. Good morning, Welcome to our ongoing live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic. France reported a record 45,422 cases in one day on Sunday and 138 new deaths. The country has now recorded 1.08 million cases. Italy has also set a new daily record, with 19,644 cases, and Luxembourg has also recorded a record rise, with 862 new cases. The United Kingdom recorded 23,012 new cases and 174 deaths, as anti-lockdown protests were held in London. In Australia, the focus is on Melbourne where the premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to make an announcement on the easing of restriction. On Friday, he said there would be “significant” changes. On Saturday, he backtracked and said “I just want to caution people from banking that tomorrow I’ll be making a whole series of detailed announcements about opening up.” The Victorian government has reportedly been briefing that changes will be delayed. The reason for the change is an outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs, including a number of cases connected to the East Preston Islamic College. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday and seven on Saturday, up from one on Friday. Almost 10,000 tests have been conducted in the area and hundreds are under self-isolation orders. Andrews has said that they will need to see those tests results, and see whether new cases can be connected to known outbreaks, before the changes are finalised. Importantly for Victorians the rolling 14-day average has now dropped below five cases per day – the milestone set back in September for easing restrictions – but that might not be enough. Andrews has said decisions will be made on where the cases are and whether they are linked, not on numbers alone. Let’s crack on. You can follow me on Twitter at @callapilla or email me at Calla.Wahlquist@theguardian.com
3||Australia is part of a Black region; it should recognise Kanaky ambition in New CaledoniaKicking the can down the road is a time-honoured solution to deadlocks over statehood and identity: hoping time, consultation and money can end up in agreement. But in New Caledonia, the French territory of 290,000 people in the Melanesian island chain to Australia’s north-east, the road is running out after more than two decades of can-kicking. The time is coming – perhaps has come – for Australia to take a clearer position. On 4 October, the second of three referendums on independence promised after 20 years of peace-building saw a sharpening divide in popular sentiment about staying under the French tricolour. Just over 53% of voters said “non” to independence, down from 56.7% in the first referendum in 2018. The trend suggests that a third referendum expected in 2022 would see the “oui” vote rise from this month’s 46.7% to parity or even a narrow majority. Such a prospect has some observers fearing a return to the communal violence seen in the late 1980s, when indigenous Kanaks sought to follow their Melanesian counterparts in Vanuatu, the Solomons, and Papua New Guinea into independence, and French settlers mounted armed resistance. It culminated in 1988. Kanak militants took French police as political hostages on the small island of Ouvéa; French special forces went in, with significant loss of life. The horror led to a 10-year peacemaking effort, the Matignon accords, signed by French loyalist and Kanak leaders, extended by the 1998 Nouméa accords. This month’s vote saw the territory still largely split along the indigenous-settler divide. The “oui” vote dominated in the northern part of the main island and the Loyalty Islands to the east, where Kanaks are concentrated. The “non” vote prevailed in the main island’s south around Nouméa and a smaller settler enclave. The question is, where to now? Under the accords, a third referendum must be held if requested by at least a third of the New Caledonia congress, its legislature. The earliest request can be in April, for a vote in 2022. The pro-independence Kanak parties have the required numbers and say they will demand it. Loyalists, seeing where the numbers are trending, are starting to baulk at it. Sonia Backès, a conservative loyalist who is president of the southern region, has said it even carries the risk of civil war. Some loyalist elements are now urging new negotiations on some kind of middle way, to avoid holding the third referendum. A more hard-line element wants a vote on scrapping the accord in 2022, bringing the 40,000 more recent settlers onto the local electoral roll and thus outvoting the Kanaks for good. But some compromise is stirring on the Kanak side too. This week, Roch Wamytan, a Kanak who was a signatory to the 1998 accords and is now president of the territory’s congress, floated the idea of independence in association with France. This would perhaps resemble the ties of the northern Pacific states of Palau, Micronesia and Marshall Islands with the United States, which extends defence, funding and social services, while still holding their own United Nations membership. France itself looks ready to adjust. In 2018 president Emmanuel Macron visited New Caledonia before the vote, and expressed pride in the decision to remain with France. This time he stayed away, and afterwards, as noted by Denise Fisher, a former Australian consul-general in Nouméa, just referred to the “success” of the “second democratic rendezvous” as a sign of “confidence in the Republic.” He promised to organise a third referendum if that was requested, and urged the territory’s people to think hard about all scenarios after 2022. The French territories minister, Sebastien Lecornu, appeared set on encouraging flexible thinking when he arrived in New Caledonia this month. “This binary question of a yes or no to independence is not the answer to all the questions raised in society today.” New Caledonia’s region is also stepping into the debate. Vanuatu’s opposition leader and recent foreign minister, Ralph Regenvanu, this week urged more contact with loyalists to convince them New Caledonia can be a viable state. He noted that this camp often cites Vanuatu, a former British-French condominium, as a dire example of independence. “For us, it is quite amusing because we think we have got a very good development model happening here,” Regenvanu told Radio New Zealand. In this context, Australia is looking oddly more pro-French than the French. In a statement on the referendum result, foreign minister Marise Payne said “we recognise the choice made by New Caledonians to remain a part of France”, declaring “Australia values its close relationship with France as a likeminded partner in the Indo-Pacific region. We welcome France’s ongoing commitment to the Pacific, and its significant contribution to regional security and prosperity.” Not a word about the Kanaks and their aspirations. Two things are at play here. China has Australia spooked about the Pacific, to the point where it is open to French duchessing that they are a significant counterweight, through such things as the recently proposed France-India-Australia “axis” and the appointment of a French ambassador for the Indo-Pacific. Both India and Australia are of course big customers for the French arms industry. From a narrow military power-balance perspective, it might seem attractive to keep a significant Western naval power like France watching over a vast stretch of the Pacific, where France has about 80% of its present exclusive economic zone. But it runs counter to the Morrison government’s signature initiative placing Australia in the Pacific “vuvale” (family, in Fijian). The Melanesians are this family’s most numerous people, perhaps outnumbering Australians later this century. They take decolonisation of their Kanak brothers very seriously. We should show that we do too. A more constructive approach would be to join regional leaders like Regenvanu in trying convince loyalists that a new independent state of Kanaky, with continuing French support and encouraged Australian investment in its struggling nickel industry, might not be a bad thing, certainly better than otherwise inevitable conflict. For Australia, it would pre-empt malign influence from elsewhere and show our recognition that we are, as Regenvanu told me earlier this year, “part of a Black region”.
4||'Could do better': top Australian economists grade the 2020 budgetAustralia’s leading economists have struggled to grade this month’s budget. Challenged by the Economic Society of Australia and The Conversation to rate it on a scale of A to F when judged by its stated aims of rebuilding the economy and creating jobs, none of the 43 economists who responded gave it the lowest grades of E or F. But most who gave it a pass were unhappy. Financial markets expert Kevin Davis praised “the willingness of a conservative government to adopt needed large deficit spending at variance with its ideology”. Economic modeller and former Reserve Bank board member Warwick McKibbin said he would give it an A for scale. But Davis said tax cuts “to the better-off employed” weren’t the best way of achieving desired outcomes, and McKibbin said the composition could have been much better designed. “There was an opportunity to invest in green infrastructure as part of a fiscal response and a climate/energy policy response that would have longer-term economic and environmental payoffs,” McKibbin said. “For spending support, transfers to low-income households rather than income tax cuts would have given a bigger bang for the buck. Greater support of childcare would support incomes and labour supply.” Bob Breunig said the design of the childcare benefit created a well-documented income cliff for second earners making it difficult for them to work more hours. It was a known problem and would have been easy to fix. Hard hats instead of soft skills The Grattan Institute’s Danielle Wood said it was “absolutely the right call to change course on fiscal strategy and recognise the need for sizeable stimulus, so marks for that”. But the budget “very much bet the house on a private sector-led recovery”. Where it had spent money directly, it mostly went to “hard-hat” professions such as infrastructure, construction, manufacturing, defence, utilities and energy. “Some of these sectors haven’t even seen job losses during Covid,” Wood said, “and there is already a healthy pipeline of work for transport infrastructure projects, so why spend your stimulus dollars here?” Renee Fry McKibbin noted that the burden of Covid-19 fell on frontline workers in health, caring industries, hospitality, tourism, arts and education, yet she said the budget focused on sectors “traditionally dominated by men”. Climate change overlooked Wood said the price of those blindspots would be a weaker recovery than otherwise, unemployment higher for longer than it could have been, and women’s economic disadvantage entrenched. Labour market specialist Sue Richardson said relying on incentives such as instant asset write-offs and hiring subsidies was risky because the private sector might not respond in the way that had been hoped. What direct spending there was seemed “intended largely to recreate the economy of the past, rather than invest in the economy of the future”. “The economy of the future will, among other things, need to have much lower greenhouse gas emissions and much greater ability to cope with the unavoidable damage arising from climate change.” How we handle the recovery will either set us on a path towards net-zero emissions or lock us into a fossil fuel system from which it will be hard to escape. Saul Eslake gave the government “great credit for being willing, explicitly, to recalibrate its budget strategy” and run up what (for Australia) were large amounts of debt. On average, a bare pass But he said the measures chosen would be less effective in delivering jobs and recovery than others available including vouchers for spending in sectors hard-hit sectors and spending on social housing and childcare. All but one of the 43 economists who responded to the survey also responded to the pre-budget survey which nominated spending on social housing, education and training and permanently boosting jobseeker as the top budget priorities. Assessing the budget, 16 of the 43 (37%) awarded it either an A or a B. Almost half (49%) awarded it a C, or “bare pass”. Six (14%) gave it a D. Some of the economists who awarded a B said it was really a “B-minus”. One of them, Lata Gangadharan, said when it came to opportunities for women (those worst affected by the downturn) the budget “failed miserably” and would attract a D. James Morley said he might have been “too easy of a marker” by awarding a B, but that it was “possible to lose the forest for the trees when only evaluating the budget on its specifics”. ‘B’ reflects the big picture, not the details The big picture was that deficit-financed stimulus was needed and that the budget provided much more than might have been expected given the previous positions of the treasury and the Morrison government. He said the forward guidance that put off “budget repair” until after the unemployment rate fell below 6% was welcome, even if one could ask why the threshold of 6% number had been chosen. The more one looks at the details, the more one wants to significantly mark down the grade for budget. But I will still give it a “B” because the big picture is on the right track and I will just hope the Treasurer somehow becomes an “A” student in the future. Rana Roy said he would have to grade the budget a C rather than an A or B, “more in sorrow than in anger”. While he approved of the deficits and the tax cuts and the focus on infrastructure, he strongly suspected the measures would not be enough. “For example, in an immediate sense it is likely that the negative impact of tapering and terminating jobkeeper will overpower the positive impact of the new wage subsidies for new hires.” Two of those surveyed awarded the budget a B primarily because it had shown restraint. Tony Makin said too much spending would have pushed up the dollar and drawn resources away from the private sector. Geoffrey Kingston said it was important to avoid “maxing out the national credit card”. Chris Edmond awarded it a C primarily because its assumptions relied on hope. By simply assuming a widespread effective vaccine will be available next year and not otherwise thinking hard about how to beat the pandemic, the government is being very optimistic. Others said it had ignored the one thing recommended by most economists, which was to invest in social housing to make housing affordable and create jobs. A permanent increase to jobseeker would have given a million Australian confidence in the lead-up to Christmas. Higher education, a major export earner with a direct impact on productivity, was being left to shrink. John Quiggin said the budget pursued “cultural/ideological vendettas against perceived enemies like renewable energy and the university sector”. But he said it was still worth a C. The government was right to budget for a large deficit, and deserved continuing credit for JobSeeker and JobKeeper. This article is republished from The Conversation under a Creative Commons licence. Read the original article, including economists’ individual grades and responses. Peter Martin is a visiting fellow at the Crawford school of public policy, Australian National University
0||'The red card was a joke': Ancelotti fumes over Digne dismissal as Everton slip upCarlo Ancelotti has denied Everton have a disciplinary problem and has accused the Premier League referee, Kevin Friend, of being swayed by the furore surrounding Jordan Pickford’s challenge on Virgil van Dijk in the Merseyside derby in his decision to send off Lucas Digne as Everton’s unbeaten start to the season came to an end at Southampton. The Everton manager suggested criticism of Pickford’s tackle, which went unpunished and left the Liverpool defender with a long-term anterior cruciate ligament injury, was an aggravating factor in Digne being given a straight red card in the 2-0 defeat. Ancelotti said the officials’ decision to send Digne off was “a joke” and confirmed Everton would appeal the red card. Asked if he was concerned his players have a discipline issue following successive sending-offs – Richarlison was absent at St Mary’s after being sent off late on against Liverpool – Ancelotti replied: “No, I don’t think so. The red card was a joke. It was not intentional. Maybe it could be a yellow but for sure it was not violent conduct. They could check better. “Maybe all the rumours all week against Pickford, against Richarlison, affected the decision and if it is like this, it’s not right, it’s not fair. We will appeal, for sure. He did not have the intention to hurt the player, or to use violent conduct. It was not the right decision. To lose Digne for three games is too much. “We didn’t complain about Richarlison. But here, we have to appeal, because this was not the right decision.” Digne’s sending off, which will result in a three-match ban unless it is overturned by the Football Association, compounded a difficult afternoon as Everton slipped to defeat. The Southampton captain James Ward-Prowse opened the scoring before Che Adams doubled Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side’s advantage after 35 minutes. Four minutes later Stuart Armstrong thought he added a third but Adams was ruled offside in the buildup. “We don’t have to be too disappointed, we are still at the top of the table, which is an unbelievable achievement for us and we have to try to stay there,” Ancelotti added. “It was not a good day, it was not a good performance, we are here to talk about the first defeat and I think we have to forward because of course we don’t like to lose games but in football it happens. It has arrived after a fantastic start. We have to move forward in this game with the belief we made here.” The Southampton manager, Hasenhüttl, said: “He tried before also to kick him and then finally he hit him from behind so, for me, it was a clear red card.”
2||Lewis Hamilton still ambitious after breaking Schumacher's win recordLewis Hamilton believes he can go on to even greater heights having surpassed Michael Schumacher’s record of Formula One race victories after his win at the Portuguese Grand Prix. The British driver took a commanding victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve and is also now within touching distance of Schumacher’s record of seven world championships. Hamilton won in Portimão despite having lost the lead in the opening laps but came back with a masterful display, taking the flag 25 seconds from his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas. The British driver was ultimately in a league of his own in Portugal and enjoyed an emotional celebration of his 92nd win as he finally surpassed Schumacher as the most successful F1 driver across race victories. The world champion praised his Mercedes team, and insisted he and they were eager for more. “I don’t believe in the saying ‘the sky is the limit’,” he said. “It depends how much we want it, how much we want to continue to raise the bar and going by our history together, the way we work, we don’t sit back on our results, we keep working, we keep elevating. Every race feels like the first one. I don’t know how this is possible after all these races but it does.” Hamilton now leads Bottas by 77 points in the world championship. If he is 78 points ahead after the Turkish Grand Prix, which takes place after the next round at Imola, he will secure his seventh title. The Briton has yet to sign a new contract with Mercedes but is clearly motivated to continue. He has enthusiastically embraced the anti-racism cause and has been a driving force in pushing F1 and Mercedes to push for greater diversity. Initiatives which have only left him enthused to continue in F1. “We are having to utilise our position as a business, as a leader in the business for inclusivity, for diversity, there is a lot of work to do, that keeps me inspired,” he said. “It keeps my teammates continuously growing, my fans learning through this process with us all and our sport is slowly changing. It’s a real special time. I definitely wonder, well I am 35 years old. I still feel physically strong but of course you wonder when is it going to tip over and you start losing performance but going by today it is not yet.” Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was third, believes Hamilton will go well past Schumacher’s records. “It’s an incredible achievement 92 victories and he will go to over 100,” he said. “It’s incredible, he looks like he will also get seven world titles as well which is very impressive.”
0||Jacob Murphy rescues point for Newcastle with late leveller at WolvesAfter 80 minutes that felt like a slog deep in midwinter rather than Premier League game No 6, Wolves and Newcastle awoke. Raúl Jiménez’s strike from a poorly cleared Neto free-kick seemed to have made it a third consecutive 1-0 win for Wolves, only for Jacob Murphy to rewrite this script. Steve Bruce’s side had barely moved beyond the centre circle in the second half. Yet after claiming a free-kick to the left of Wolves’s area with three minutes left, up stepped Murphy to curl the equaliser around the wall and past Rui Patrício’s fingertips. If this was a touch unfair on Wolves they have to accept some culpability for taking the match to Newcastle only sporadically. From the XI that schooled Leeds in Monday’s 1-0 win, Nuno Espírito Santo brought in Rúben Neves for João Moutinho. Bruce’s reaction to the 4-1 capitulation to Manchester United was to choose Fabian Schär, Ryan Fraser, Murphy and Miguel Almirón instead of Emil Krafth, Jonjo Shelvey, Isaac Hayden and Joelinton. When in flow Wolves are a medley of gold shirts running to and off the ball and from kick-off they had their visitors chasing them. Daniel Podence, playing off Jiménez, drifted into space at will, one of these moves having him turning for goal and unloading at Karl Darlow, who saved low down. This presaged three more attacking moments from Wolves. First, Neto hit a corner straight into Darlow’s gloves; then Jiménez twice miscued when he should have connected cleanly. It meant Nuno’s men had failed to convert from four opportunities and Newcastle quickly moved from relief to posing their own threat. Callum Wilson raced on to a long ball before Max Kilman’s challenge conceded a corner. This the first of two in quick succession, Ryan Fraser delivering each, and while their hosts were not breached Newcastle had their respect. The fluidity of Wolves’s play is complemented by tenacity, though. It was illustrated when soaking up pressure at Elland Road and was shown here again in a response that once more had Newcastle pinned back as possession was tapped in and around them. Bruce’s side were able to stymie them from moving into the final third yet there was scant sign – the Wilson foray, apart – of Rui Patrício, the Wolves No 1, being threatened. It meant that as the contest passed the half-hour mark entertainment had become as rare a commodity as any actual attempts on goal. When Fraser ran along the right and floated in a cross aimed at Wilson this pattern might have been broken but the ball was too close to Patrício, who gathered with ease. And when Almirón skated through the middle to cause a Wolves’ backpedal the pass might have been weighted perfectly for Allan Saint-Maximin but the No 10’s shot was skewered wide. Finally Podence, at the other end, twisted and turned to leave two Newcastle defenders spectators, the subsequent ball in possessing menace: Jiménez rose and only a well-timed Jamaal Lascelles intervention prevented the Mexican heading at goal. The mood caught on. Tempo was upped, quality elevated. Suddenly Saint-Maximin was doing his own swerve-and-slalom to cut in from the left before letting fly from 20 yards: the ball ricocheted off Willy Boly so Patrício was grateful to save. Still, as the second half began the sides remained in deadlock. And the fare was back to being soporific. After Jiménez again snatched at a shot and Murphy hacked away from under Newcastle’s bar Podence was back in creator mode. This time a dip of the hips took him into yards of clear grass and he teed up Rúben Neves with precision. Yet here the midfielder became the latest to lack composure, spraying the ball wildly over. Podence was undeterred. His feet danced again a little later inside Newcastle’s area and when he shot the ball appeared to hit the arm of Federico Fernández; Nuno appealed on the touchline yet VAR checked and ruled no penalty which seemed odd as numerous similar incidents have been penalised this season. Soon the Newcastle bench were themselves shouting “handball ref” when an Almirón effort at Patrício’s goal pin-balled around the area but this did not interest VAR. When Nuno took off Podence for Adama Traoré on 67 minutes this felt quaint as this removed the best performer. But now came a finish that did at least feature two goals – each of which highlighted what had previously been missing.
0||Kevin McCarra obituaryKevin McCarra, who has died aged 62 of Alzheimer’s disease, was football correspondent for the Guardian from 2002 to 2012 and prior to that a football writer for the Times, Sunday Times and Scotland on Sunday. One of Scotland’s finest sportswriting exports, he was blessed with original thinking, a deep and genuine understanding of football, and an extraordinary talent for phraseology that allowed him to turn what might otherwise have been mundane match reports into works of art. He was born in Glasgow, the youngest of three children, and grew up in Clarkston, on the outskirts of the city. His mother, Adele, was a pharmacist who later went into science teaching, and his father, Joe, was also a teacher. Having attended Holyrood secondary school in Glasgow, Kevin took a degree in Scottish literature at Glasgow University, becoming heavily involved in the Third Eye Centre, a contemporary arts venue. At that stage lecture halls looked to be his natural domain, and after graduation he enrolled for a PhD. However, an invitation from the Third Eye Centre to curate an exhibition about Scottish football was followed by a commission to write a book entitled A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, which was published in 1984. In turn that led to writing work with Scottish Field magazine. Kevin’s deft touch and sharp observations quickly caught the eye of the newly established Scotland on Sunday, which in 1988 took him on as a staff writer – and the PhD was ditched. When the entrepreneur Fergus McCann saved Celtic football club in 1994 Kevin was at the forefront of reporting on the story and shortly afterwards he accepted a move to the Times, initially as Scottish football correspondent but later covering English matches after the direct intervention of the newspaper’s editor prevented a move to the Scotsman. It was at the Times during one particularly raucous European football night at Ibrox that Kevin dictated to the copytaker down the phone that the Rangers manager Walter Smith had “returned to his previous central defensive pairing of Richard Gough and Gordan Petric” – only to find the phrase rendered into “tedious central defensive pairing” when it appeared in the paper the following morning. There was, however, never any prospect of Smith, Petric, Gough or anyone else in the football world becoming angry with Kevin. Similarly, even in such a tribal environment as Glasgow, where support for either half of the Old Firm is generally kept under wraps, he had no fear of revealing his lifelong allegiance to Celtic, as even Rangers fans knew he would not allow that to cloud the judgment in his work. His writing was of sufficiently high quality and balance to render such thoughts redundant. In 2002 he succeeded David Lacey as the main footballing writer at the Guardian, moving with his wife, Susan Stewart, an investment banker, whom he had married in 1986, to Stoke Newington in north London. During his time at the Guardian Kevin was a constant source of support to other journalists, both established and aspiring. Self-deprecating about the scale of his own talent, he felt uncomfortable at receiving so many emails from inquisitive teenagers keen on pursuing a life in the sports media. He regarded his own route as too unorthodox to be helpful and was perhaps unaware that even just a return communication from someone of his standing – which he always gave - would nonetheless be gratefully received. Support was not reserved for the young: in the late 2000s, when Hugh MacDonald, then a sportswriter with the Herald in Glasgow, arrived in London to preview a Champions League tie involving Arsenal, Kevin drove him to the club’s rural pre-match press conference and then back to his hotel. It only emerged later, and by accident, that all of this took place on Kevin’s day off. He also allowed me to stay in his home after being instrumental in arranging some work experience at the Guardian. Many years later a ticking off arrived by email for my use of “plethora” in relation to opportunities missed during a football match. True to the word’s definition, which relates to a larger amount of something than is needed, he reminded me that “teams cannot create too many chances”. If such a note had arrived from any other journalist, ego would have led to annoyance, but from Kevin it produced only a smile. In an industry where cynicism is embedded, he stood out for his kind, gracious and graceful approach. No one had a bad word to say about him, and that spoke volumes. In 2012 his book Celtic: A Biography in Nine Lives was published; he had written several others over the years, mainly about Scottish football and beginning with One Afternoon in Lisbon (co-written with Pat Woods in 1988) about Celtic’s European Cup glory in 1967. In 2012 he left the Guardian to return to Glasgow. Susan gave up her job and spent more and more of her time helping him as his health deteriorated. Season tickets at Partick Thistle and Celtic allowed for plenty of football to be watched, and there were trips, too, to Venice, their favourite city – but nothing like the time for travel that they had planned. He is survived by Susan and his brother, John. • Kevin James McCarra, journalist, born 1 February 1958; died 24 October 2020
5||The Guardian view on the social care crisis: fix a broken systemCoronavirus has yanked back the veil that had obscured the crisis in social care. The unfairness, confusion and humiliation felt by people using the system is out in plain sight. The public intuitively grasps that something needs to be done. When Boris Johnson arrived in Downing Street, he claimed to have a plan to fix a broken system. If a week is a long time in politics, then last July feels like an aeon ago. Mr Johnson’s plan has yet to appear. The worry is that it has been swallowed up by the gaping maw of the pandemic. That is why ministers should listen to the Commons health and social care committee. Last week MPs painted a picture, in England, of an underfunded system, stretched to breaking point, with a low-paid workforce who need more than clapping. The committee said, at a minimum, £7bn extra should be spent by 2023-24 on the system, with roughly 60% of the money used to cover demographic changes and lift pay in line with the national minimum wage. The rest of the cash would be used to introduce a cap on care costs to protect people against catastrophic bills, first suggested by the economist Sir Andrew Dilnot in 2011. This is an “oven-ready” plan. MPs have set aside policy differences to make the offer digestible for the Treasury. Select committees in both the Lords and the Commons had argued for introducing free personal care to help people with daily tasks such as bathing and dressing. Parliamentarians are now more muted in their support for this policy, aware the £5bn price tag would be too large for the chancellor to swallow. The state should be more generous because we are all living longer. The consequent higher demand for long-term care exposes more people to the “lottery” of the system. It is becoming harder to argue, on ethical grounds, that the NHS will treat long-term conditions such as cancer for free while dementia can cost a sufferer the family home or life savings. The system is plainly malfunctioning when the elderly occupy hospital beds because of a shortage of care places. The state is a crucial prop in the English social care system, providing private operators with a subsidy, via councils, that allows them to open their doors to rich and poor alike. Without adequate funding, local-authority-funded places in private care homes dry up. The upshot is, say experts, a growing divide: with only the very poorest and most incapacitated able to access council-funded beds in a shrinking number of care homes while affluent seniors buy spots in Florida-style retirement villages which come with private nursing care. Anger over such divisions may quickly turn into an electoral “grey-quake”. Ministers cannot say they haven’t been warned. Yet a government solution remains elusive. There is little consensus, especially in the ruling Conservative party, on how the “in year” cost of social care should be apportioned between its current and future beneficiaries. Some Tories think government intervention is unpopular and hanker for more market-led solutions. Yet there is already a social care precept on council tax and there has been no revolt in the shires. The state is best positioned to pool risks and insure people against the catastrophic costs because it is impossible to tell who will need long-term care in old age. Other modern democracies like Germany and Japan have introduced levies on older workers. A wealth duty might also be another way of meeting the cost of a national benefit. The select committee’s chair, Jeremy Hunt, was the longest-serving health secretary and the first ever health and social care secretary. In office he did win a significant increase to the NHS budget but he failed to do the same with social care. This was partly because, in the absence of a debate, social care taxes polled badly. But also because George Osborne, when chancellor, ducked the issue and Theresa May blew it up on the campaign trail. Mr Hunt, who lost the chance to lead the Tory party to Mr Johnson, has urged the government to keep its word and mend social care. No one would wish otherwise.
5||The Guardian view on plant-based food: nothing wrong with a veggie burgerThe European parliament has not always had the best press. A peripatetic assembly with a messy remit and a decidedly unenthused voter base has allowed critics to misrepresent, often lazily, its deliberations. Thus were myths such as the ban on bendy bananas born, and we all know where that led in 2016. But things are looking up in Brussels (or is it Strasbourg?) because the parliament has reached an eminently sensible decision in the great battle over whether plant-based products can be labelled as burgers, sausages, escalopes and steaks. On the surface this is a rather arcane debate, so it was remarkable how much coverage last Friday’s vote got in the British media, especially as we are no longer even part of the EU. It is odd that we are now taking a close interest in the parliament while for decades, as a member, we ignored it or mocked its portentous rulings. The parliament was addressing an attempt by the EU’s farmers to have terms such as burger and sausage banned when the contents were made of plant-based alternatives to meat. MEPs decisively rejected the move, delighting the environmental lobby, which argues that a switch away from meat is essential to make the food industry more sustainable. Green MEPs were dining out on veggie burgers on Friday evening, but this was not just a victory for environmentalism. It was really a triumph for logic. Yes, a sausage is usually made of meat, but it doesn’t have to be. The term is synonymous with shape rather than content. Glamorgan sausages, made of cheese, leeks and breadcrumbs, are a traditional Welsh delicacy, and no one challenges their appropriation of the term. Rice burgers are popular in Asia; vegan steaks are now part of the culinary landscape; and while the French would no doubt insist that an escalope should be made of veal, there is nothing inherently misleading about selling a vegan escalope made of Quorn as long as the ingredients are made clear. The terms usefully describe shape, texture and what the product is being substituted for. Farmers groups demanded that “veggie discs” and “veggie tubes” be used instead, but that would only sow confusion and needlessly reduce sales of plant-based products. MEPs seem to be inconsistent in matters of labelling. “Veggie burger” and “vegan sausage” have been allowed, but they have come down hard on dairy substitutes. The European parliament had already banned “almond milk” and “vegan cheese”, and has now extended that to “cheese-like” and “yoghurt-style”. But there is no inconsistency. Cheese, milk and yoghurt are specific products, not generic names. It is right to ban these for plant-based substitutes, just as a hard line should be taken on such oxymorons as meat-free meatballs. Consumers need protection from over-enthusiastic marketing. The two sides should call a truce. Neither the farmers nor the environmentalists have a monopoly of wisdom. Many an allegedly meaty sausage is decidedly lacking in meat, and plenty of plant-based products are heavily processed. Whether they are committed carnivores or vigorous vegans, consumers need to be encouraged to read the ingredients on packs to understand what they are eating and how their food has arrived on their plate. This is about nutrition, not politics.
6||Free school meals: the Tory MPs defending refusal to support campaignFollowing last week’s parliamentary vote against backing Marcus Rashford’s campaign to extend free school meals (FSM) over the holidays to stop children going hungry, the government has faced heavy criticism for refusing to support the footballer’s proposal. However, despite the growing backlash, some Conservatives have spoken in defence of ministers’ continuing refusal to perform a U-turn on the policy: Ben Bradley The Tory MP for Mansfield tweeted on Friday: “At one school in Mansfield 75% of kids have a social worker, 25% of parents are illiterate. Their estate is the centre of the area’s crime. One kid lives in a crack den, another in a brothel. These are the kids that most need our help, extending FSM doesn’t reach these kids.” Responding to a user who replied saying “£20 cash direct to a crack den and brothel really sounds like the way forward with this one”, Bradley tweeted: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did …” Following heavy criticism, Bradley subsequently deleted the tweets, claiming they had been taken out of context. Mark Jenkinson Defending his Conservative colleague after Bradley’s comments were seized on by Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, Workington MP Jenkinson tweeted on Friday: “I know in my constituency that, as tiny a minority as it might be, food parcels are sold or traded for drugs.” He added: “And that’s parcels, not vouchers – which have greater monetary value. As I said, a relatively minuscule number – but we can’t pretend it doesn’t happen. Pretending, to score political points, helps no one.” Paul Holmes The Tory MP for Eastleigh, in Hampshire, posted a statement on his website on Saturday in which he argued it was unfair to paint Wednesday’s vote as a choice between “feeding hungry children and not feeding hungry children”. He argued that “no child should go hungry”, highlighting the £9bn invested in the welfare system, mainly via universal credit, as well as the £63m hardship fund for local councils. But he also sought to point the finger at the opposition, adding: “The hardship that campaigners like Marcus Rashford experienced happened under a Labour government. Furthermore, the Labour party when in government in 2008 specifically rejected proposals to extend free school meals to children during holidays. “This is not a comment on the rights or wrongs of that decision. I highlight it because surely the level of need during the financial crisis was comparable to this pandemic but I didn’t see the same levels of outrage or abuse then as I do today. This includes threats to female colleagues of mine.” Danny Kruger The Tory MP for Devizes, in Wiltshire, wrote in his local paper, the Gazette &amp; Herald, on Sunday: “This is a really important and emotive topic and I understand why so many people are up in arms about it. Many families across the country are struggling to get by. Benefits provide hardly enough money to live on, and for some people they do not provide enough. “The problem is that generous, unconditional, universal benefit entitlements trap people in dependency on the state and rightly enrage people who are working hard for themselves. That’s why I believe in a more flexible, community-led approach to welfare.” Brandon Lewis The Northern Ireland secretary defended the government’s position on Sunday, telling The Andrew Marr Show that the situation had changed since the summer. He said: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed, so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.”
7||On the US campaign trail: 'We are watching democracy unfold'Lauren Gambino, political correspondent, Washington DC The political year really began for us in Des Moines, Iowa. What felt like every aspiring Democrat in the party was running for the party’s nomination – and then there was Joe Biden, the frontrunner right up until the games actually began. The Iowa caucuses are always a quirky affair: Iowans gather in gyms and churches to support and persuade others to join their candidate – but this year a disastrous and unprecedented reporting meltdown delayed the results for weeks, effectively nullifying the relevance of the whole byzantine affair. And just like that, the wildest campaign season in modern history was under way. Weeks later, Biden staged an incredible comeback to overtake Bernie Sanders, disappointing Republicans who hoped Democrats would nominate a democratic socialist. The primary was cut short by the arrival of the pandemic. Campaign events ground to a halt. Biden’s headquarters moved from Philadelphia to his basement, where his campaign set up a TV studio. The Trump show began, with the president leading extraordinary briefings on coronavirus, during which he famously suggested disinfectants as a potential cure. (He insists it was a joke.) I was one of just a handful of reporters in Wilmington, Delaware, to see Biden deliver his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention. There was no audience, just us. The fireworks display afterwards was a brief reminder of what it used to feel like to be on the campaign trail – but those moments were few and far between. Now I cover the presidential debates from my living room and only travel with Biden when it’s our turn as part of a pool of reporters who follows the candidate. Protests against racial injustice, the death of supreme court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Trump’s coronavirus diagnosis have all threatened to upend the presidential race and yet they haven’t. With days left before the election, Biden continues to hold an advantage over Trump, despite all that has happened over the last 10 months. Whether Trump can again pull off a stunning upset remains to be seen. Four years ago, I waited for Hillary Clinton at the glass-ceilinged Javits Center in New York, surrounded by women and girls in pant suits. (She ultimately never came.) This year, I may be covering the end of this wild election from a hotel room in Wilmington – or, very possibly, my couch. Oliver Laughland, southern bureau chief, New Orleans Covering this election has been one of the most challenging assignments of my career. And it’s not just because I am driving thousands of miles during the pandemic to visit swing states around the country. Presenting our Anywhere But Washington series, with film-maker Tom Silverstone, has been an eye-opening experience taking me to some of the most fascinating but deeply fractured communities in America. From the bitter fight to win the suburbs of Dallas to the retirement communities of central Florida, where political golf-cart rallies often turn nasty, the divisiveness of the Trump era has been plain to see. Pervasive disinformation has also been a disturbing factor in most of our video dispatches. In Georgia I watched first-hand as voting rights activists battled against QAnon conspiracy theories taking root among some voters, and I interviewed a Republican congressional candidate who stormed out as I asked her about the misinformation she was pushing as part of her campaign. But the consequences of Donald Trump’s war on facts were most poignant when I visited the old offices of the Vindicator newspaper in Youngstown, Ohio, which closed in 2019, making the city the largest in America now without a daily paper. It’s a region that Trump promised to deliver for, and there is now almost no one holding him accountable for his failures there. But in every community I’ve gone to, the enthusiasm and passion for politics has been just as evident. Take Ebony Carter, a 25-year-old first-time candidate running in a rural Georgia seat that Democrats have not contested in six years. She’s out canvassing with her de facto campaign manager – her mum – knocking on every door in her area in a bid to flip the district. “Why am I doing this?” she said during a day of campaigning. “Because somebody has to.” Kenya Evelyn, breaking news reporter The presidential race underscores that “Representation Matters” isn’t some meaningless mantra. Rather, it reflects the urgency to authentically capture the pulse of the people most affected by policy. Black Americans are disproportionately affected by three national crises – a coronavirus pandemic, recession, and racial uprising – yet are still most often the people left out of policy, the communities excluded from news coverage, and the perspectives that are most easily stereotyped and overgeneralised. But Black and brown voters are stepping forward to hold parties and politicians – and anyone else who conflates proximity to a community with being for and of that community – more accountable to their vote. As a member of America’s most reliable voting bloc – Black women – I hope to have captured that demand for African American agency with our Black Voting Power series, highlighting the Black men and women at the forefront of the fight for voting rights and calls for institutional change. We’ve reached the point in the 2020 race when everyone from reporters and pundits to politicos now parachutes in to these same neglected communities. But if this election cycle shows us anything, it’s that proximity to a community doesn’t guarantee a commitment to it, and that call for change will ring out well past election day. Ankita Rao, voting rights editor When we launched our voting rights project, The Fight to Vote, last year, the obstacles facing voters already seemed menacing. A supreme court ruling in 2013 had opened the door for states with deeply entrenched racism to enact new policies around elections without checks and balances. Thousands of polling stations closed, often in majority-Black areas, new voter ID laws introduced confusing restrictions, and voter intimidation was rampant. In 2016, when Donald Trump was elected, the impact of these voter suppression tactics were clear. Then 2020 happened, and with it the pandemic and economic devastation. Suddenly the question was not just will all voters have equal access to voting, but will the country be able to pull off an election at all? Congress fought over money for local officials , leaving the presidential election thoroughly underfunded. Trump railed at mail-in voting, one of the few safe ways to vote as Covid-19 cases continued to rise across the country. Voters scrambled to register in states such as Texas where online registration still isn’t allowed. When the election officially started a few weeks ago, with mail-in voting and early voting starting across the country, we were ready for anything. We mapped out scenarios where Trump refused to concede, and where Democrats unleashed an army of lawyers to make sure each vote was counted. We launched a tracker to count mail-in ballots in battleground states, in an attempt to locate and analyse how ballots were being sent, accepted, rejected and counted. We enumerated the active court cases that will decide when and how votes are counted – cases still going on with just days until 3 November. And we prepared ourselves, and our readers, for a reality in which we would not know who the new president was on election day. We are watching democracy unfold in front of our eyes, despite every effort to stop it. A record number of Americans have voted early, most of them Democrats, in an effort to safeguard their choice and their health. States such as Texas, where politicians have tried to make it as difficult to vote as possible, are seeing record turnout, with new voters casting ballots for the first time. Does this mean the people’s will has succeeded over voter suppression? Definitely not. But after months of scrutinising an election process that’s often taken for granted, it’s a sign that our country values the right to vote above all, and will fight to protect it.
8||Lawyers call for apology from Johnson and Patel for endangering colleaguesThe UK prime minister and the home secretary are accused of endangering the personal safety of lawyers through their abusive attacks on the profession and should apologise, more than 800 former judges and senior legal figures have said in a letter sent to the Guardian. Boris Johnson and Priti Patel are additionally accused in the letter of displaying “hostility” towards lawyers, undermining the rule of law and effectively risking the lives of those working in the justice system. The signatories include three former justices of the UK supreme court, five retired appeal court judges, three former high court judges, the lawyer heads of four Oxford University colleges, more than 80 QCs, 69 law professors from leading English universities, the directors of Liberty and Justice, as well as hundreds of law firm partners, barristers and solicitors. The letter is the largest coordinated response so far to increasingly vehement rhetorical attacks on the legal profession by the two Conservative politicians. In August, the Home Office published a video on Twitter blaming “activist lawyers” for frustrating the department’s efforts to deport people with no right to remain in the UK. The video was later withdrawn. Earlier this month, at the Conservative party conference, Patel broadened her targets, claiming that among those defending the “indefensible” and “broken” immigration appeals system were “do-gooders, lefty lawyers, the Labour party”. In his conference speech, Johnson went further, declaring he would prevent “the whole criminal justice system from being hamstrung by what the home secretary would doubtless – and rightly – call the lefty human rights lawyers, and other do-gooders”. Last week, a man appeared in court charged with carrying out a racist attack on a firm of immigration lawyers in London. Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow, faces six charges including preparing an act of terrorism. He has not yet entered a plea. The roll call of signatures protesting against the vilification of lawyers represents an extraordinary host of prominent legal experts united in a common purpose. Among the former judges are Lords Collins, Dyson and Walker, who recently left the supreme court, as well as onetime appeal court judges Sir Richard Buxton, Sir Anthony Hooper, Sir David Keene, Sir Alan Moses and Sir Stephen Sedley. The letter states: “We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. “Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law, which ministers and lawyers alike are duty-bound to uphold. “We invite both the home secretary and the Prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future.” In support of the letter, former director of public prosecutions Lord Macdonald QC said: “The home secretary may not grasp the indecency of her language, but the prime minister should know better. “Lawyers who represent demonised people are always attacked by populist politicians, but it is demeaning to our country and its institutions that the government itself is now dipping into this disreputable playbook. “It is precisely this sort of ugly authoritarianism that the rule of law is called upon to counter. The entire legal profession is proud of those lawyers who are being so crudely and dangerously vilified.” The former supreme court justice Lord Dyson told the Guardian: “What’s worrying is the inflammatory language used by the home secretary and supported by the prime minister. It was irresponsible and dangerous and quite unjustified to use inflammatory language of the sort. The language is almost the language of a demagogue. “We all now what happens when people in high places and in power resort to language of that kind … They are whipping up emotions without justification. It’s dangerous.” Dinah Rose QC, the president of Magdalen College, University of Oxford, said: “The people at the heart of government whose role it is to ensure that the legal system and the rule of law are respected have either decided to remain silent or their voices are not being listened to. “Where lawyers are abusing the system, they deserve to be criticised, but the problem is that the government’s attack is on any lawyer who is using the system to represent their clients. There’s an attempt to whip up hatred against lawyers for simply doing their job.” In a judgment last week upholding the right for migrants to have access to lawyers, the lord chief justice, Lord Burnett of Maldon, also stated: “It is a matter of regret that a minority of lawyers have lent their professional weight and support to vexatious representations and abusive late [immigration] legal challenges.” A government spokesperson said: “The government rejects the underlying insinuation in this letter and is clear any form of violence is unacceptable. Lawyers play an important role in upholding the law and ensuring people have access to justice. They are however not immune from criticism.”
1||A political populism far removed from Donald TrumpAndy Beckett presents an entirely negative picture of populism (This is a moment of truth for rightwing populists – but don’t celebrate yet, 23 October). There are many unfortunate examples in our present age of how destructive populist movements can be. However, he appears unaware of earlier and more positive episodes of populism, in particular the founding of the People’s party in 1891 in the US. This became a significant political party, gaining 8% of the popular vote when it fielded a candidate in the 1892 presidential election. The origins of the People’s party, also known as the Populist party, lay in the exploitation of sharecroppers and tenant farmers by business monopolies and the banking elite. These agrarian workers had been plunged into debt, after taking on loans to fund investments in new farming equipment, when they were hit by droughts and falling crop prices, together with extortionate loan terms and interest rates. The Populist party agitated for massive political reforms, which included the recognition of unions, regulation of the railway industry, the direct election of senators, progressive income tax, and women’s suffrage. These ideas were considered radical at the time, and still are! The current problem with populism is that most of it is not genuine, but is either generated by cynical groups with a hidden interest, or is hijacked by unscrupulous politicians for ulterior purposes. However, there still are populist movements that serve a higher purpose. Be careful not to diss populism per se, as it has a distinguished pedigree. It is the pseudo-populists who need to be challenged and brought to heel. Dr Stephen Blomfield Sheffield • Andy Beckett’s piece on populism was a brilliant discussion of one of the most pressing questions of our time. I only have one small quibble. He says we should remember that populists do sometimes “get re-elected”. But that’s not the point. Populism is democracy’s ugly sister. It flourishes when the primordial democratic promise of political equality is negated by a dysfunctional political system. The answer is the maximum possible diffusion of power. It’s not an accident that federal systems are less likely to be infected by the populist virus than centralised ones. A radical overhaul of our dysfunctional political system is the only way out of the populist trap. David Marquand Penarth, South Glamorgan • I disagree that the “predictable and cautious politics” of the 1990s and 2000s provoked an outburst of populism. It was because these political periods were unstable that there was a backlash. The administrations of John Major and Tony Blair produced boom and bust, two massive recessions with widespread unemployment and widening inequality. The Blair government was still essentially Thatcherite even though it tried to fiddle around the edges to make things a bit better for the least affluent. The inevitable crunch came in 2007 precisely because banking and housing remained unreformed. Then came David Cameron, George Osborne and austerity. Populism is the muddled reaction against 40 years of Thatcherism. David Redshaw Gravesend, Kent • David Runciman highlights the need for politicians with experience and judgment when faced with a crisis like the Covid-19 pandemic (Boris Johnson is learning that in politics you cannot simply ‘follow the science’, 24 October). The problem is that our pluralist democratic system is not designed to produce politicians with the wisdom and practical experience to use facts in a relevant way, but only ones that can gain resonance at the ballot box. Both Boris Johnson and Donald Trump exemplify the deficiency. Derek Heptinstall Westgate-on-Sea, Kent
3||Feeling the heat over Arctic sea iceThe delayed freeze in the Laptev Sea is consistent with the entire Arctic Ocean, which is set for the slowest recovery in the extent of sea ice this autumn, if the current daily trend continues (Alarm as Arctic sea ice not yet freezing at latest date on record, 22 October). This follows on from this summer having the second lowest minimum since 1979, with the early decades significantly above the annual trends during the last few years. Other feedback mechanisms are now starting to take hold of global heating, as current atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations are well beyond the normal Quaternary levels over the last 800,000 years – usually 170 to 280 parts per million, between ice age maximums and interglacial stages, compared with a still accelerating anthropogenic 410 ppm, coupled with the impact from a significant rise in methane and other warming gases. This is why mitigation policies are all we have left. Extinction Rebellion would be better off insulating homes, running public transport cooperatives and campaigning for major economic reforms to pay for this. Starting with taxing carbon intensity, abolishing non-dom tax status and establishing an overseas tax liability for British citizens like the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) does for US citizens wherever they are living. Even in Monaco where too many of our honoured tax exiles live. David Nowell Fellow of the Geological Society, New Barnet, Hertfordshire • Late Arctic ice formation should surprise nobody. Rising temperatures melt ice so less solar energy is reflected and darker surfaces absorb more heat. Trapped greenhouse gases escape, causing more warming and more ice to melt while fires and dying vegetation worsen matters further. Even if net emissions from human activities somehow became negligible, this positive feedback will accelerate heating. Many ideas essential to combat expected heating would make sense even if temperatures were static, fell or if a major food crop failed. Examples include restoring fish stocks, less waste, alternatives to fossil fuels, silviculture, regenerative agriculture and combining conservation with careful use. Instead if adopting such win-win policies, decades have been wasted bickering about who was right. Future generations will find this very difficult to forgive. Iain Climie Whitchurch, Hampshire
9||Ministers must end their attacks on lawyersThe undersigned are practising barristers (some working for central and local government), solicitors, legal academics and retired judges. We are all deeply concerned at recent attacks, made by the home secretary and echoed by the prime minister, on lawyers seeking to hold the government to the law. Such attacks endanger not only the personal safety of lawyers and others working for the justice system, as has recently been vividly seen; they undermine the rule of law which ministers and lawyers alike are duty bound to uphold. We invite both the home secretary and the prime minister to behave honourably by apologising for their display of hostility, and to refrain from such attacks in the future. Lawrence Collins Retired justice of the supreme court, John Dyson Retired justice of the supreme court and former master of the rolls, Robert Walker Retired justice of the supreme court, Richard Buxton Retired lord justice of appeal, Anthony Hooper Retired lord justice of appeal, David Keene Retired lord justice of appeal, Alan Moses Retired lord justice of appeal, Stephen Sedley Retired lord justice of appeal, Theodore Huckle Former counsel general for Wales, Ken Macdonald Former director of public prosecutions, and warden of Wadham College, University of Oxford, Helen Mountfield Principal of Mansfield College, University of Oxford and 791 others
8||Is Rishi Sunak just Osborne in disguise?Reviewing Exit Management by Naomi Booth, Nina Allan writes: “In a genre … traditionally … dominated by men, it is particularly gratifying to read a London novel written by a woman” (Review, 23 October). Has she never heard of Maureen Duffy’s London novels, or, in this century, Zadie Smith and the late Andrea Levy? John Wilson London • I was delighted to read that “guising” is still practised in Scotland (Be ready for digital Christmas, says Scotland’s public health adviser, 22 October), but it is not entirely synonymous with trick or treat. Guising traditionally involved some effort by the participants, eg singing a song or telling jokes, rather than just turning up – an approach that would doubtless win the approval of many government ministers today. Elaine Rowland Chester • It’s a bit rich for Bernard Jenkin, a member of the party that frequently accuses its opponents of political opportunism, to say they have “misunderstood the mood of the country” re free school meals (Report, 25 October). Where is Charles Dickens when we need him? David Marcer Gloucester • Is it just me? If I close my eyes when Rishi Sunak is speaking, I hear the voice of ex-chancellor George Osborne. Derek Beaumont Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire • Re Durham student experiences (Letters, 21 October), when I was there in the 70s at a formal dinner, I cut off the nose of the cheese. The way they all started harrumphing, you’d have thought I’d said: “Bollocks to the Queen.” Ian Garner Keighley, West Yorkshire
6||Scores of councils in England activate half-term food schemesMore councils in England are offering food support for struggling families over the half-term holiday amid public discomfort over the government’s refusal to offer help and growing support for the footballer Marcus Rashford’s campaign At least 78 councils had announced by Sunday evening that they would be activating half-term food schemes, either by offering food vouchers or providing extra financial and logistical support to local food banks and charities. The majority of councils offering help were Labour-run, including Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham, Newcastle, Bristol, Leeds and a number of London boroughs, with a small but growing number of Conservative-run councils breaking ranks over the issue. Tory-run Staffordshire county council, which covers the education secretary Gavin Williamson’s South Staffordshire constituency, said it would provide half-term help to up to 18,000 children, joining Hillingdon – in Boris Johnson’s constituency – Medway, and Kensington &amp; Chelsea, all Conservative-run. Staffordshire’s cabinet member for children and young people, Mark Sutton, said: “We know that times are hard for many families at the moment, with increased pressures on household budgets, so we wanted to help those in greater need to ensure that children can get a decent meal through the holiday.” However, a handful of Conservative-run councils said they would not be offering any help over half-term beyond any existing local safety net schemes either because they did not have the money or because it was not their role to provide food support. Walsall council’s Tory leader, Mike Bird, said: “Unfortunately, I have to be the gatekeeper for Walsall council because we have not got the money … When you keep going to a well and taking water it will run dry.” Jonathan Nunn, Tory leader of Northampton council, said: “We’ve considered it as a council but the costs would be prohibitive for the council to fund it… We don’t currently have a plan to lobby the government so that will probably stay as it is. We’re happy for others to step in and help those who need that help.” Others appeared ideologically opposed to the council stepping in. Responding on Friday on Twitter to a resident who said it was shameful for the government to pay consultants £7,000 a day but not feed poor children, the Tory leader of Rushmoor council, David Clifford, replied: “The shame is the day government rather than parents feed their children – if I were in need I would go to our food bank – it works extremely well and not run by government.” The issue appeared to be dividing municipal Conservatives: opposition councillors in Sutton urged the Liberal Democrat-controlled council to provide meals over half-term for children who received them at school, and the Conservative party branch in North Tyneside praising its local Labour-run council for taking similar action. Conservative-run Hampshire county council said that although it oversaw schools and children’s services, responsibility for helping families in hardship over half-term was the responsibility of district councils in its area. Tory-run Kent also said it would not offer extra support. Wandsworth, which is Conservative-controlled, was questioned by a local charity for restricting its half-term help package to children receiving social work support. Wandsworth food bank tweeted: “So far this scheme only helps children with a social worker. It doesn’t help all the 5,700+ Wandsworth children who receive free school meals.”
3||Belarus 'people’s ultimatum' protest met with violent crackdownBelarusian riot police launched another violent crackdown in Minsk on Sunday evening, throwing stun grenades into crowds of peaceful protesters, chasing people through courtyards and making arrests as they attempted to curtail the 11th consecutive Sunday of protest in the country. At least 100,000 people marched through the centre of the Belarusian capital earlier in the day to give what they called a “people’s ultimatum” to Alexander Lukashenko: step down, or face a nationwide strike that could cripple the economy. Long columns of protesters, wrapped in the red-white traditional Belarusian flag that has become the symbol of the protests, streamed through the city centre, shouting “resign!” and “strike!” As usual, authorities cut off mobile internet across central Minsk, closed metro stations and placed cordons of riot police at key sites. Military and riot control vehicles were positioned throughout the centre and officers in balaclavas and wielding shields stood at almost every intersection, but they did not attack the crowds until the evening. The current wave of discontent was prompted by Lukashenko declaring an overwhelming victory in August presidential elections that were widely believed to be rigged, and then cracking down ruthlessly on those who came out to protest. In the first big rallies in August in response to the crackdown, euphoria and disbelief combined to create a heady excitement that Lukashenko’s days were surely numbered. The authoritarian leader, who has been in charge for 26 years, has since made it clear he does not intend to give up power without a fight. A number of opposition leaders have been forced out of the country or arrested over the past two months, and authorities have threatened to use live ammunition on protesters.The crowds on Sunday were still largely buoyant though, with several bands of drummers providing a thudding musical accompaniment and many people flashing victory signs. Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, who stood against Lukashenko after her husband was imprisoned, was able to act as a lightning rod for protest voters but was forced to flee to neighbouring Lithuania the day after the vote, having been given just 10% in the official tally. Tikhanovskaya has declared herself the legitimately elected leader from Vilnius, and has said she wants to oversee a transition period before arranging a new, free election. “Today at 23:59 the term of the people’s ultimatum will expire, and if the demands are not met, Belarusians will start a national strike,” she said in statement on Sunday. Few in Minsk expect the strike to be successful, however. Strikes in August and September drew some support from workers at big factories but were soon crushed. “I support the strike, but of course I’ll still go to work,” said Sergei, a 29-year-old sales assistant who was draped in a red-and-white flag at the protest on Sunday. “We need to get rid of Lukashenko, but I also need to keep my income.” Whether or not the strike is a success, it is clear that Lukashenko has lost legitimacy among huge swaths of the population, and he appears to have little chance of regaining it. A counter-rally in central Minsk in his support was planned for Sunday but called off late in the week, ostensibly to avoid the risk of clashes with the opposition protesters. Most people felt the real reason was a fear that embarrassingly few people would show up. Lukashenko does retain the loyalty of his security forces, however, and if the strike does not work, the question will be whether the protest movement, which has so far remained almost entirely peaceful, will radicalise or whether it will die down as a result of fatigue and the onset of winter. The renewed violence from authorities on Sunday evening may serve to galvanise the weary protest movement again. The incumbent president has promised, alongside the threats, to launch a constitutional reform process. He even paid a visit to the KGB prison in Minsk this month for so-called negotiations with political prisoners in an attempt to win over part of the opposition. Many have dismissed the initiative as too little too late, but how events will play out remains uncertain. “It’s impossible to predict what will happen in a few months. We don’t know what will happen with the economy, we don’t know where Russia will stand, and we don’t know how far Lukashenko will go with concessions,” said the Minsk-based political analyst Artyom Shraibman. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, called Lukashenko on Saturday, one of the only conversations the Belarusian leader has had with a western politician since his controversial re-election. According to a description of the call published by Lukashenko’s team, the two men discussed “the internal political situations in both Belarus and the US”. The EU has placed sanctions on many in the Belarusian regime since the protests began, and Lukashenko has turned to Vladimir Putin for support. The Russian president is known to dislike Lukashenko but appears to have decided that propping him up is better than allowing a change of power to come from the street. The head of Russia’s spy agency, Sergei Naryshkin, flew to Minsk last week in one of many high-profile Russian visits.
10||Norman Thrower obituaryMy father-in-law, Norman Thrower, who has died aged 100, was professor emeritus in the department of geography at the University of California, Los Angeles. From relatively humble beginnings, Norman became one of the world’s most famous cartographers. In 1957, Norman joined the geography department at UCLA, where he authored, co-authored and edited 11 books, and more than 150 other contributions on cartography and associated geographical discoveries. He served his profession, UCLA and the state of California in many capacities, including as president of the Sir Francis Drake Commission (1975-81), which organised celebrations for the quadricentennial of Drake’s landing in California in 1579. Born in Crowthorne, Berkshire, to Daisy (nee Bayley) and Gordon Thrower, a chef at Broadmoor psychiatric hospital, Norman failed his 11-plus and did not go to secondary school. After winning drawing competitions and attending art school at the University of Reading, he joined the British army aged 21. His artillery division was redeployed to India, where he trained as a cartographer at the Survey of India to draw topographic maps in support of the war effort in Europe. The maps were based on aerial photographs taken over Europe then flown to India, with the return flights bringing back the completed maps. This covered the period of Operation Crossbow, one of the goals of which was to identify V-1 launch ramps using binocular imaging, including in northern France before D-day. The experience played a crucial part in Norman’s post-military career and the development of new mapping techniques introduced in his PhD for illustrating the three-dimensionality of the surface. Norman first met Betty Martin, an officer in the US Army Nurse Corps, in 1945 when her boat docked in London, though they had been pen pals for a number of years. Norman and Betty married in 1947 and, later that year, arrived in Charlottesville, Virginia, living in veterans’ housing while Norman did a BSc and an MSc in geography at the University of Virginia, where he was influenced by Erwin Raisz, an internationally renowned cartographer. With their first two daughters, they then moved to the University of Wisconsin, Madison, where Norman gained his PhD. A final move, to California in 1957, saw the birth of their third daughter. His best known book is Maps and Man (1972), now Maps and Civilization: Cartography in Culture and Society (1999). Later works focused on advances in 17th- and 18th-century cartography by Edmund Halley and Samuel Pepys. And, finally, an editing of A Buccaneer’s Atlas: Basil Ringrose’s South Seas Waggoner, with Derek Howse (1992), a compilation of captured maps of Spain’s Pacific ports whose value to the British crown saved many buccaneers from hanging. Betty died in 1997. Norman is survived by his daughters, Page, Anne and Mary, and five grandchildren.
3||Hopes rise for approval of coronavirus vaccine by end of this yearHopes are rising that a coronavirus vaccine will be approved by the end of the year, with healthcare workers receiving their first dose in early 2021. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US’s leading expert in infectious diseases, said on Sunday it should be known by the end of November or early December if a vaccine was safe and effective. The Irish government added to the growing optimism that a vaccine would soon be available. “I’m increasingly optimistic, as is government, that we will see a vaccine approved in the next couple of months and that in the first half or first quarter of next year it’ll be possible to start vaccinating those most at risk,” Leo Varadkar, Ireland’s deputy prime minister, who is also a doctor, told RTE radio on Sunday. Fauci’s remarks came after a report that the NHS in the UK is preparing to start immunising frontline staff with a vaccine within weeks. The Mail on Sunday published a memo by Glen Burley, the chief executive of a group of hospitals in the Midlands, in which he said NHS care providers had been told to be prepared to start a Covid-19 staff vaccine programme in early December. “The latest intelligence states a coronavirus vaccine should be available this year with NHS staff prioritised prior to Christmas,” according to Burley’s message, which was sent earlier this month, the paper reported. However, well-placed NHS sources said that, while hospitals were preparing plans to help roll out any vaccine that is approved, the timescale Burley set out is premature and overly ambitious. “There is no progress at all [on when a vaccine will arrive], no date, no national steer [from NHS England bosses] and only frustration,” said a senior official at one of the major NHS trusts that has been handed a key role in the drive to distribute whichever vaccine is the first to be approved. Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, told MPs and peers that a vaccine would not be available in the UK until the spring. Fauci was asked on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show if Donald Trump’s claims that a Covid-19 vaccine, while not a guarantee, would be coming by the end of the year were true. “We will know whether a vaccine is safe and effective by the end of November, the beginning of December,” he replied. “The question is, once you have a safe and effective vaccine, or more than one, how can you get it to the people who need it as quickly as possible? “The amount of doses that will be available in December will not certainly be enough to vaccinate everybody. You’ll have to wait several months into 2021.” Healthcare workers are likely to be given priority access to any vaccine, as well as people whose underlying health means they are considered at increased risk of complications if they get Covid-19. “That could start by the end of this year, the beginning of January, February, March of next year. When you talk about vaccinating a substantial proportion of the population, so that you can have a significant impact on the dynamics of the outbreak, that very likely will not be in to the second or third quarter”, Fauci added. A vaccine being developed between scientists and doctors at Oxford University and the drug company AztraZeneca, which is in phase 3 trials, is considered the likeliest candidate to be used first. On Friday, Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, set out a similar timetable to that of Fauci and Varadkar. A vaccine could be available in early 2021, with enough supplies being produced to let many Germans be immunised within six or seven months, he said. Germany’s health ministry plans to create 60 special vaccination centres to ensure the vaccines can be stored at the proper temperature and has asked the country’s 16 federal states to provide addresses for the storage premises by 10 November, the newspaper Bild reported.
11||Ewart Hood obituaryMy father, Ewart Hood, who has died aged 71, was an NHS psychologist and a kind and quietly brilliant man. The son of the Rev John Hood, a Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Peggy (nee Ewart), he was born in Edinburgh and brought up in Perthshire with his brother, Allan. He attended Morrison’s academy in Crieff before studying psychology at Edinburgh University, graduating in 1971. He qualified as a clinical psychologist at the University of Birmingham in 1973. He went on to practise first at Stanley Royd hospital, in Wakefield, where he met his future wife, Denise Robinson, another psychologist. They married in 1979. Ewart was an early advocate of supporting people with mental health problems to live in the community, rather than in institutions. He was never afraid to speak up against injustice - including blowing the whistle about poor practice he witnessed early in his career. In 1978 he moved to Llanederyn health centre, Cardiff, to be senior clinical psychologist in a new practice and one of the first of its kind, based within the general practice department of Cardiff University Medical School. In the 1980s Ewart and Denise, now with two children, moved to Newcastle where Ewart worked part time while caring for us, and my mother went back to work full-time. He worked at St Nicholas (psychiatric) hospital, then as a senior clinical psychologist at the Newcastle district psychology department, working with outpatients from and within GP practices in the west end of Newcastle. Later he became a consultant clinical psychologist at Freeman hospital, Newcastle. He disliked formal teaching but was a popular supervisor on the Newcastle doctorate course for clinical psychology from 1990 to 2004. He was never too busy to take on a trainee. His clients in Newcastle included refugees from conflict in Rwanda and the Congo. When they were too afraid to use an interpreter, he would switch into French. Ewart loved music. As a young child, he learned to play the church organ, sometimes standing in for the organist at Sunday services. As an adult, he played the piano and guitar and sang in the university choir, the Newcastle Anti-Apartheid choir and later the North East Socialist Singers. Ewart retired in 2004. He learned to upholster and to bake bread, as well as taking long-distance cycling trips, tending an allotment and supporting his family. He is survived by Denise and by his children, Peter and me, and by three grandchildren, Elsa, Naomi and Bill, and Allan.
12||Letter: Deirdre Le Faye obituaryIt might encourage some readers to know that Deirdre Le Faye’s great achievement in the field of Jane Austen studies was achieved despite the fact that she had to leave school at 16, her family not being able to afford any higher education, and that she had to earn a living with a full-time job as a British Museum administrator. More daunting is the fact that she had a photographic memory and powers of total recall. She once told me she had reviewed a book by an American scholar and noted more than 200 factual errors. Before she turned to Jane Austen, Deirdre Le Faye did major research work on early child-rearing practices for Hugh Jolly, the paediatrician. Sadly he died before he was able to write it up, as did his doctor wife. So there is a valuable cache of clearly annotated and referenced material ready for a medical historian to write a valuable book on the subject. I can direct them to the material.
12||Forward poetry prize goes to ‘audacious, erotically charged’ The Air YearBritish poets have won all of this year’s Forward prizes for poetry, with Caroline Bird’s “audacious and erotically charged” The Air Year taking best collection, Will Harris’s RENDANG winning best debut, and Malika Booker winning for best single poem. Bird’s sixth collection The Air Year, named for the first 12 months of a relationship before the “paper” anniversary, was announced as the winner of the £10,000 prize in an online ceremony Sunday afternoon. A playwright, and published poet since the age of 15, Bird saw off competition from the acclaimed Native American-Latinx Natalie Diaz and the award-winning Pascale Petit. “It hasn’t sunk in yet, it is very weird,” Bird said of her win. “Obviously, it feels amazing. But it is also unsettling, as I write poetry imagining no one will ever read it. I read it now and I find it quite upsetting, even though some of the poems are funny and lively. You wouldn’t want to watch a video of yourself in distress, and it feels like that. But I guess that is a good sign in some ways, that I don’t want to ever read it again.” Chair of judges, the critic and cultural historian Alexandra Harris described Bird’s poems as “trapeze ropes made with words, swinging us up and out into the unknown”. “A lot of contemporary writing demands sympathy in a rather worthy fashion. She won’t do that,” she added. “The Air Year is the opposite of sentimental, it is brimming with humour.” Written in “a time of complete uncertainty” in her life, Bird set herself the challenge of writing poems starting from a single opening line that she would not change, leading to humorous and often melancholic poems that begin “Nancy found an entire torpedo in the forest”, in Nancy and the Torpedo, or “The 18th-century bawd who sells her daughter’s / virginity / to an Earl. The tired CIA operative who says ‘just do / it’ / and half a village dies”, in her poem about endings, The Final Episode. “At that time in my life, I felt like a cartoon character running in mid-air, only not falling because I hadn’t looked down. Romantically, emotionally, mentally, I did not know what I was doing or where I was going, in all areas of my life. And the poems, as they came out, seemed to want me to land safely,” Bird said. One of the most acclaimed debuts in recent years, Will Harris won the £5,000 Felix Dennis prize for best first collection with RENDANG, which explores his Chinese-Indonesian and British heritage, family ties, language and borders. RENDANG was praised by judges as containing “acute intelligence and mobile grace”. Previous nominee Booker, co-founder of the influencial collective Malika’s Poetry Kitchen, won the £1,000 prize for best single poem with The Little Miracles, documenting her experience of caring for her mother in the aftermath of a stroke: “Since I found mother collapsed on the kitchen / floor, we siblings have become blindfolded mules / harnessed to carts filled with strain, lumbering / through a relentless storm.” Booker had previously refused to write about her mother’s illness but was moved by medical research to “be more present during [visits] with my mother, scrutinising our time together by tuning in as a daughter, which has led to more meaningful and precious interactions, culminating in this poem of witness capturing the reality of my family’s emotional upheaval.” Judges praised The Little Miracles for its “warmth, frustration and humour”. The three poets were selected from 205 collections and 208 single poems submitted. “What we were looking for in the end were collections that could keep growing as the world changed,” said Alexandra Harris. “The best poetry we were reading found ways to connect the unknowable with the ordinary.” Past winners of the Forward prizes include three of the UK’s poet laureates – Carol Ann Duffy, Simon Armitage and Ted Hughes – as well as Seamus Heaney and Claudia Rankine.
2||Tao Geoghegan Hart's shock Giro d'Italia win 'the stuff of comic books'Tao Geoghegan Hart has spoken of the “bizarre” feeling of becoming the fifth Briton to win a Grand Tour with victory in the Giro d’Italia for Team Ineos Grenadiers, whose general manager hailed the win “the stuff of comic books”. The 25-year-old pulled on the pink jersey for the first time on the final podium in Milan after a dramatic closing weekend of the race, which saw he and Team Sunweb’s Jai Hindley – two riders not considered contenders at the outset – starting the last stage level on time, an unprecedented situation in a Grand Tour. Speaking to Eurosport after his victory, Geoghegan Hart said: “It’s bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. “I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is something completely different to that and I think it’s going to take a long time to sink in. “My DS [directeur sportif] told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point.” Hindley, who finished 39 seconds back in second, said: “Of course it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super-proud of the team and how I rode. “It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three weeks I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race to be honest. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies.” Ineos general manager Sir Dave Brailsford spoke of the way Geoghegan Hart’s situation in the team changed following Geraint Thomas’s enforced withdrawal after stage three following a heavy crash: “He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being: ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said: ‘I can do this.’ “The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really. Geoghegan Hart was ahead of Hindley at every time check throughout the final 15.7km time trial, clocking a time of 18 min 19.40secs to confirm his remarkable win. Asked about his future following such a high-profile victory, he said: “I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. “I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated, wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races.” Geoghegan Hart follows Sir Bradley Wiggins, Chris Froome, Thomas and Simon Yates in winning one of the big three stage races on the calendar, delivering Britain’s 11th Grand Tour victory since Wiggins won the Tour de France in 2012, and second in the Giro after Froome won in 2018. Hindley’s Sunweb teammate Wilco Kelderman rounded off the podium, finishing 1min 29sec behind the victor.
2||GB's Tao Geoghegan Hart sensationally claims Giro d'Italia glory after time trialIn the end, Tao Geoghegan Hart’s 39-second victory in the Giro d’Italia ahead of the overnight leader, Australian Jai Hindley, was not the tightest the race has ever seen. That honour remains with the Canadian Ryder Hesjedal’s win by 16sec in 2012. But none of the three Grand Tours has ever gone into its final day so tightly poised, with less than a second dividing Hindley and Geoghegan Hart as they prepared to start Sunday’s brief closing time trial into Milan, after more than 85 hours and over 2,000 miles of racing. On paper, Geoghegan Hart was expected to have the upper hand, and so it proved over the pancake flat course through the Milanese suburbs to the majestic Piazzo Duomo. The 25-year-old Londoner gained time gradually but inexorably on the diminutive Australian, visibly churning a far larger gear as Hindley opted to pedal a smaller ratio with a higher cadence but less power. At the only time check with five kilometres remaining the Londoner had a 22sec lead, meaning the race would be won if he avoided a crash or a puncture. After he negotiated the final corner on slippery wet cobblestones with the utmost care, he became the first rider ever to win the Giro without having worn the pink jersey until the end of the final stage. “My directeur sportif said I was 10sec up and he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew that we were in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the final kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down in a 15km time trial.” Hindley had started 3min after Geoghegan Hart, rode the final kilometre with the look of a man who knew he had lost but when the race had left Palermo 22 days earlier, neither he nor his nemesis had expected to end the race with overall victory in their sights. Geoghegan Hart made his own luck in the final few days, but a curious combination of circumstances set him up for his final assault on the pink jersey. Ineos’s original Giro leader, the defending champion, Richard Carapaz, was drafted into the Tour de France at the last minute due to Geraint Thomas being short of form. Thomas was sent to the Giro as leader instead, but when he crashed on the stage to Mount Etna and broke his pelvis, that left Ineos leaderless. Initially the team focused on stage wins, with Filippo Ganna adding a road race stage to his initial time trial win, and then Jhonatan Narváez of Ecuador, before Geoghegan Hart opened his account on the mountain stage to Piancavallo at the end of the second week. That set up a final few days in which the race boiled down to a duel between Ineos and Sunweb, with Hindley emerging as the German team’s strongest climber ahead of his nominal leader Wilco Kelderman of the Netherlands. Geoghegan Hart’s searing sprint win at Piancavallo, after Sunweb had looked to have taken control, pointed to the young Briton as the rider in form as the race’s biggest climbs hove into view. With the support of his Australian teammate Rohan Dennis he took the fight to Kelderman and Hindley on the majestic climb of the Stelvio Pass last Thursday, before dislodging the Dutchman and moving level with Hindley after winning Saturday’s stage to the Alpine ski resort of Sestriere. That set up Sunday’s pulsating final. Like the Tour de France, won by the 21-year-old Slovenian Tadej Pogacar, this race marked a passing of the generations. The main Italian hopeful, Vincenzo Nibali, never truly made an impression and finished seventh, while another near veteran, the Dane Jakob Fuglsang, also showed little. In contrast, the 22-year-old Portuguese João Almeida led for 15 of the 21 stages before fading in the final few days to finish fourth, while at 24 and 25 respectively Hindley and Geoghegan Hart now have the future ahead of them. The Giro will also be remembered for the resurgence of the Frenchman Arnaud Démare, winner of four sprint stages, and for the effect that coronavirus had on the race. Positive tests for Covid deprived the Giro of two big favourites, Simon Yates of Great Britain and Steven Kruijswijk of the Netherlands, resulting in a more open race that gave space to the young hopefuls. On Sunday, the early pace was set by Ganna; the world time trial champion was viewed as the inevitable winner beforehand, and his blisteringly fast time of 17min 16sec gave him four stage wins in the race, and landed Ineos their seventh stage win, making this the British team’s most successful Grand Tour ever, as well as their 11th Grand Tour title. For a team which had been deprived of its leader as day four, it was quite a turnaround.
13||Ervine Glenny obituaryMy former colleague Ervine Glenny, who has died aged 97, was a materials engineer who, through his research and subsequent management of engineers at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), helped to pioneer the advent of jet engines and the use of carbon fibre composites to lighten aircraft and other structures. He was born in Belfast, the son of Elizabeth (nee Ervine), a housewife, and Robert Glenny, a police constable. He was named Robert, but was always known by his middle name, Ervine. He was educated at Methodist college, Belfast, and won a bursary to study chemical engineering at Queen’s University in the city, where he met his wife to be, Joan Reid, who was taking the same course. He began his research in 1947 with the National Gas Turbine Establishment (NGTE), which had just been formed from Power Jets, the company created by Frank Whittle, who invented the concept of gas turbines which form the basis of jet engines. By exploring the high temperature properties of materials suitable for gas turbines, Robert was able to contribute to their commercialisation and moved with NGTE to Farnborough, Hampshire, in 1955 to be close to the RAE, which specialised in all aspects of aircraft design. In 1970, Ervine moved to the NPL in Teddington, south-west London, to become superintendent of the materials application division and in 1973 he moved back to Farnborough to become head of the materials department at RAE. Ervine’s advice was always sound and well balanced and his encouragement and support of all his engineers enabled innovations to be pursued and commercialised. These included high strength, lightweight carbon fibres and he encouraged Bill Watt and other colleagues to continue developing their invention and its application initially to aircraft but then to other forms of transport. Upon his retirement from RAE, Ervine acted as a project monitor and assessor for the Department of Trade and Industry. One Sunday in 2003, Ervine and I travelled to Stansted airport to attend a project meeting in Prague. When Ervine showed his passport at the airline counter, the official said: “I am very sorry, Dr Glenny, but you have insufficient validity left on your passport so we cannot fly you to Prague.” In reply, Ervine uttered, without hesitation: “I am going to home to rejoin my 80th birthday party.” This quiet, unassuming person helped, in his own way, to make transport lighter and more energy efficient, a legacy from which we are all benefiting. Joan died in 2017. Ervine is survived by his children, Helen and Michael, and grandson, Jon.
2||Giro d'Italia: Geoghegan Hart seals shock win after time-trial – as it happenedAll the latest reaction to Geoghegan Hart’s victory: And with that, I’ll be off. Bye! Ladies and gentlemen, I give you Tao Geoghegan Hart. If you haven’t already read William Fotheringham’s piece on the man who became our champion, now’s your chance: Jai Hindley, who started the day in pink and ended it in second place, has a chat: Of course it’s super-disappointing to lose a race on the last day like that. At the moment it’s pretty hard to take but I think when I look back I’ll be super proud of the team and how I rode. It’s a massive step forward in my career and it’s three week’s I’ll never forget. I think as a team, actually we didn’t put a foot wrong all race to be honest. We can be super proud of what we accomplished. I’d just like to thank the guys on the team, the whole team, everyone involved. It’s a massive operation to get here and to be on the podium in Milan. A lot of effort and time has gone into it and I really appreciate what the team has done to get me here. Tonight? I think I’ll put the feet up for a bit, maybe sink a few cheeky bevvies. All of today’s key numbers: Stage 21 1. Filippo Ganna (IT) Ineos Grenadiers 17:16 2. Victor Campenaerts (BEL) NTT Pro Cycling Team +32 3. Rohan Dennis (AUS) Ineos Grenadiers “ 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +41 5 Miles Scotson (AUS) Groupama - FDJ “ 6. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team +44 7. Chad Haga (USA) Team Sunweb “ 8. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +46 9. Kamil Gradek (POL) CCC Team +47 10. Jan Tratnik (SLO) Bahrain - McLaren “ 11. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +55 12. Martijn Tusveld (NED) Team Sunweb +58 13. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) Ineos Grenadiers “ 14. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal +1:03 15. Maciej Bodnar (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +1:04 Overall leaders 1. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers 85:40:21 2. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb +39 3. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb +1:29 4. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck-Quick-Step +2:57 5. Pello Bilbao (ESP) Bahrain-McLaren +3:09 6. Jakob Fuglsang (DEN) Astana Pro Team +7:02 7. Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Trek - Segafredo +8:15 8. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe +8:42 9. Fausto Masnada (ITA) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +9:57 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (AUT) Bahrain - McLaren +11:05 11. Domenico Pozzovivo (ITA) NTT Pro Cycling Team +11:52 12. Rafal Majka (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +20:31 13. Sergio Samitier (ESP) Movistar Team +35:29 14. James Knox (GBR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step +37:41 15. Brandon McNulty (USA) UAE Team Emirates +38:10 16. Aurélien Paret-Peintre AG2R La Mondiale +45:04 (FRA) 17. Larry Warbasse (USA) AG2R La Mondiale +53:25 18. Ben Swift (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers +57:36 19. Antonio Pedrero (ESP) Movistar Team +59:36 20. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team +1:02:57 King of the Mountains 1. Ruben Guerreiro (POR) EF Pro Cycling 234 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 157 3. Thomas De Gendt (BEL) Lotto - Soudal 122 4. Rohan Dennis (AUS) INEOS Grenadiers 119 5. Ben O’Connor (AUS) NTT Pro Cycling Team 71 6. Jai Hindley (AUS) Team Sunweb “ 7. Wilco Kelderman (NED) Team Sunweb 55 8. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 48 9. Jonathan Castroviejo (ESP) INEOS Grenadiers 45 10. Einer Rubio (COL) Movistar Team 44 Points leaders 1. Arnaud Démare (FRA) Groupama - FDJ 233 2. Peter Sagan (SVK) BORA - hansgrohe 184 3. João Almeida (POR) Deceuninck - Quick-Step 108 4. Filippo Ganna (ITA) INEOS Grenadiers 87 5. Josef Cerný (CZE) CCC Team 78 6. Andrea Vendrame (ITA) AG2R La Mondiale “ 7. Diego Ulissi (ITA) UAE Team Emirates 77 8. Simon Pellaud (SUI) Androni Giocattoli - 70 Sidermec 9. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GBR) INEOS Grenadiers 66 10. Patrick Konrad (AUT) BORA - hansgrohe 61 11. Here are the final standings in the overall classification: One thing has gone flat today: the Prosecco that is being given to the winners. Two bottles have so far been presented, and neither really did any spraying at all despite some enthusiastic shaking. Dave Brailsford has a chat about his team’s latest success: When we started out Geraint was the leader. What happened here was Filippo [Ganna] set the scene. Coming here with a rainbow band, first day, got the TT sorted, got the pink jersey. Then a massive disappointment with Geraint going home. Then when Filippo won that road stage in the hills, everyone was like, ‘Wow, that is incredible.’ It inspired everybody. It opened the race up. Everybody race the stages, give everybody an opportunity, and I think Tao liked that. He grew into the role. There was no pressure on him, it was an adventure every day, but there was a moment, to be fair to him, when he switched from being ‘Maybe.’ You could see a switch going off in his head and he said, ‘I can do this.’ The story I like about Tao is the fact he bunked off school to come and ride behind the other guys. It was his dream to be a pro bike rider, coming into the team, and he’s gone and won a Grand Tour. It’s the stuff of comic books really. What I like about it is, we’ve done the training, we’ve done the defensive style of riding, and we’ve won a lot doing that, but it’s not much fun, really, compared to this, is it? What the guys have done here, all the team here has raced, and at the end of the day it’s all about racing. We’re the Grenadiers now. A lot of people have contributed to this victory. I can’t think about this without thinking about Nico [Portal]. Everybody in this team has supported him along the way and they deserve a lot of credit for that. Here’s a report on today’s action: Our champion gives his first interview, and is asked how he feels to have won this thing: Bizarre, to be honest. Not in my wildest dreams did I imagine that this would be possible when we started almost a month ago in Sicily. I think all of my career I’ve dreamt of trying to be top five or top 10 maybe in a race of this stature. This is someting completely different to that and I think ti’s going to take a long time to sink in. My DS told me I was 10 seconds up, and then he kept giving me a few seconds. I only knew we must be in a pretty good situation when he was screaming at me not to take any risks in the last kilometre. It’s not often your DS tells you to slow down that much in a 15km TT, but I also knew the work was done up to that point. Is this the start of a long and great career? I don’t know and I don’t really care. I’m just going to enjoy this. it’s incredible, really incredible. I’m going to stay the same person, I’m going to stay as professional as I believe I always have been. Dedicated. Wake up every day looking forward to riding my bike, loving my life and being grateful for the amazing position, the privilege, that I’m in to be in this team and at these races. Everyone’s always nice about people who have just won stuff, but there is such genuine warmth being expressed for Tao Geoghegan Hart both by people at the race and others at home. “Shades of Lemond and Fignon here,” writes Guy Hornsby. “I feel for Jai Hindley, who’s been incredible all race, but Tao has been relentless this last week. A Tour won by a wafer-thin margin, but they don’t call it the Race of Truth for nothing when the clock is on. What a story.” Let’s not forget about Filippo Ganna, who has completed a clean sweep of the time trials on this year’s Giro by an astonishing 32sec margin. He and Tao Geoghegan Hart pose for photographs in front of the duomo, quite the one-two for Ineos Grenadiers. Jai Hindley’s race is over, and he has finished second! His has been a phenomenal race, but not quite enough for glory. What a moment for Tao Geoghegan Hart, Grand Tour champion! Tao Geoghegan Hart crosses the finish line in 18min 14sec, the 13th best time of the day, but he will surely now win the 2020 Giro d’Italia! Up to 24sec now, with Geoghegan Hart just 1.5km from the finish line. Neither of the overall top two are threatening to win the stage, but the Londoner is doing exactly what was required of him today. Into the last 3km for Tao Geoghegan Hart, and his overall lead is still expanding. Up to about 20sec now. Geoghegan Hart has a 17sec lead now, with just 4km to go, very nearly a conclusive lead. Hindley crosses the line at the 10.3km mark, and he’s well down on our leader, Filippo Ganna, who is not going to be shifted off that bar stool any time soon. Tao Geoghegan Hart is 10sec ahead! With 6.3km to go, he seems to be on his way here! Joao Almeida crosses the line in 17min 57sec, enough for fourth place (for now) on the day, and I think in overall classification as well. We won’t really know who is in the box seat here until both riders have passed the 10.3km marker. Tao Geoghegan Hart is about 1km away from it as I type. And so, to the race leader (just). Jai Hindley, clad almost entirely in rosa, never mind the maglia, is the last on the road! Tao Geoghegan Hart is on his bike and on the road! We are 20 minutes away from the end of this year’s Giro. What’s it to be? Wilco Kelderman, Friday’s maglia rosa holder, is on his way. Just two to go now! Nobody for some time has made any dent in the top three either at the 10.3km marker (Ganna, Haga and Campenaerts the top three there) or at the finish (Ganna, Campenaerts and Dennis). When riders launch themselves down the ramp organisers are playing some genuinely godawful Europop, which I suppose is one way of encouraging them to go as fast as they can. “I‘m sure its more comfortable that the saddle on his bike!” says Andrew Benton of Ganna’s bar stool, and this I’m sure is true. “Best saddle for me was the one on my Raleigh roadster sit-up-and-beg bike, wide and comfy and with a big curly spring at the front to ensure it soaked up the bumps.” Vincenzo Nibali is on his way, along with Jakob Fuglsang and Joao Almeida. There are only four riders still waiting. The crunch is coming. “Though an urban contre la montre is hardly likely to win over new fans, this Giro has been spectacular,” says Gary Naylor. “The riders may not be the very best, but competition has been fierce and fair. And Italy? Just wow.” There’s been great drama and great scenery, to be sure. Perhaps a bit more to come (drama, at least). I’m not sure I’ve seen this bettered. Filippo Ganna certainly deserves better than a bar stool. They really could have given the leader a more comfortable place to sit. Into the top 10 we go! Fausto Masnada of Deceuninck-Quick Step is the first second (sorry, counting error) of them on this bike, a man whose name it is impossible to read, think or say without having to fight the urge to insert a Que in the middle. Domenico Pozzovivo, the 37-year-old Italian, has just got under way. He’s 11th in the overall standings, so we now move from one to three minutes between riders as we head into the top 10. Rohan Dennis crosses the line in 17min 48sec, 32sec slower than the leader but good enough, for now, for third. If Ganna wins this stage, it would be the seventh stage win for Ineos Grenadiers on this year’s Giro. They have never previously won more than six on any Grand Tour. They also have a very good chance to win the whole thing in the shape of Tao Geoghegan Hart, which would make this a very good day indeed for them. We should know precisely how the chips have fallen within the hour. Rohan Dennis, the Australian who came second in the time trial on stage 14, is on his way, and has just been timed 20 seconds behind Ganna at the split. Ganna also won the individual time trial on the first stage of the Giro, and the individual time trial that formed Stage 14, and the individual time trial title at the world championships last month. To say he has been dominant in this particular discipline of late would be to understate what’s been going on. He also won stage five on this year’s Giro, a hilly 225km, just to prove he’s not a one-trick pony. Filippo Ganna crosses the line in a time faster than anyone else to have tried the course by a margin of over half a minute! He was clocked at 17min 16sec, 32sec faster than Campenaerts. It is very cloudy in Lombardy this afternoon, and the downside of having a finish line outside the cathedral is that most of the stage is spent on a variety of unexciting A-roads on the approach to central Milan. There is, in short, a lot of grey about. Filippo Gana mashes the rest at the split! His time after 10.3km is 20sec faster than Haga’s, and Campenaerts’ spell in the leader’s seat is surely about to end. We get an official time at 10.3km, to judge how well a rider’s doing while they’re still a while from the finish line. Chad Haga was the fastest so far over 10km, crossing that line a second before Campanaerts, but by the end he was 12 seconds behind and sits fourth. Victor Campanaerts is the clubhouse leader, but Filippo Ganna is on his way and will have him in his sights. Ganna is not only Italian but local, raised on the shores of Lake Maggiore, and you can tell people are excited about him because he is being followed by two motorbikes, three cars and a helicopter. Well then. The last day of the Giro d’Italia, and it’s more poised than Grace Kelly at a tea party. Or something. Tao Geoghegan Hart, the Londoner with a name that’s not as exotic as it looks, is level at the top of the standings with Jai Hindley but is reckoned to be a better time triallist. Both have completed the first 20 stages in an official time of 85 hours, 22 minutes and seven seconds. So who will end up as champion? Time will tell, what little of it is taken by the 15.7km route into Milan, ending at the Piazza del Duomo. Firstly, then, welcome! Secondly, here’s some information that may come in useful, starting with the route profile: Here’s the top 10 in the general classification as it stood this morning: 1. Jai Hindley (Aus) Sunweb 85” 22’ 07s 2. Tao Geoghegan Hart (GB) Ineos Grenadiers = 3. Wilco Kelderman (Ned) Sunweb +1m32s 4. Bilbao Pello (Es) Bahrain-McLaren +2m51s 5. Joao Almeida (Por) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +3m14s 6. Jakob Fuglsang (Den) Astana +6m 32s 7. Vincenzo Nibali (It) Trek-Segafredo +7m46s 8. Patrick Konrad (Aut) Bora-Hansgrohe +8m05s 9. Fausto Masnada (It) Deceuninck–Quick-Step +9m24s 10. Hermann Pernsteiner (Aut) Bahrain McLaren +10m08s The first rider got going at 1.40pm (12.40pm GMT), but it’ll take a while to get to the leaders. Here then are the start times for those last 10 riders (in local time, so subtract one for BMT): 3.45pm Hermann Pernsteiner 3.48pm Fausto Masnada 3.51pm Patrick Konrad 3.54pm Vincenzo Nibali 3.57pm Jakob Fuglsang 4.00pm Joao Almeida 4.03pm Pello Bilbao 4.06pm Wilco Kelderman 4.09pm Tao Geoghegan Hart 4.12pm Jai Hindley And here’s William Fotheringham’s report on yesterday’s action, which also tees up today’s: Tao Geoghegan Hart is on the threshold of Giro d’Italia victory going into Sunday’s time trial stage into Milan. After winning Saturday’s mountain stage at the Sestriere ski resort, the 25-year-old, London-born Scot is level on time with the new race leader, Jai Hindley of Australia, an unprecedentedly tight and tense situation after more than 85 hours of racing. No Grand Tour has been this close going into the final day, but Geoghegan Hart is a stronger time triallist; a single second’s advantage would suffice, meaning that he will be expected to give Great Britain its second Giro d’Italia win in three years after Chris Froome’s last-ditch victory in 2018. For a rider who had expected to support either Richard Carapaz or Geraint Thomas in an attempt for overall victory, it is an astonishing twist of fortune. Much more here:
13||Bill Fearns obituaryMy father, Bill Fearns, who has died aged 99, was a marine engineer whose long career encompassed designing vessels that were used in the second world war, including the D-day landings. Born in Dundee into a family of eight, to James Fearns, a foundry labourer, and his wife, Jessie (nee Farquharson), a jute spinner, Bill was raised in a tenement. He attended Stobswell school, but left aged 14 to train as a draughtsman in the Robb-Caledon shipyard, gaining qualifications at Dundee Technical Institute at night. At the age of 15 with his brother, Alex, he played bagpipes in the massed bands at the 1936 Hampden Cup final, something he was always proud of. During the war, now a qualified naval architect and therefore in a reserved occupation, in 1941 Bill was seconded to Clydeside, designing U-Boat-hunting corvettes and working on the D-day Mulberry harbours. After the war, he worked on Martin-Baker ejection seats at RAE Farnborough, but in 1948, after marrying Margaret Shand, Bill returned to a booming John Brown’s on Clydeside, working on the Cunard ships Saxonia, Carmania and Franconia. In 1956, he became a surveyor with Lloyd’s Register in Greenock and was transferred in 1960 to Hamburg, West Germany. Bill worked on reparation ships for Israel and was surveyor on the rebuilding of the SS Uganda and SS Nevasa to become educational cruise ships, as well as on the first custom-designed container ships. In 1973 Bill went to Singapore to head its operation replacing expat specialists with native Singaporeans. He enjoyed the occasional round of golf with Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s prime minister. When he returned to Lloyd’s Register in London at the end of the 1970s, shipbuilding was changing dramatically. London’s docklands were closing down and computers were now being used to assist with surveying. After retiring in 1984, he played golf at his home in South Woodham Ferrers, Essex, sang in the local choir and played in several pipe bands, including the Rayleigh British Legion Band. Margaret died in 2015. Bill is survived by his children, Jane and me, and by two grandchildren and a great grandchild.
1||Nearly 60 million Americans cast early vote as record-shattering turnout expectedTheir enthusiasm reflected in post boxes stuffed with mail-in ballots and by hours-long queues at voting sites across the country, by early Sunday almost 60 million Americans had cast a vote in the presidential election, even as the candidates scrambled to deliver their closing message more than a week before election day, 3 November. The vast numbers of early voters in the most consequential election in generations is fuelling what promises to be record-shattering turnout. Not since 1908 have more than 65% of eligible US voters actually exercised that right. Behind the eye-popping headline figures lie clues to why voters are so engaged, so early. Democrats hold a sizeable advantage in the early returns. The reason, analysts believe, is simply Donald Trump, and by extension his handling of the coronavirus pandemic that has infected 8.5 million people and killed 224,000. “The pandemic is part of it, particularly for older voters,” said Dr Larry Sabato, founder and director of the University of Virginia’s Center for Politics. “I’m pushing 70 myself, and it has to be a part of your calculations, we’re kind of vulnerable. “But to me, that doesn’t explain the lines. People really have bought into the understanding that if this isn’t the most important election we’ve ever had, it’s one of several. People are determined to express themselves and we all know why: Donald Trump. That includes his base: the cult is going to support the cult leader. But there are more, maybe quite a bit more, who want to end this nightmare. And that’s the way people put it. If you don’t like the word I’m sorry – that’s just the way it is.” More than one third of the votes already returned come from the three most populous states, California, Texas and Florida, according to the US Elections project, an independent data analysis by the University of Florida. California is staunchly Democrat, and its 55 electoral college votes are all but a lock for former vice-president Joe Biden. The race for the 38 votes in Texas is closer, but leaning strongly Republican. That leaves the swing state of Florida and its 29 electoral college votes as a glittering prize. So far, from 5.3m mail-in and in-person votes recorded, representing almost 40% of 14 million registered voters, Democrats hold an advantage of more than 7%, or around 400,000 votes. “It is our most mega, mega state,” Sabato said. “I like to put it that way, and there’s no way practically for Trump to get elected without Florida.” The president voted in Florida on Saturday. “If he loses there it will be obvious he’s going to lose,” Sabato said. “If Biden loses Florida, though, it is not the end for him. He has quite a number of other paths. [But] the problem with losing Florida is it is an indication that you’re likely not to do well in other states – we’re talking about Georgia, North Carolina, even parts of the midwest.” The Democrats’ lead in Florida appears to be amplified nationally, at least in the 19 states that release party affiliations with their statistics. In those states, registered Democrats have sent in more than 13m votes to Republicans’ 7.4m, with 6m votes from minor or no party affiliates making up the remainder. Across all states, the University of Florida reports, votes cast early amount to more than 42% of those from the entire 2016 election. In some places the figure is even higher, such as Hays county, Texas, where 73,277 early votes are several hundred more than the total four years ago. Sabato cautioned Republicans not to rely on the tradition of Democrats’ early voting advantages being wiped out when their own supporters turn out on election day. Trump “sure can win in the swing states”, he said, “Trump people who weren’t registered or didn’t vote the last time, they have spent four years identifying them. That’s been the hidden campaign that people haven’t talked about. “But you’re taking a tremendous chance when you put all your chips on the election day vote. Suppose there’s a hurricane barreling toward Florida. Almost certainly there will be really bad weather in at least a couple of swing states, you know, lots of things happen in life, and maybe the spike up in coronavirus will keep a lot of those older Republicans away on the day.” Michael McDonald, a professor of political science who maintains the University of Florida database, told the Guardian’s Fight to Vote project extraordinarily brisk early voting had handed Democrats a clear advantage, noting that the party’s supporters had not only submitted significantly larger numbers of ballot requests, but were also returning them at a higher rate than Republicans. Like Sabato, however, McDonald also urged caution. “The irony here is Democrats are actually doing Republicans a favour,” he said. “It should benefit Republicans who are trying to vote on election day that the Democrats have done them this favour of not standing in line in front of them.”
14||Bush and koalas found to be threatened by 'gratuitous' NSW land-clearing planTens of thousands of hectares of bush could be at risk under a New South Wales government proposal to allow rural landholders to clear up to 25 metres of land from their property’s fence line, analysis by WWF-Australia shows. The NSW government announced this month it planned to amend its Rural Fires Act to allow clearing without an approval on rural property boundaries to reduce bushfire risk. The proposal, which was not one of the 76 recommendations from the NSW bushfire inquiry, prompted alarm it could lead to broad-scale clearing of endangered forest and habitat and was called “anti-science” by the independent MLC Justin Field. WWF-Australia used spatial data to examine how much forest could be exposed under the proposed changes in four local government areas: Clarence Valley, Port Stephens, Shoalhaven and Wollondilly. It found if all rural property holders cleared to the maximum extent, 44,293ha of forest could be at risk in those four council areas, 32,609ha of that in Clarence Valley. The analysis found 12,000ha of at-risk forest in those regions was high quality koala habitat unless the state government imposed conditions to protect it. Martin Taylor, a conservation scientist at WWF-Australia, said there would be landholders who would not clear their land if the proposal passed the state parliament. “But this is what is at risk of being cleared if they go ahead and do it,” he said. “It’s gratuitous. You’re fragmenting forests even more than they are already. Particularly for koalas, it makes it harder for them to get around.” NSW laws already allow property owners to clear trees within 10 metres of a house or other building, and shrubs within 50 metres, to mitigate bushfire risk. The proposed rules would allow an additional 25 metres of clearing at the boundary. Property owners are also permitted to clear distances of 15 metres in coastal NSW, 30 metres in central NSW and 40 metres in western NSW to construct or maintain rural infrastructure, such as a fence. The greatest impact of the proposed changes is expected to be in coastal zones that have been most exposed to bushfires. Field expressed concern the government still had not presented any advice it had received from the NSW RFS before announcing the proposed amendments earlier this month. He said the emergency services minister, David Elliott, “has not been willing to explain” how the proposal would reduce bushfire risk, nor why it had been prioritised over the 76 recommendations from the bushfire inquiry report. “My concern is it will be developers that use this,” Field said. “I also worry that it sends the message that this is a constructive way to manage bushfire risk. It sets us up for failure.” The government is likely to introduce the legislation to parliament in November. It has said it would develop a code to take account of endangered species and habitat but it is unclear what this would entail and whether it would be introduced at the same time. Elliott did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia. Field said the government needed to ensure protections were in place for riparian zones, such as creek lines, critically endangered habitats, and threatened species, including the koala. He feared the laws could end up being used for purposes unrelated to bushfire risk. “I’m particularly concerned by coastal rural land that’s held by developers who may have an intention for future rezoning,” he said. “They would be allowed to clear their boundaries whether or not they had a fence, effectively degrading the environmental values of their land – not for bushfire protection but to assist with future rezoning applications.” There are also questions about how the proposed changes would interact with existing land-clearing laws that have caused turmoil inside the government in recent months. The lower house has passed amendments to local land services laws to exempt private rural landholders from having to recognise the expanded definition of koala habitat under the koala state environmental planning policy (Sepp) that nearly split the Coalition. If the changes pass the upper house, they would grandfather the arrangements under the koala Sepp for the five councils that already have approved koala plans of management. But the Environmental Defenders Office said if additional councils completed their own plans in future, the changes would allow private landholders to continue to do code-based land-clearing without an approval. Rachel Walmsley, the EDO’s policy and law reform director, said the deal reached between the Liberal and National parties was “not about clarifying the laws. It’s about weakening. “It is actually preventing koala habitat from being mapped and applicable.” NSW has already recorded huge increases in land-clearing rates as a result of changes to native vegetation laws in 2017.
4||Queensland election: seats to watch as parties play a game of electoral chessLabor’s holds a two-seat majority in Queensland and the most recent polls suggest a close contest on 31 October, with little swing in either direction since the 2017 election. But experts say the statewide polls are of little value in understanding how the larger election night story will play out on Saturday. Queensland is a deeply complex state – where messages in regional areas often run contrary to those used to woo city voters. Rather than a statewide pitch, Labor and the Liberal National party have been engaged in a game of electoral chess, attempting to plot a path to 47 seats. There are 93 electorates in Queensland. The LNP needs to win nine to gain a majority. The state has a large crossbench: three Katter’s Australia party MPs, one Green, one One Nation MP and an independent. The influence of minor parties will shape marginal contests, as well as the makeup of the next parliament. There are more than 20 seats that could flip on Saturday. Here are the ones to watch, and what they mean in the context of a tight election. All roads lead to Townsville Thuringowa (Labor 4.1% v One Nation) Townsville has three marginal seats and both campaigns have spent considerable time in the northern city, where crime and employment have dominated discussion. On face value, the seats of Townsville (Labor’s most marginal seat) and Mundingburra (where MP Coralee O’Rourke is retiring) are closer contests than the western suburbs electorate of Thuringowa. But both parties believe that if Townsville does swing to the LNP, Thuringowa would be the first of the three to fall. One Nation has previously polled well in Thuringowa and the contest has also been targeted by Katter’s Australia Party as a potential gain. Others to watch: Townsville (Labor 0.4%), Mundingburra (Labor 1.1%) LNP attempts to thread the needle Aspley (Labor 1.2%) The seat of Aspley, a suburban electorate in northern Brisbane, fell to Labor in 2017. LNP sources say if they cannot win it back, the party does not have a realistic path to a majority. Aspley has changed hands regularly in the past 20 years and is strategically important to both parties. The area is an LNP stronghold at local government level and the party has chosen a long-term councillor, Amanda Cooper, to run. Similar to Aspley, Gaven on the Gold Coast, won narrowly by Labor last election, is considered a key test of whether the LNP can win back its increasingly dwindling urban support in state politics. Maiwar, the Brisbane western suburbs seat held by the Greens, was identified by the LNP as part of its path to victory, however it is understood the party now considers a gain there unlikely. Others to watch: Gaven (Labor 0.7%), Mansfield (Labor 1.6%), Maiwar (Greens 1.6% v LNP) Will One Nation continue to be a factor? Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation) To win the LNP needs to shift the electoral dynamic in three ways: it needs to win Townsville; it needs to regain a footing in the south-east; it needs to win back low primary support in the regions, particularly those voters who abandoned it for more conservative options. Similarly, Labor cannot maintain a majority if it holds firm in the city but loses too much support in regional areas. In 2017 the expected “One Nation effect” didn’t quite eventuate. The party won only one seat (Mirani) though it did have some impact on the outcome of the election, particularly in central Queensland where the LNP’s primary vote tanked. In Maryborough (a seat the LNP won in the Campbell Newman 2012 landslide), the LNP primary vote was 18% at the last election. Word from the major party camps is the One Nation vote has tempered statewide, but it has always maintained a fervent following in pockets like Maryborough. Similarly in Keppel, in 2017 there was a 15% swing away from the LNP, which was beaten into third by One Nation. Others to watch: Keppel (Labor 3.1% v One Nation), Maryborough (Labor 2.5% v One Nation), Mirani (One Nation 4.8% v Labor) Labor could offset regional losses on the city fringe Pumicestone (LNP 0.8%) The former Labor MP John Mikel – now an adjunct professor at the University of Queensland – says that in lieu of reliable public polling on specific seats, one way of taking the temperature of the electorate was to “follow the leaders”. Having spent time in the regions, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk pivoted her campaign to areas of LNP heartland on the Gold and Sunshine coasts where Labor hopes to win seats. Pumicestone – which covers Caboolture and Bribie Island – is the LNP’s most marginal seat and its one-term MP, Simone Wilson, is not recontesting this election. It is the most likely Labor gain, but there are a handful of others on small margins. If the LNP threads the needle elsewhere, it still needs to hold these vulnerable seats. If Labor loses ground in the regions, the city fringe could offset losses and keep the Palaszczuk government in power. Or a mixed bag might deliver a hung parliament. Others to watch: Caloundra (LNP 3.4%), Glass House (LNP 3.4%), Currumbin (LNP 3.3%), Bonney (LNP 1.7%), Theodore (LNP 3.7%) The nightmare scenario for LNP Oodgeroo (LNP 7.2%) The seat of Oodgeroo, based in the city of Redlands south-east of Brisbane, would be a surprise loss for the LNP’s Mark Robinson, a Pentecostal pastor who employs the former Australian Christian Lobby head, Lyle Shelton, in his electorate office. But this week LNP leader Deb Frecklington made the surprise decision to include a whistle-stop in the electorate, rather than visit seats like Mansfield and Aspley the LNP needs to win from Labor. Robinson is being challenged by a high-profile local independent, Claire Richardson, who opposes the controversial Toondah harbour development plan. There are a handful of other seats the LNP need to be foregone conclusions to prevent Labor forming government. If Burdekin and Whitsunday (both on very tight margins) in the north fall to Labor, the LNP could be wiped out above the Tropic of Capricorn. Similarly, Clayfield and Chatsworth in Brisbane, and Burleigh on the Gold Coast, are on relatively small margins. Losing those seats would trigger a Labor landslide. Others to watch: Burdekin (LNP 0.8%), Whitsunday (Ind 0.7%), Burleigh (LNP 4.9%), Chatsworth (LNP 2.9%), Clayfield (LNP 2.4%) Minor parties will shape the next parliament South Brisbane (Labor 3.6% v Greens) And finally, the most keenly anticipated contest of all is in South Brisbane, the most progressive electorate in Queensland and possibly the country. Labor’s former deputy premier Jackie Trad has been written off in this seat, where the Greens vote has surged consistently in recent years. Last time around, Trad benefited from LNP preferences. The LNP’s “Labor last strategy” will make her task of holding the seat more difficult. Increasingly in Brisbane electorates will be three-cornered contests between the LNP, Labor and the Greens. Preference arrangements have made the Greens serious contenders in at least four seats – possibly more – if they can run second on primary votes. These include the CBD seat of McConnell and the inner-north seat of Cooper, vacated by popular minister Kate Jones. The same situation will occur in the north, where Katter’s Australia Party holds three seats. Some of the regional contests involving One Nation, KAP and the majors could be even more complex. In 2017, Nick Dametto won Hinchinbrook with 20.9% of the primary vote. Others to watch: McConnell (Labor 7.9%), Cooper (Labor 10.6%), Hinchinbrook (KAP 7.6% v LNP)
15||Australia's theatres are slowly reopening, but will subscribers return?Judith Hughes, a Melbourne Theatre Company subscriber, sees seven shows a year, organising tickets for a group of 11 women with an average age of 65. She is eager for the company to reopen its doors. “The general feeling among our group is that we’ll do what we can to support the arts and we want to get back in the theatre as long as we can do it safely,” she says. Anecdotally, the sentiment seems shared by theatre audiences across the country. Mitchell Butel, artistic director of the State Theatre Company of South Australia, says demand for its first post-Covid shows, Gaslight and Ripcord, have been “through the roof. We were the first main stage back in the country and we had no seat to sell.” Box office statistics supplied by the Sydney Theatre Company show that 54% of ticket buyers for Wonnangatta, its first post-lockdown show for 2020, were previous ticket-buyers, and 70% of the company’s subscribers surveyed say they expect to renew. But the enthusiasm isn’t necessarily reflected in other data. An Australia Council for the Arts sponsored survey tapped more than 12,000 arts lovers nationwide and 150 arts organisations. It included galleries and museums as well as performing arts groups and was taken three times, in May, July and September. Its September figures for attending cultural events as a whole were more confident than the previous two surveys, but show an understandable short-term caution. Despite a theoretical willingness to engage, only 29% of audience members surveyed were ready to attend an event as soon as permitted, with 29% of those who are residents in states where venues are open having attended a cultural event in the past fortnight. Only 14% were actually buying tickets for live shows and performances. But the production costs of putting on a show remain the same, whether you’re playing to 50 people or 500. This is a crucial factor influencing theatre companies’ programming and projection of box office revenue for 2021. How many tickets can they reasonably expect to sell in a limited audience return? Covid has also disrupted the subscription funding model that a majority of companies rely on. In a normal year, the theatre companies would be in the middle of launch season, with tickets for much of 2021 going on sale for subscribers to buy in packages of several shows at once. The funds brought in during the subscription period would then go into the budget for the following year. STCSA will launch its full 2021 season on 29 October but other companies are holding fire, with plans for limited season launches selling in stages, and with smaller subscription packages for those reluctant to commit long-term in an environment of uncertainty. This isn’t great for the bottom line, and it hasn’t helped that the only money spent from a $250m rescue package for the arts promised by the federal government back in June has gone to the screen industry. Of all the companies, those in Melbourne have dealt with the longest lockdowns and the harshest restrictions. Melbourne Theatre Company’s largest proportion of subscribers – 34% – are between the ages of 50 and 64, an age bracket more at risk from Covid complications. “It’s awfully challenging,” says MTC executive director Virginia Lovett. “At the beginning we went in hard and fast [with cancellations]. People re-booked for September, when we hoped to reopen, but we’ve had to cancel the rest of the year.” In pre-pandemic days, Australia’s not-for-profit performance companies were expected by funding bodies to be as commercially profitable as possible, to build up philanthropy and sponsorship income, and reduce their reliance on subsidies. Federal and state government subsidy more generally varies from theatre to theatre and this funding depends on the legal status of the company. Both STCSA and Queensland Theatre Company are statutory bodies, set up by acts of state legislation, and have greater state support; Melbourne Theatre Company is technically a department of the University of Melbourne, although both it and STC, a public company, receive similar levels of government funding: between 6% and 7%. Many companies emphasise their box office revenue as a sign of this model working. MTC’s 2019 annual report touts box office receipts of $18.1m out of total revenue of $28.3m. For some state theatres, subscriptions represent an average of 50% of box office revenue. For the MTC, it’s 70%. The figures are the result of a campaign over the past few years that saw subscriber numbers grow 40% in 2018 to a high of 22,300, before dropping off last year to 20,315. Lovett is pessimistic about the ability of theatre companies to sustain revenue in a downward-turning market. “The recession will also mean a drop in sponsorship, philanthropy and corporate entertainment,” she says. This, she argues, means that the current government subsidy isn’t sufficient for what the company is expected to deliver during and in the aftermath of a pandemic. “It has to be between 15% and 18%,” she says. “If the governments are serious about us continuing to be a thriving part of the culture and want us to develop new work, be involved in education and touring, the subsidy has to increase.” Lovett says that MTC’s own research shows strong support and loyalty from existing subscribers, many of whom donated the cost of their cancelled tickets to the company. “They want to see good social distancing and we’re looking closely at what other theatres are doing,” says Lovett. “There will be a certain percentage who are very hesitant, but optimistically there is a very high number willing to return.”
4||John Kerr's letters to the Queen's private secretary: 'A raw display of devastation'In the cryptic taxonomy of archives, the relationship between Sir John Kerr and the Queen stretches beyond the palace letters and into obscure files scattered throughout the National Archives of Australia and elsewhere. The most surprising of these is a new set of letters between Kerr and Sir Martin Charteris in the National Archives of Australia. From all these archives – in personal letters, Kerr’s rambling handwritten notes, and his unguarded personal reflections – a common theme emerges: the involvement of the palace in every step Kerr took, and every decision he made, regarding the dismissal of Gough Whitlam and its gathering aftermath, including even his own resignation. It is impossible to separate Kerr’s decisions from his intractable view of his “duty” to the monarch and the monarchy, presented to him so clearly in the months before the dismissal by Queen’s private secretary, the unctuous Charteris. Charteris had worked that sense of duty perfectly, most notably in his reassurance to Kerr that whatever decision he was to make, it could only do the monarchy good. Kerr’s decisions were in this sense entirely bounded by considerations of his view of the interests of the Queen and what was best for the monarchy. There was, quite simply, no decision that Kerr would make without what he saw as the imprimatur of the palace. How could it have been otherwise? For Kerr, his duty defined his decisions. Soon after the release of the palace letters, several previously unpublished letters from one of those obscure files were unexpectedly and quietly released by the archives, nine years after I first requested it. This file, carrying the incongruous title “Correspondence between the prime minister and the governor-general on the governor-general’s resignation”, contained several letters between Kerr and Charteris that were not included with the palace letters released by the archives with such fanfare following the high court decision. Apart from anything else, this raises the significant question of how many more of these historic letters lie elsewhere in the archives, imperfectly labelled and unseen, which ought to form part of the broader palace letters collection. The newly released documents consist of several anguished letters, drafted and redrafted by Kerr to Charteris in 1977 in the months before his reluctant resignation, and a single letter from Charteris in reply. They tell a poignant story of personal decline. These letters provide a snapshot of the distressed end of Kerr’s term as governor general, of his deteriorating relationship with the palace, and of his dramatic turn against Malcolm Fraser, as those who had encouraged and cajoled him in the months before the dismissal began to move against him. In the early months after the dismissal, in the afterglow of the successful revival of the reserve powers of the Crown, Kerr describes the view from the government, and “encouraged” by the palace, that he “should, indeed, must stay”. It is essential that he “avoid appearing to concede error” in any way about his dismissal of Whitlam. As Kerr navigates the shifting fortunes in his position, a detailed handwritten note prepared by him in April 1976 reveals the role of “the palace”, Charteris, and Prince Charles, as part of a select group of informal advisers with whom he discussed his future as governor general. Kerr sought advice from Prince Charles, the palace, Sir Robert Menzies, Sir Anthony Mason, prime minister Fraser, and Sir Garfield Barwick. They had all urged him to remain as governor general because, “(1) what I did was the right thing to do and (2) resignation … would leave the impression that I regretted what I did”. Despite the private professions of support and encouragement, as the months pass and the protests against him continue, Kerr perceives a change. Privately, he writes of his growing fear that “the Government, or some of its members, may get tired of defending me … and encourage me to go”. And if they did, Kerr would not go easily. He would not even consider resigning without a new position to go to. In a sign of his faltering judgment as his concern for his position grows, Kerr imagines that Fraser might consider appointing him as Australia’s high commissioner to the United Kingdom. “London might be the best place to spend a few years,” he muses. It is hard to understand how Kerr could have entertained the idea that after such intense political controversy, he could be appointed to a plum diplomatic role by the government he had installed in office just months earlier. In an extraordinary letter to Charteris in late 1976, when his relationship with Fraser is already splintering, Kerr raises the possible use of the reserve powers against the government. Kerr writes that Fraser faces several options for the next election, including a half-Senate election, or an early election for the House of Representatives. He sets out the possibility, raised by some commentators, that “because of my view that the Governor-General has a real discretion”, he ought to consider whether there is a case for invoking the reserve powers to deny Fraser such an early election. Kerr reminds Charteris, with the air of one with a shared understanding, that these powers exist and are available to him. Charteris’s response is emphatic, and quite unlike his benign insistence on the existence of the reserve powers, and even of their possible beneficial use, just the previous year. “I hope that this possibility will not arise, both for your own sake and also I think for the sake of the Crown,” he writes, firmly closing off that discussion. By 1977, Kerr’s behaviour at public events was also becoming a liability. That was the year he landed face-down in the mud at the Tamworth Show as he attempted to place the winning medallion around the prized cow “Lovedale Posh”, all of it captured by a waiting photographer. The front-page images of the governor general pinioned under the cow’s hoof won a Walkley award. There was a memorable repeat performance at the Melbourne Cup later that year when Kerr, in an ill-fitting top hat and tails, struggled to remain upright as he awarded the cup to the owners of the winning horse. It was a sad sight of a public decline (now a much-watched YouTube clip called, “the Governor-General drunk at the Melbourne Cup”). Kerr’s inadvertent burning of the carpet at Victoria’s Government House during a short visit, when he tripped over the heater in the middle of the night and woke to find the carpet smouldering, no doubt also caused ripples of anxiety in vice-regal circles. And so, it is hardly surprising that by 1977 the Queen had joined the list of those who wished the governor general to make an early retirement. In little more than a year he had gone from saving the Queen from embarrassment to being the embodiment of that embarrassment. Kerr’s greatest fear under Whitlam, his removal from office, would now ensue under Malcolm Fraser. Kerr’s forced resignation was, to him, the ultimate betrayal by Fraser, whose political fortunes during the 1975 crisis his unprecedented actions had assured. The newly released cache of letters and drafts to Charteris is a raw display of devastation. In an extraordinarily indiscreet draft letter, Kerr writes that Fraser had never given him the support that “I have been entitled to have”, and that now, “victory achieved”, Fraser is “happy for me to go”. The well-honed vituperation that Kerr once deployed against Whitlam he turns towards Fraser, “a stern, distant, arrogant man determined to rule completely and not able to relax in conversation with me as Mr Whitlam was able to do”. Whitlam is now, apparently, not so bad after all. This is an edited extract from The Palace Letters: The Queen, the governor-general, and the plot to dismiss Gough Whitlam by Jenny Hocking, out 27 October (Scribe, $32.99)
16||'Getting burgers delivered generally sucks': Adam Liaw rates the best and worst food to order inThe unique conditions of 2020 have seen eating habits change across the globe. Alongside the sourdough preppers and physically distanced diners, perhaps the biggest difference of all can be seen in the world of home delivery. For some cities in lockdown the only life on the streets has been thousands of scooters, cyclists and drivers zipping from restaurant to house, feeding families and keeping businesses running. But most food wasn’t made to be sealed in plastic and bounced on the back of a scooter for 20 minutes before it gets to you. Let me take you through a few delivery favourites and their pros and cons in search of the answer to which food reigns supreme in the world of home delivery. Pizza: 6/10 Pizza is the O.G. delivery food, which is why it’s so surprising that it’s not a particularly good one. Steaming a baked product in an insulated bag after it’s cooked is not exactly keeping it in prime condition. The heavily processed chain-store varieties get away with it because you’re not expecting perfection, but the problem is I’m a snob and like my fancy Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana-approved pizza to arrive as it would fresh from its wood-fired oven. The saving grace is that pizza reheats exceptionally well. After I’ve placed my order I turn my oven on as hot as it goes. When the pizza arrives, it goes straight on to a tray and into the oven for a couple of minutes to bring it back to its original glory. This method works for chain-store pizzas, too (though their original glory isn’t quite as glorious). Lasagne: 8/10 Why there hasn’t been a family-sized lasagne delivery service that has taken the world by storm and become some kind of billion-dollar tech unicorn through this Covid period is quite beyond me. Pasta is *OK* for delivery but it really is better freshly prepared. The exceptions, however, are the “al forno” baked varieties of which lasagne is the undisputed king. It might be a little time-consuming to make at home, but it can be prepared relatively easily and in bulk in restaurants. Combine this with its excellent deliverability and it’s a wonder why Italian restaurants haven’t pivoted to this sooner. Fine dining: 🤷🏻♂️/10 With restaurants severely restricted in what they can serve, many fine-dining establishments have pivoted to home delivery. Some do it well, others not so well, so it’s hard to give this one a score. While it’s good to see many restaurants giving it a go, I can’t help but feel that fine dining is more about the experience than the food alone. A bit like watching Hamilton on the telly, it might be OK as a novelty but it really isn’t the same as being there. Burgers: 3/10 The major burger chains have all jumped on the home-delivery wagon as a source of revenue, but getting burgers delivered generally sucks. The fries are irredeemable, any semblance of freshness has wilted to mush, and the sauces and meat juices have soaked into the bun, destroying any integrity it may once have had. If you must send for burgers, try to keep them as simple as possible. A simple cheeseburger – the smaller the better – will roughly approximate a White Castle-style steam-grilled slider after the trauma of delivery. Load up on these and leave the fancy burgers and fried sides for dining in. Sushi: 8/10 Sushi began life as delivery food. It was originally a product of packing fish in rice for weeks long road transport by horse and cart. The fermentation of the rice preserved the fish, and that souring is mimicked by the vinegared rice used in modern sushi. Even the nigiri sushi that we see whizzing around on conveyor belts these days was originally sold door-to-door by a man named Hanaya Yohei who in the 1800s wandered the streets of what is today Tokyo’s Ginza district selling rice balls he moulded by hand and topped with pieces of raw fish. Sushi’s delivery credentials are well established, but its main benefit is that it’s served at room temperature, meaning that the insulation and transportation process doesn’t generate excess heat or steam. Rolls are likely to fare better than nigiri, as balancing fish on top of rice is not a process designed to survive transport across these mean streets. Chinese/Thai: 3/10 – 7/10 You might think it’s strange that I’m lumping these together, but there’s such a variety of Chinese cuisines that even keeping those into one category is weird enough, so you may as well throw the stir-fried Thai takeaways in there as well. My issue with these is twofold. I’m no fan of the “pick your meat and sauce” Thai-ish takeaways at the best of times, so how they’re delivered doesn’t matter much to me. But one thing the various Chinese and Thai cuisines have in common is that they thrive on variety and the juxtaposition between the different characteristics and textures of dishes, and that’s something that delivery doesn’t do justice. A braised dish might arrive in good condition, but a crisp-fried fish or chicken won’t. Soup will need to be reheated, and stir-fried dishes will lose much of their wok hei. It won’t stop me ordering good Chinese or Thai food for delivery, but having it in a restaurant will be so much better. Curry: 9/10 Getting slow-braised dishes from the subcontinent delivered is perhaps even better than cooking them yourself. There’s little difference between the delivery version and fresh in the restaurant for most of the wet dishes, but anything from the tandoor will suffer from the journey. I reheat breads like naan and paratha on a hot, dry grill pan after they arrive, and can confirm it’s a step worth doing. Dumplings: 10/10 If I had to pick a favourite food to order in it would be dumplings. Dumplings are the *chef’s kiss* of home delivery foods, and they’ve been hiding in plain sight the whole time. While many of us have missed the joys of circulating yum cha trolleys over the past few months, if you think about it getting delivery is kind of the same thing except the trolley is a scooter and it travels a greater distance. Re-steam them if you want them piping hot, or even just give them a zap in the microwave. Steamed foods thrive in the steamy environment of packaging and home delivery, so break out the lazy susan and teapot and gird your loins for yum cha at home.
4||Independent MP to bring bill for federal anti-corruption body as pressure mounts on CoalitionThe Morrison government is expected to come under pressure over its delay in progressing a national anti-corruption commission this week, with an independent MP introducing her own bill and Labor likely to intensify its question time attack. Declaring the government’s pandemic-related excuse “does not cut the mustard at all”, the prominent independent MP Helen Haines told Guardian Australia: “There’s nothing so delicious as a scandal and boy, we’ve had a feast haven’t we?” Haines, the member for the Victorian seat of Indi, will introduce her bill to parliament on Monday morning and is urging the government to allocate time for debate in the near future. Her proposed body, called the Australian federal integrity commission, would allow public hearings when in the public interest and allow any member of the public to make referrals. She said the public understood there were “obvious and serious issues” for an integrity commission to confront, and Covid-19 had not stood in the way of other issues being pushed through parliament. “We have debated and passed numerous bills throughout the pandemic, some rather light bills which are changing the names of departments, right through to more complicated and tricky issues like mobile phones in detention centres, for example – I’m not sure why that had to get rushed into the parliament,” Haines said. “We’ve had the EPBC bill which is highly contentious and was not properly debated at all. That excuse – and I think it is an excuse – it doesn’t hold water at all.” Work on the Coalition’s proposal began in 2018, and officials from the attorney general’s department confirmed last week that the attorney general, Christian Porter, received a draft bill to establish the body in December 2019 – before the pandemic began. The fact the 300-page draft legislation was ready last summer was first revealed by Guardian Australia in January, when Porter said he was waiting “rather than starting the consultation process during the holiday period, which is not an ideal time to start a process of public scrutiny”. Confronted about the further delays during question time last week, Scott Morrison said the government’s watchdog proposal required complex consultation, and the prime minister did not want “one public servant diverted” from managing the public health crisis. But in a clear warning to the government about the public appetite for strong action, Haines said she had even heard feedback from community members sheltered in bushfire evacuation centres last summer – “so incredible is the public’s desire to fix this canker, essentially”. “We’d be talking primarily about the bushfires and about their circumstances, once we’d talked about that and I just sat quietly with people, they would raise it even then. They would say, ‘Helen, you know, it’s important work that needs to be done, we need a federal integrity commission’.” Haines’ bill is expected to be seconded by the independent member for Warringah, Zali Steggall. Haines will also introduce a bill to bring in a code of conduct for parliamentarians. Private members’ bills are rarely debated or voted on in the lower house, given the government has a majority. But Haines has used social media to try to drum up support for a full parliamentary debate on her bill on 3 December. Using the hashtag, #BringOnDebate, Haines has urged members of the public to contact their local MPs “to ensure the government doesn’t shut down debate on this bill”. She has not ruled out seeking to suspend standing orders to bring it on for debate if the government does not accommodate her request – although the numbers may not be there for such a move. Labor’s position is to support a powerful and independent integrity commission. While it does not yet have a formal position on the model advanced by Haines, it is likely to strongly support bringing on debate. Labor is also expected to target the government over the matter during parliamentary question time throughout the course of this week. Signalling his interest in pursuing the issue, the manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, said the government’s failure to produce its own bill reflected “a deliberate decision from Mr Morrison to try to go on a go-slow when it comes to dealing with corruption”. Burke said he did not think anyone could accept government’s claim about the pandemic being a reason for the delay, given that it was already drafted before the Covid-19 crisis began. “All they have to do is print it off on their own computer, walk into the parliament, and table it and the public conversation can start,” he told Sky News on Sunday. Last week in parliament Labor pursued the government over the $30m acquisition of land at Leppington Triangle that was worth $3m – something that is being investigated by the Australian federal police and the infrastructure department. It also chased the government over any lobbying from the former NSW MP Daryl Maguire. On Thursday revelations of Australia Post’s spending on four luxury Cartier watches as reward for senior managers in late 2018 led Morrison to demand the chief executive, Christine Holgate, stand aside pending an investigation. The following day, the chair of the corporate regulator, James Shipton, stood aside pending an investigation into high spending on tax advice. Morrison has left the door open to a broader review of spending by commonwealth entities but has argued his swift action in relation to Australia Post would have sent a clear message to all executives and board members of government agencies. “I think they got it with a rocket,” Morrison said on Friday.
5||As South Australia now knows, local jobs must be a priority in the clean energy transitionFuture historians will no doubt remember 2020 as the year of Covid-19. But according to veteran climate campaigner Bill McKibben, they may also view it as a turning point, the year the world moved decisively towards “the transition everyone knew we needed to make”. McKibben told the recent Global Smart Energy Summit 2020 has been a year of “extraordinary convergence”, from the images of Australia’s bushfires, seen around the world on New Year’s Day – “like something out of Hieronymus Bosch” – to unprecedented developments such as China’s commitment to achieve net zero emissions by 2060, the EU’s pledge to make its Green Deal and Є100bn Just Transition Fund the centrepiece of post-Covid recovery, and the US $15tn divested from fossil fuels. Closer to home, there’s extraordinary convergence between business and state governments on the need to speed up Australia’s energy transition. Tim Reed, president of the Business Council of Australia, wants a “national, bipartisan commitment to net zero emissions by 2050”. Most states have already made this commitment, and South Australia is leading the pack. The state’s energy and mining minister, Dan van Holst Pellekaan, says SA will aim for 100% net renewable generation by 2030. Rapidly expanding wind, solar and battery storage capacity in SA’s Upper Spencer Gulf region will play a key role in achieving that aim. But energy transitions are not just about panels, turbines and targets. They’re processes of social as well as technological change. The people of Port Augusta, Whyalla and Port Pirie know all about this. The Upper Spencer Gulf has become a social laboratory for Australia’s energy transition. The gulf once known as the Iron Triangle was a manufacturing powerhouse. Whyalla had the steelworks, Port Pirie the lead smelter and Port Augusta the coal-fired power plants which drove them. But in 2015, Alinta Energy announced it was closing the power plants and the Leigh Creek coalmine. Less than 12 months later, all three had shut. The closure wasn’t completely unexpected. Local Liz Zyler says she knew the end was coming when her husband, Kym, an electrician who worked at the mine, told her they weren’t buying any more dynamite. “I just realised: coal was finished. They were going to close”. Like many local people, Liz was angry that Alinta promised the plants wouldn’t close before 2030, and then pulled the plug without warning. “They pulled that Band-Aid off real quick” says Liz. For a while, she became severely depressed, and recalls fighting with Kym nearly every day. “Our kids were still at school, and I’d just turned 50”, says Kym. “That’s not a very employable age”. Many of Kym’s older colleagues took a payout. But he and Liz decided the money wasn’t enough. In the end, he got a government job in Adelaide. He still works as an electrician, but only returns to Port Augusta on weekends. Liz had seen the writing on the wall years before. “I started to realise gas, oil and coal were on the way out, and we were going to be stuck with a stranded asset”. In 2012, she joined Repower Port Augusta, a grassroots initiative set up by local people to plan for a future after coal. The push for renewables came from the community. “We had a vote on whether we wanted a gas-fired power station or solar thermal. 4,000 people voted for solar, a quarter of the population of Port Augusta, and that was huge.” Repower Port Augusta won the backing of then Labor premier, Jay Weatherill, and electricians union the CEPU. According to Ben Jewell, CEPU SA branch organiser, renewables were seen as “the next big thing that was going to return the jobs that Leigh Creek and the power station had lost”. But Repower Port Augusta’s bold vision was dealt a body blow in 2019. The planned 150 MW solar thermal plant was scrapped. Despite a $110m federal government loan, Solar Reserve, the company behind the project, announced it could not raise enough bank finance. Other projects have gone ahead – such as the Bungala Solar Farm, on land owned by the Bungala Aboriginal Corporation. The project promised to create 350 jobs during construction but, according to Ben Jewell, few of those went to locals. “We went out there and there were 150 guys employed and 140 of them were backpackers” says Jewell. “This should have been an opportunity for Port Augusta to build their skill base, give the locals transferable skills because it was going to be a renewable energy hub. But that just didn’t happen”. Bungala is just one example of a broad trend our research has identified across renewable energy projects in regional Victoria and NSW: most jobs come in the construction phase, and don’t always go to local workers. Liz says regions and state governments “need to think smarter about the next generation”. With more pre-planning, she and Kim believe Port Augusta’s transition could have been better handled, with more good quality jobs for locals. But despite the problems, there’s no doubt a major transformation is happening in the Upper Spencer Gulf. The 35 turbines of stage 1 of the 126 MW Lincoln Gap windfarm are already operating just outside Port Augusta. Stage 2 (94MW, 24 turbines + 10MW battery storage) is under construction, while the even larger stage 3 is awaiting approval. Other projects, such as the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park, and Energy Connect, an interconnector that will link the gulf to NSW, should begin construction in 2021. These developments foster a sense of pride and purpose, a feeling the gulf is leading a much larger transformation which the whole country will undergo over the coming decades. But the gulf also has valuable lessons for other regions facing transition, such as the Hunter Valley: unless local people see jobs and other benefits for their communities, there’s a danger support will falter, and the legitimacy of Australia’s energy transition will be undermined. • Tom Morton, Climate Justice Research Centre, UTS; research Lisa Lumsden
4||Decades of neglect: Victoria has built less than 10% of its public housing pledge as waiting list swellsThe Victorian government has built only 57 of the 1,000 new public housing units it pledged by 2022, amid a push to bind the state to a housing target. As the pandemic puts the spotlight on the state’s ailing public housing system, the Greens will this week call for a legislated benchmark to guarantee a much-needed boost to housing stock. It comes as analysis obtained by Guardian Australia suggests there are nearly 30,000 children among the 100,000 people on the state’s ballooning housing waiting list. The waiting list has blown out every quarter since a new registry was created in 2016, yet the state government’s signature 1,000 homes commitment is yet to gather steam. Though the government insists the pledge is on track, figures provided to a parliamentary committee show only 57 of the homes Labor promised to build by late 2022 have been finished. Halfway into Daniel Andrews’s second term, a further 87 homes are under construction and 122 are said to be “about to start construction”. Housing advocates warned in 2018 that the $209m promise – which focuses on the most needy applicants – was already insufficient given Victoria spends less per capita on social housing than any other jurisdiction. Since then, the public housing waiting list has only gotten longer. In the three months to June 2020, an extra 2,161 Victorians were added to rolls, according to estimates by researcher Dr Duncan Rouch. That takes the total number of people waiting for a home to 99,264, includes 29,618 children. The Greens’ housing spokesman, Sam Hibbins, blamed the situation on decades of “neglect by successive state governments”. “The state government hasn’t even built 10% of the public homes it said it would during this term, which means the waiting list will continues to blow out,” he said. “The only way we can solve homelessness is to build more homes, it’s really that simple.” Under a bill the Greens will introduce to parliament this week, the government would be bound to a public housing target, which the party says would work similar to a renewable energy target. It would require the government to construct or purchase an additional 100,000 new public homes by 2030, or 10,000 a year. The benchmark is more ambitious than a proposal from the state’s peak homelessness body, which in May called for the construction of 6,000 units a year. According to government figures, the average waiting time for a “priority access” housing applicant is currently 11.6 months. This fast-tracked list includes people who are homeless, escaping family violence or living with a disability. The Department of Health and Human Services has previously partly blamed the wait figure on the “lack of growth in social housing”. Until very recently, Michael Miletic, 63, was among those on the priority list. The Geelong man had been staying in cheap accommodation during the pandemic. When that came to an end, he was homeless for a month. It was not a new experience. “I’ve been house surfing for years,” Miletic said. “I’ve never had a place to call my own.” While waiting on the public housing list, Miletic slept in his car and would shower at the Geelong Olympic pool. Luckily, he said, his vehicle had a canopy on the back that fits a bed. “I thought, ‘At least I’m not doing it hard on the streets,’” he said. After eight months on the waiting list, Miletic was given a home this month. He knows his wait was shorter than most, and credits the outcome to the assistance he received from the Housing for the Aged Action Group. Across Victoria, there has been a 125% increase in priority applications like Miletic’s since September 2016, according to Rouch’s research. Geelong is the worst-hit regional area, while demand in metropolitan Melbourne was highest in a housing region described as “Western Melbourne”. That area includes the suburbs in and around the nine high-rise towers in Flemington and North Melbourne that were controversially locked down in July at the start of Melbourne’s second wave. Since September 2016, demand has increased by 82% in that region, while applications also surged in north-eastern Melbourne, including Preston (200% increase), the Dandenong area (166%) and the Hume and Moreland area, including Broadmeadows (149%). Since the tower lockdown, the government has allocated $30m to voluntarily relocate families living in Melbourne’s public housing high-rises. And in July, it also committed to build 168 new social housing units as part of a Covid stimulus package. However, controversially, it is also selling off eight public housing estates to developers as part of a “renewal” project that will lead a 10% increase in social housing, which also includes affordable homes leased by non-profits. With the state budget due before the end of the year, Hibbins said forthcoming stimulus should include a massive housing boost. “There hasn’t been the will from governments in the past, but the Covid crisis has now presented us with a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to build back a better future, and access to secure housing for everyone should be the first step,” he said. A state government spokeswoman said Labor was responsible for record investment to support those sleeping rough, or at risk of homelessness, and family violence survivors who need a home. She said the 1,000 homes program “remains on track to be completed by 2022”. Contracts have been signed with builders for nearly all of the 1,000 homes. “We’ve also been invested almost $500m to build, repair and upgrade over 23,000 community and public housing homes across the state,” the spokeswoman said.
4||Australia's biggest companies are being run by a 'directors' club', study findsA major new study of who runs Australia’s biggest companies has confirmed the existence of a “directors’ club” and proves boards are not punished for poor performance, investors say. More than a third of vacancies on the boards of the top 300 listed companies in Australia are filled by directors of other companies in the same group, according to data compiled by proxy advice firm Ownership Matters. The study, which compiled information on every director of an ASX300 company since 2005, also found that the directors of poorly performing groups last almost as long as the directors of top companies. It comes as corporate Australia readies for an annual shareholder meeting season that got off to a torrid start last week when Crown Resorts directors survived a protest vote only due to the intervention of the company’s biggest shareholder, the billionaire James Packer. To combat the lack of consequences faced by directors, they should be forced to run for re-election every year, as happens in the UK, the Ownership Matters co-founder Dean Paatsch said. Currently, most Australian directors only face a shareholder vote once every three years. Non-executive directors are supposed to perform a key role in making capitalism work, by supervising the efforts of company management to grow businesses. Directors of companies in the ASX300 oversee $1.7tn in capital at a cost of around $400m in fees. Ownership Matters analysed the pool of 1,777 executives and 4,143 non-executive directors who have sat on ASX300 boards since 2005. Over that period, 38.5% of director positions among the group were filled by someone who already had a seat on a top 300 board. This ratio peaked at 43.4% in 2006 and currently sits at 36%, Ownership Matters said. The study found representation of women on boards has improved dramatically, rising from just 9.6% in 2005 to a third this year. It also found that once inside the “club”, the professional lifespan of directors soars. Three-quarters of non-executive directors served only once and served for an average of 71 months. However, the 14% who were lucky enough to pick up a second board seat saw their tenure extended to an average of 116 months. “Each additional seat extends a director’s service by at least two years,” and being made chair was worth an average of an extra four years, Ownership Matters said. But the data also shows that the directors of poorly performing companies were only a little more likely to be removed than those of good performers. “The effect is you would lose one more board member every three years,” Paatsch said. He said this was also often due to directors resigning before a company hit the wall, rather than remaining on the board of a struggling business. “Turnover often increases as a result of people managing their careers – jumping ship when they’re most needed,” he said. Nathan Parkin, the co-founder of fund manager Ethical Partners, said the study proved that a relatively small group of directors controlled many of Australia’s top companies. “It really is an invitation-only club,” he told Guardian Australia. It “mostly invites people who are a known quantity, or who are on other boards and known, and that’s a big part of the recruitment process,” he said. “There should be a wider pool of candidates – and there is a wider pool of candidates who are qualified and available.” He said the small pool of directors had positives, including making it easier for them to share information on good governance practices with each other. But it could also result in a culture where boards did not properly interrogate claims made to them by management, he said. Electing all directors annually was “probably a good practice”, he said. “It doesn’t need to lead to director turnover, necessarily, if everyone’s doing a good job.” However, Simon Mawhinney, the managing director of contrarian investor Allan Gray, said he feared there could be “some perverse outcomes” to annual director elections. “One of the big problems we have is this focus on short-termism,” he said. He said this could be a problem if directors endorsed a necessary investment program that took years to pay off. “You run the risk of coming up for re-election in a year and it looks awful,” he said. He said Ownership Matters’ use of share price to measure underperformance was “a little bit blunt” because it did not take account of factors outside the control of boards and management. “If you’re the CEO of an oil or gas company, then for the past five years you’ve presided over awfulness and there’s nothing you can do about that,” he said. “But if you were to sharpen the pen I don’t think the results would change a lot, and that’s concerning. “If people like me held these directors more accountable for capital allocation errors and sought blood when errors were made, that would increase rigour. But instead none of that happens, there’s no accountability.” Louise Davidson, the CEO of the Australian Council of Superannuation Investors, which advises super funds on governance issues, said the research showed progress on gender diversity – but “also suggests that there is a real risk of it plateauing unless the director pool continues to grow and becomes more diverse”. “Introducing new voices to the director pool will only strengthen good governance in Australian companies and in turn deliver stronger shareholder returns,” she said. She said ACSI supported annual director elections because they improved accountability. Nicola Wakefield Evans, a non-executive director of Lendlease and Macquarie Group who is the Australian lead for the 30% Club, a group that campaigns for more women on boards, said the increase in representation revealed by the report was “really pleasing”. “Obviously one thing people are interested in is, are we starting to see the clubbiness for women? And I don’t think we are.” She said women were still missing out on board positions because they lacked executive experience companies often look for. “So we do need to focus on that area.” Wakefield Evans said she was “agnostic” on whether boards should face re-election every year. “My own view is that they will come.” She said it meant angry shareholders would be better able to target the directors they blamed for a company’s predicament. Currently “shareholders want to send a message but they ping the wrong directors”, she said. “The only downside is that you then run the risk of losing the whole board, which is a huge amount of corporate memory.”
2||Born for the big stage: how Dustin Martin turned the tide in the AFL grand finalWe always suspected it, but now we know there has never been anyone like him. One Norm Smith medal guarantees a player’s place in the history of the game. Win two of them, and you’re set for life as one of the greats. Win three, and your name is Dustin Martin. If it is true that grand finals do not build character but instead reveal it, then Dusty is the quintessential man for the moment. The Richmond star was born for the big stage. The Tigers have now won three premierships in four seasons, and in each decider Martin was the best player on the park. It is a mind-boggling individual achievement, harder in its essence than winning three Brownlow medals or three Colemans. There is a reason it had never happened before: the perfect storm of aptitude, opportunity and sense of occasion seldom descends on the game. Only three others had previously won two Norm Smith medals – Gary Ayres, Luke Hodge and Andrew McLeod – but now one man stands alone. Parents rarely admit to having a favourite child, but if Martin were to nominate the pick of his three Norm Smiths the smart money would be on the 2020 edition. Against Adelaide in 2017 and Greater Western Sydney last year he was the chief punisher in two spankings; against Geelong on Saturday night he was the difference. Twenty-one possessions (10 contested), four clearances, three tackles and four goals were the sum of his numerical return, but it was his ability to influence the course of the game in key moments that set him apart. Per se, it has been setting him apart for some time now. The highlights reel of the grand final will forever favour Martin’s fourth goal, an astonishing snap late in the fourth term when the game had already been iced. Mere mortals wouldn’t even attempt it; for Martin it is all in a day’s work. “One of the most individually brilliant goals that I’ve ever seen,” teammate Shane Edwards told AFL Media afterwards. “You become a spectator. For about 10 seconds there you’re just thinking, ‘He couldn’t, could he?’, and he does. The occasion, he’s just got a feel for it.” The goal was a wondrous illustration of Martin’s supernatural talents but it was his industry precisely two quarters prior that marked the game’s most pivotal moment. Twenty-one points down deep in the first half, and with Geelong dominating play, Richmond needed something from somewhere. Step forward Martin, who shrugged off Jake Kolodjashnij as if he were an Auskicker before snapping truly for a desperately needed goal. Not only did it cut the margin to 15 points at the long break, but it planted a seed of doubt from which the Cats would never recover. “It was an important goal,” coach Damien Hardwick said. “That’s what great players do. They take their opportunities and they get the job done. That’s why he sits here with his third Norm Smith. The significance of his goals were really important. We looked at the quality of work he’d put in throughout the course of the game, we probably knew his third Norm Smith wasn’t too far away.” And with that third Norm Smith comes the unofficial accolade as the greatest finals footballer in AFL/VFL history. Of course, not all great players get the chance to do what Martin has done. Being exceedingly good is one thing, being in an exceedingly good team is sometimes another. Many a fine footballer has never played in a grand final, let alone three and been the star turn each of them. And that is the lot of the professional. There are no guarantees. If Martin has anything resembling a peer in the modern game, it is Patrick Dangerfield. A Brownlow medalist like Martin, Dangerfield endured 13 seasons and 269 senior games before he got to play in a grand final. The Gabba decider could well be his last. But the reality is nobody really comes close to Martin. Not now. Not as a three-time premiership winner and triple Norm Smith medalist to go with his countless other baubles. Turning 30 in 2021, it is hard to know what else he will achieve. It is debateable he will win another Brownlow but one could argue he is a better player now than in his younger days when his output was measured by disposals. Importantly, his body and mind look to be operating in peak condition. Age, however, does weary them eventually. It was fitting that Martin should be in opposition when the curtains were drawn on Gary Ablett’s career. The comparisons – and the parallels – between the two are stark. Ablett departs the game as one of its finest products, alongside Martin the best of a generation. But one can only wonder – and wonder if Ablett wonders – what might have been had he stayed at Geelong instead of followed the money trail to Gold Coast in his prime. As a one-club man at the fulcrum of his team’s ascent from middling to magnificent, Martin will never have cause to wonder what might have been, whether his God-given talents could have better contributed to individual and team success. To the man himself, the latter is the one that counts. “There’s no way I would have been able to do it without my teammates,” Martin said of his third Norm Smith. “We’re an unbelievable team. It’s not a one-man team, we all do our part. We’re humble and we’re hungry. Success is awesome.” No, Dusty, you are awesome. The pleasure is all ours.
0||Southampton v Everton: Premier League – as it happenedSo there we go. Thanks all for your company and comments – sorry I couldn’t use them all – and enjoy the rest of the weekend. Ta-ra. And here’s our match report. Sad news: Kevin McCarra has died. Here’s our tribute to a football-writing pioneer. Back to the red, here’s Gary Naylor: “I’m an Everton fan and it’s textbook. “Any player who lunges at an opponent in challenging for the ball from the front, from the side or from behind using one or both legs, with excessive force or endangers the safety of an opponent is guilty of serious foul play.” I’m not sure we can call it a lunge; it looked to me like he trod on him in the course of running in the usual manner. Elsewhere, Newcastle seem to have picked six wingers for their trip to Wolves. I’m buzzing to see how they make that boring. “How many times does Digne try to bring someone down without trying to play the ball before it becomes deliberate?” asks Stephen Henderson. Yes, a fair question. But the first attempt is a booking, so maybe two yellows and a one-match ban is the correct outcome here. Fun and games from elsewhere... OK, we’ve just see it again, and I’m actually leaning towards the two Robbies in terms of intent – he probably didn’t do it on purpose – but the law doesn’t require it to be. If it’s strict liability, then it’s a red I guess, but it shouldn’t be. “Robbie is on NBC giving the ‘his hands were in the air’ defence, it’s a yellow card. Rubbish. I am a Everton fan but you are responsible for your studs.” Hands in the air is as close as football gets to a smoking gun. I guess we’ll see it again in a minute. Ward-Prowse says his team didn’t like the idea of a team coming to play them unbeaten, and said that if they can get to the ball first, they’re well organised and have the firepower to score goals. He’s also pleased with his goal – and knows he needs to score more, as the manager is demanding of him – but thinks they should’ve won by more. “Sashes - hope I’m not too late,” says James Bolle. “I’m biased but it’s not been bettered.” Imagine telling Malcolm Shotton he had to go to work in that! “Digne red,” says Arran Ridley. “Digne means worthy in French.” Affaire classée, Lieutenant Columbo. Big picture: Southampton vault up to fifth, three points off the lead; Everton stay top. “Fitting, perhaps, that Everton are decked out in seafoam as they wave goodbye to their unbeaten run,” emails Grant Tennille. Also, since when was foam green? Southampton were excellent, Everton abject. 90+5 min “Six points separate the top fifteen teams,” says Bill Hargreaves, “some of which have a game in hand. The bottom five have had it, in terms of title aspirations. Probably.” It’s great, isn’t it? Before the season, I’d have backed Man City, but having watched them a few times I’m beginning to wonder if this side is finished, and whether Guardiola has the ability or desire to rebuild. So I’d back Liverpool. 90+4 min Alan Smith gives Redmond the man of the match award, which is fair enough, but I’d probably have gone for Ings. 90+2 min Calvert-Lewin leaves a boot in on Vestergaard and is booked. He’s had better days. 90+1 min “Not quite a sash,” says Justin Kavanagh, “but let’s mention the finest Manchester United second strip of all, this three-striped wonder from the 1977 Charity Shield. That game was shown last night on Irish TV and, fool that I am, I watched it through, not remembering that it was a 0-0 draw. Better than their 0-0 draw earlier in the day, mind. There’s a full lockdown in Ireland, in my defence.” Oh my days, that is inspired scheduling! 90 min There’ll be five additional minutes. 90 min “I watched the replay five times,” returns Mike MacKenzie. “It was a deserved red as Digne’s studs raked Water-Peters achilles area (and it was of course from behind). NBC commentators are useless.” That was certainly my reading of it. 89 min Another change for Southamton, Dan N’Lundulu making his Premier League debut by replacing Che Adams. 87 min “I’d certainly agree that the Saints have been good overall last season and this one so far,” says Mike MacKenzie. “But I think it shows the main problem with the PL which is unequal distribution of revenue among teams. A team like Southampton (or Wolves in recent years) can become quite decent but it reaches a plateau. Getting better means buying more expensive players which they can’t afford and then the rich teams come calling for their top players. Better revenue sharing is essential to make the league competitive in the long run.” Yes, I agree with all of that, bar the use of Wolves as an example. It’s tricky, as I don’t believe in making players play anywhere they dom’t want to because their labour belongs to them. The single aspect that’d make the most difference, though, probably isn’t even a financial one, but just reducing the number of subs allowed. 86 min Southampton replace Armstrong, who’s put in a monstrous shift considering, with Diallo. Why we need a stadium announcer to tell us this, I’m not entirely certain. 85 min In fairness to Everton, assuming they lose this, they’ll still be top of the league at full-time. 84 min Lovely from Romeu, lifting insouciantly over the Everton defence, Schuster-style, for the scurrying Ward-Prowse, but he can’t quite catch up with it. 83 min This has been an absolutely comprehensive doing. 81 min “NBC commentator insists Digne red not called for,” tweets Ron Stack, “says a ‘more football-trained eye’ would see it differently.” I don’t know – I’d need to see it again, because doing MBMs, you spend as much time watching fingers and console as the actual game, but it looked bang to rights on first half-glance. I’m not sure who gave that opinion, but I’ve been watching football for 38 years; how many are necessary to be deemed “football-trained”? I daresay the officials have a few years in them too. 80 min Everton finally get Calvert-Lewin on the ball in the box, but he’s double-teamed ad easily unloaded. 78 min Southampton fancy more here and win a corner down the right which Betrand swings in towards the far post, where Vestergaard, 9”4 tall, has somehow got himself in a battle with Gordon, 3”5 tall. But he can only head over the bar. 77 min “Sashed kits,” emails Ed Thorpe. “Can we have a shout-out for this lovely effort from Dulwich Hamlet Women, which is so nice the men sometimes borrow it as a third kit?” A bit Party Rings, but very smart nevertheless. 76 min Calvert-Lewin has barely had a kick, and tearing down the left, he’s easily thwarted by Bednarek. 75 min Digne will miss the away games with Newcastle and Fulham, which sandwich the home game with Manchester United. With Richarlison also absent for the first two of those and Coleman out injured, they’ve got a problem. 73 min Digne insists he didn’t mean it and hoofs something on his way down the tunnel; if only there was some course of dealing to give us an insight into his intention. Dearie me, what a misplacing of noggin that is! Walker-Peters runs away from Digne, who has a hack, misses, raises arms which makes all the difference, then administers a stamp to the achilles. See you in three games mate; absolute later. 71 min “It would be helpful for the neutral if Southampton could decide if they’re going to be woeful or decent,” says Stephen Carr, “as I’m struggling to keep up.” They’ve been good for quite sometime, I’d say, and they’ve been very good tonight. 70 min Bern “bites yer legs” Ard accidentally clatters Walker-Peters, who comes through on his blind side. He’s down briefly, but we’re quickly on with the game. 69 min Everton are pressing now, but still struggling to create. A clincher looks more likely than a livener. 67 min This is it. 65 min I’ve just discovered the Clive Allen played for seven London clubs, if we count his not playing for Arsenal. Can anyone beat that? I also recall the absolutely lush kit he wore for Bordeaux, complete with long shorts. This isn’t quite it, but is also nice. 64 min In a game almost entirely devoid of reducers, it takes the smallest man on the pitch to administer one, Bernard clattering Romeu. He’s booked, and would be well advised to watch his step from here on in. 63 min Looking again, Ings might’ve been marginally ahead of play. He must’ve left it for the man coming in. 62 min What?! Redmond collects a loose ball after useful foraging by Adams, slipping outside him to Armstrong; his cross is a doozy, but somehow Ings manages to avoid tapping it home! Not a clue. 61 min I saw Gordon play for Everton in the League Cup game against Salford. He looked a serious talent, and my guess is he’ll play in behind Calvert-Lewin. 59 min “No discussion on sash kits would be complete without mentioning Crystal Palace. Here’s a mid-80s beauty.” The one I found was earlier than that, but it’s the same idea. I assume the photo was taken after Allen signed for Palace from Arsenal, who he’d joined for £1.25m only to leave without playing a game, in a swap deal for Kenny Sansom. 58 min Ancelotti goes again, bringing on the extremely exciting Anthony Gordon for Doucoure, and also sending on Delph for Sigurdsson. 57 min Digne crosses and Walker-Peters has both hands above his head, giving Everton a free-kick just outside the box, left-hand side. Sigurdsson decides to swing it out, but can’t avoid the first man. 56 min Whatever Ancelotti said at half-time, it hasn’t worked. Problem being, he’s not replete with options that might solve it. Two strikers would at least change things though. 54 min But look at this work of art from Southampton, as referenced earlier. 52 min Godfrey chases Bertrnad into the box and Bertrand falls, but there’s not enough contact for either ref or VAR to award a penalty. 51 min “I HATE it when team turn out in totally unnecessary alternative strips,” emails Simon Gill. “Example 1: Everton today. Seafoam green and charcoal indeed. What would the likes of Shanks or Cloughie have had to say about that? Example 2: Wolves at Leeds the other day. The old gold and black is iconic; turning out in something like the castoffs from a Portugal training strip is not. Even if that is meant to be somehow referential, it still sucks.” Tangentially, I used to like my team playing away to Southampton because we got to see the blue third kit RIP, of which I’m struggling to find a snap. 50 min On which point, Ralph Hasenhuttl very clearly knows some things. If I was a rich club contemplating a change of manager, he’d be near the top of my list, with Marco Rose and Julian Nagelsmann. 49 min So far, the second half looks a lot like the first. This match-is not suiting Everton. 47 min “I’m not against sashes on kits,” says Chris Fowler, “and I like Rayo Vallecano’s model. But, although I know that in the early days Saints kit had a sash, I always prefer their kit, at least, to be red and white stripes. Like the good old days (the 1970s, when I first went to the Dell, for example), when the same strip was used season after season, The stripes didn’t have to be necessarily all the same, mind you, and I really liked the kit when Keegan played for us at the beginning of the 1980s, with its wide 2 red and 1 white stripes with a black pinstripe between them. The two shades of blue away kit was a cracker, too.” Yes, agreed on all counts. I remember a blue away kit a little later too, George Lawrence era, maybe worn in the 1986 cup semi against Liverpool. Ah, here we go. 46 min Immediately, Southampton get the ball into Adams, who holds up then swivels and shoots straight at Pickford. 46 min We go again. Everton send Bernard on for Iwobi, but I’m not certain what that’s going to achieve – the problem seemed to be one of shape rather than personnel. “Being at the top of the table this far into the season has been a dream,” says Mary Waltz. “Well it is quite obvious from this first half that it is still 2020, Trump is still President, and I am no longer dreaming and I am wide awake. My boys look like they have been reading their clippings and have been played off the field.” Half-time entertainment: Southampton have been excellent, while Everton have been poor. I doubt things’ll proceed quite like that, so the second half should be decent. 45+1 min Godfrey, who’s had a stressful baptism, finds himself in space down the right and considers a cross, which ends up flying behind. Whoops. 45 min There’ll be one additional minute. 44 min There’s not much rhythm to Everton’s play. I’m sure being without Richarlison is bothering them, but they’re also missing the width they get from Coleman down the right, and I wonder if changing to a diamond or a 4-4-2 would help them get into the game. Or maybe they might just play better. 43 min James finds Doucoure, and the ball ends up with Iwobi, but Ings is back by his own box to tackle. What a very very good player he is – you could tell when he was at Burnley in that first season they came back up, a one-man forward line and doing brilliantly in the bigger games. It didn’t work out at Liverpool, but right now he’d be a really good alternative to Firmino. 40 min Here come Southampton again, and Adams looks offside, but the flag stays down because this is now the procedure. Armstrong then drills home what looks like number three, but the flag is then raised. Southampton look dangerous every time they go forward, and though Everton look good for at least one, they’re struggling to create and still look likelier to concede. 37 min “It’s one of the better kits of the 2020 PL lot,” says Mike Hollitscher. “You take the River Plate/Rayo Vallecano sash and reverse the colours. I don’t get why some don’t seem to like it. Is it too Johnny Foreigner?” I doubt it – the whole culture is influenced by fashion from elsewhere. I can only speak for myself, and say that on its own, it’s not bad even if it looks like they’re in a beauty pageant, but it’s not what I’d expect from a Southampton kit. And this Everton one, modelled by the HILARIOUS John Bailey, what a CHARACTER is also a jazzer. Danny Ings, the creator supreme! This time, he turns up on the left, bustling away from poor Godfrey and slapping over a low cross that falls nicely for Adams. He takes a touch, ponders the ultimate futility of existence, as the 35 defenders inside the box run about in circles, then cracks a low one past Pickford with the help of a slight deflection. I’m not sure that was in the corner. 33 min “Jumping in on the kit chat,” says Barry Brian, “there are some disastrous kits this year (Chelsea’s blue and pink, Man United’s black and white, Inter home), but this Everton number certainly isn’t one of them. As for Southampton, I love a sash but fear we are in danger of overuse in recent years.” I quite like the United one, though it reeks of people with attention-seeking facial hair and glasses – yes, I realise that these days, that narrows things down to about 42 percent of the world’s population – doing themselves mischiefs trying to design something “iconic”. As for this Everton one, it’s a nice colour, but very toothpaste. 31 min “It looks like whoever designed the kit has been watching the Canadian Premier League, says Kevin Smith, attaching a picture of Calgary’s Cavalry FC. 29 min Both sides are playing well, but Southampton have looked the incisive to this point, and ought really to have scored sooner. Everton need to get James on the ball and give Calvert-Lewin some decent service, or failing that, some service. Twenty-four seconds later, poor Pickford is picking a pot of pickled peppers the ball out of his net, and what lovely reason he was given. Ward-Prowse finds Ings, who feeds him back in with a megs pass, and a deft first touch puts him in prime position to absolutely shmice a fine finish into the far bottom corner! 26 min Nice from Southampton, Redmond again on the ball and sliding back and across for Romeu, tanking onto it ... and he absolutely lamps it, a little flick off Keane forcing Pickford into a plunging save! 25 min “Everton’s kit is officially ‘seafoam green and charcoal’, by the way,” emails Andrew Goudie. That reminds me of the salmon and pink classic. 23 min Ings sticks one out wide to Bertrand, and another low cross finds Armstrong, but he’s kind of side-on to it so that when the ball arrives at speed he can’t quite resolve the conundrum of his feet, tentatively poking at a backheel that gets nowhere. 21 min How do we feel about this Southampton rig? Do they look like contestants in a beauty pageant? 19 min How! Again, Everton switch the ball left, this time to Sigurdsson, and he has a look the larrups a shot which looks to be flying over and plenty ... until it dips mid-swerve and crack the crossbar! 17 min Redmond gets himself at Godfrey again, but this time opts to go inside. The attack continues, the ball comes back to him, and this time he sticks Betrand in behind yerman – he needs help from Doucoure, who I think is the midfielder on that side. This time, though, he escapes when Bertrand’s low cross goes into the side-netting. 16 min ...James gets a decent connection and goes around the wall, but McCarthy waits for him, collecting the ball without needing to move. This is a good game so far. 15 min A foul on Calvert-Lewin gives Everton a free-kick 25 yards out, marginally right of centre. Sigurdsson fancies it, but not a chance James is stepping aside, armband or not... 13 min Everton are finding Iwobi constantly, and this time he comes in off the left and drags a shot towards the near post which is deflected just wide. The corner comes to nowt. 12 min Lovely from Southampton, Ings finding Redmond, who runs away from Godfrey – there it is! – then cuts back for Adams, arriving onto it just as you’d like. But he doesn’t make the connection he’s after, bumbling a shot that skips just wide. 11 min Godfrey misplaces a pass and Adams snaffles the loose ball, running away from Allan, but though Ings is moving for him he’s forced backwards and Southampton must build again. 10 min Everton are pushing. 8 min “I was there!” says Richard Adams of the Plymouth-Watford game. “And yes I can confirm that Reilly is hated in Plymouth for scoring against us. Pic: Umbrella Vi. Stood on the halfway line of the Lyndhurst End every home game for decades.” Can an end have a halfway line? But yes, I love this stuff – my mate’s nan is Man City’s longest-serving season-ticket holder. Here she is. 6 min “The Lomana Lua Lua incident actually led to the introduction of the exclusion rule barring on-loanees from playing against the parent club, as this Guardian article so eloquently explains,” emails Clive Naylor. It’s one of those that seems counter-intuitive. Of course they should play, but not allowing it guards against skulduggery. 5 min Nice from Everton, Allan spinning and laying back to Keane, who unleashes a gorgeous, er, “diag” to Iwobi. It’s about a yard too long. 4 min “A year to the day since this,” says Andrew Goudie, although that’s nothing compared to Ajax’s tonking yesterday of VVV Venlo (surely the only team with four consecutive Vs in their name).” Just when I thought we’d managed not to raise it. That will haunt all involved forever. 3 min It comes to nowt. 2 min Southampton win a free-kick out on the left, ideal for Ward-Prowse to swing in, and Calvert-Lewin is up first, but a shout from Keane allows him to escape at cost of a corner. 1 min I feel like Allan is the new Belgium, a player everyone knows and accepts is good, but is discussed like some sort of secret whose contributions are noticeable only to the highly enlightened. 1 min Off we go! The players take a knee. Let’s support them by donating, educating others and educating ourselves. The players are out! “I was on the North Bank when Inchy Heath scored that goal,” says Gary Naylor. “It’s hard to put into words how much the FA Cup meant back then, and the feeling of going to Wembley after being at Elland Road in 1980 watching Frank Lampard run round the corner flag. Happiest of days.” Yup, I remember. My parents went to the 1983 reply without me (I was deemed too young, aged four) and I’ve never quite forgiven them. And my team winning it the following year remains an extremely special memory. “Manchester United, playing with great pluck and intelligence, this player Hughes coming into it more and more...” On which point, did we have way better commentators then, whose lines we recall like that, or are we just old with too much football on to allow us to remember any of it? Oh yes! This from the game in question. Goodness me! Here’s Mac Millings with further details: “In the other semi-final of the ‘84 FA Cup, the mighty Watford FC defeated Plymouth Argyle by the odd goal. Perhaps the most notable footnote to that game was the reaction of one Plymouth fan to Watford’s goalscorer, George Reilly. Key line: ‘The attacker chewed off one of Reilly’s ears and whispered ‘Plymouth’ into the other one.’” I remember the game, but I did not know that. Ralph tells Sky that it’s been a “very intense time with lots of ups and downs,” and recently, performances have stabilised. The team, aren’t as far in development as they think they can be and still have things to improve, but they like to learn and have a good chance to win every game. Today, he thinks, is a good test against a strong side, and though the table doesn’t tell you everything after five games, it’s not a coincidence that they’re top. “Not sure about the Pennant one,” says Adam Griffiths, “but Lomana Lua Lua scored a last kick of the game equaliser for Portsmouth against Newcastle in 2004, while on loan from Newcastle. For reasons that are unclear, Newcastle hadn’t insisted on a ‘you can’t play against us’ clause. And yes, he did the full celebration.” Lovely stuff. Email! “As a neutral Mancunian (who only got Sky recently after hearing Murdoch had left) I’m really looking forward to this. Everton turned a corner this season and Southampton did last season. Both seem to want to control the game rather than sitting back defending.” Yes, I really like both of these too, and think we’ll see a decent game. One of the reasons the league table is as it is is because of corona, one way and another, but another reason is that almost every club has serious players who can hurt you. Which I guess brings us back to Sky. What Southampton need to beware is Everton’s attackers darting between the lines of what can be quite a rigid formation, and losing the numbers game in midfield. My guess is that they’ll have made specific plans for dealing with James. So what’s going to happen in this game? If I was Ralph Hasenhuttl (for avoidance of doubt, I’m not), I’d be looking to get Redmond running at Godfrey wherever possible, but as early as possible too – as in-form him is not something to face at the best of times, never mind out of position, on debut. Everton, meanwhile, need to beware the press that might stop the playing out, and in Romeu, Allan will find someone who delights in all the same things as him. Yet somehow I don’t think they’ll be friends. Kieron Dyer then spoke really movingly about those men as his pioneers, leading into a discussion about the dearth of black managers. The lack of Rooney rule, and the lack of desire on the part of the Premier League to institute such a thing, tells us how much we still have to do. On Sky at the moment, we’re watching a mini-doc on black players in the Premier League years, with Andy Cole, Paul Ince, John Barnes and Troy Townsend. Check it out, it’s really good. All black lives matter, people. These teams met in the 1984 FA Cup semi-final, at Highbury. Which ended in the traditional style. Ancelotti tells Sky that James didn’t train much in the week, but has recovered from his knock. He also says that replacing Gomes with Sigurdsson - who captains the side – was a difficult decision, but he’s been training well and is rewarded for his attitude. Meanwhile, Ancelotti is confident in Jordan Pickford, and hopes his team play with ambition; though they’ve started well, they need to keep at it. Everton, meanwhile, make three changes: Ben Godfrey makes his first Premier League start for the club, in for the injured Seamus Coleman; Gylfi Sigurdsson is in for Andre Gomes; and Alex Iwobi deputises for the suspended Richarlison. All of which tells us that James Rodriguez is good to go; good. On which point, I might be misremembering – YouTube is silent on the matter – but didn’t Jermaine Pennant once score the winner for Leeds, when on loan to them from Arsenal? Stuart Armstrong comes straight back for Southampton, following time out with corona; goodness me, if my experience is anything to go by he’ll find that an extremely taxing endeavour. He replaces Theo Walcott, not allowed to play according to the terms of his loan. Southampton (a throwback futuristic 4-4-2): McCarthy; Walker-Peters, Vestergaard, Bednarek, Bertrand; Armstrong, Romeu, Ward-Prowse, Redmond; Adams, Ings. Subs: Forster, Stephens, Long, Tella, Diallo, Vokins, N’Lundulu. Everton (a simple complex 4-3-3): Pickford; Godfrey, Mina, Keane, Digne; Doucoure, Allan, Sigurdsson; Rodriguez, Calvert-Lewin, Iwobi. Subs: Olsen, Delph, Nkounkou, Bernard, Gomes, Gordon, Davies. VAR’s straight man: Kevin Friend The Premier League is absolute state – and for once, in the best possible way. Everton top, and with this game in hand, is one thing. But if Southampton win today, they move from 13 to fifth, which is to say that this is a whole new ball game. I’m sure there’s a cheap gag to be made here, about Goodison and the world’s most perpetually indignant crowd, but anyway: Everton have very quickly become very good, and the way they’ve gone about it is telling. Carlo Ancelotti is a very particular kind of manager, who tends to inherit very good but very unhappy players, fortifying them with very good vibes and very minimalist tactics. And that lookslike what he’s done at Everton, finding the right few words for Dominic Calvert-Lewin – “one-touch finishes like Inzaghi” – then giving him, and Richarlison, all the scope that they need to show all that they have. First, he provided them with a happy working environment, then he contracted Abdoulaye Doucouré and Allan to build them a platform, and finally he asked James Rodríguez to decorate it. It’s extremely simple, but it’s also extremely difficult, because if it wasn’t, everyone would do it. Southampton are slightly different. Like playing for Ancelotti, playing for Ralph Hasenhüttl looks a lot of fun, but with a lot more drilling - pressing triggers, half-spaces, and all that jazz. In the end, though, it works partly because his team run their arses off for him and partly because they have a pair of big, burly, classy centre-forwards, marking whom sounds like the absolute worst way to spend a Sunday lunch. This should be really good. Kick-off: 2pm GMT, 3pm BST
0||Southampton's bright start ensures first defeat for lacklustre 10-man EvertonA year on from the infamous 9-0 home shellacking by Leicester, this was stirring evidence of Southampton’s impressive transformation under Ralph Hasenhüttl, whose side ended Everton’s unbeaten start to the season as fine goals by James Ward‑Prowse and Che Adams brought Carlo Ancelotti’s side back down to earth with a bump. Everton were insipid from the moment they fell behind and Lucas Digne’s red card for appearing to rake his studs down Kyle Walker-Peters’ achilles with around 20 minutes to play compounded a frustrating trip south. For the Saints, this was the closest thing to a complete performance. With 39 minutes played, Stuart Armstrong, the beneficiary of Adams’s endeavour and awareness, thought he had added a third. At that point Ancelotti removed his hands from the pockets of his royal blue trench coat and made his feelings known, berating Jordan Pickford for failing to hoover up the initial pass downfield to Adams, always a willing runner. Pickford argued there was no such problem and, as it happened, the assistant referee flagged for offside and the goal was disallowed, but it was an episode symbolic of the kind of chaos that ensued as Southampton carved Everton open. Ancelotti revealed James Rodríguez had barely trained this week after sustaining a knock against Liverpool last weekend and, while he conceded the Colombian was undercooked, that was the least of the manager’s concerns. Everton were two goals down inside 35 minutes, with Ward-Prowse arrowing in across Pickford after a neat give-and-go with Danny Ings. Ward‑Prowse hooked the ball over Allan before Ings slipped in the midfielder, who finished emphatically. Adams, who has often slogged without reward, doubled the advantage just eight minutes later. Ings again turned provider, scooting away from Ben Godfrey and Yerry Mina before hanging a cross towards the back post, where Ward‑Prowse was waiting unmarked. But Adams, too, was lurking and, with the Everton defence having gone walkabout, he smashed in via a Gylfi Sigurdsson deflection. Given Everton have never won a Premier League game when trailing by two or more goals at half-time, it is fair to say Ancelotti had work to do. He tweaked personnel at the interval, introducing Bernard in place of Alex Iwobi, one of three substitutes from the Merseyside derby promoted to the starting lineup, but little changed. They sorely missed the suspended Richarlison – they are yet to win a Premier League game without the Brazilian since he signed two years ago – and the isolated Dominic Calvert-Lewin cut an aloof figure aside from an initial spurt, but it was the absence of Séamus Coleman, who was forced off against Liverpool, that told most dearly. Godfrey again deputised at right-back but the £25m signing from Norwich never looked comfortable. Twenty-eight seconds into the second half Everton were fortunate not to trail by a bigger margin after Adams comfortably eluded Godfrey inside the channel but the striker dawdled before getting a tame shot away. At least Godfrey tried to atone for his errors, racing back to regain possession after losing the ball upfield early in the second half. The body language of Digne and Sigurdsson, who had the captain’s armband until being withdrawn on the hour, was not so reassuring. Everton were lethargic and lukewarm at best. Sigurdsson came close to opening the scoring after a swerving shot from distance skidded off the top of the Southampton crossbar, cutting inside after collecting a Rodríguez pass, bringing a chorus of gasps from the Everton dignitaries and substitutes scattered across the stand. Everton’s appetite appeared to wane but Southampton were relentless and strode forward with the tempo the animated Hasenhüttl conducts on the touchline. He bounced around the technical area to roar his players on, yelping in disbelief as Armstrong’s cross somehow eluded Ings in the six-yard box. Southampton were supercharged, but not by any ghosts of that Leicester game. “It’s not interesting for us,” Hasenhüttl said. “We are so concentrated on what we have to improve all this time; we don’t have time to speak about anniversaries. The way the guys managed this was game outstanding.” It was a similar story in the first half, when Nathan Redmond dragged wide after meeting a cross by Ryan Bertrand, again overlooked by the England manager, Gareth Southgate, this month. Moments later, a Bertrand cross pinballed around the Everton penalty area before Michael Keane eventually averted the danger after Walker-Peters recycled possession. But that was just the start of things to come, not that Southampton will be resting on their laurels any time soon. “If you lean back a little bit, you immediately get the bill for it,” said Hasenhüttl. “We have to keep on working and keep on being focused. It seems we have definitely done some big steps forward. ”
6||Ann Ambache obituaryMy friend Ann Ambache, who has died aged 72 of a heart attack, left Northern Ireland in the 1960s for a 40-year teaching career in England. She herself carried on learning new skills all her life, which enabled her to make a move from home economics to teaching information technology to children with special needs. Ann was born in Dungannon, County Tyrone, where her parents, Bridget (nee Hart) and Patrick Campbell, ran a small farm. Ann, eldest of four children, attended Killyman junior school and Dungannon academy. She had to be self-sufficient from an early age and helped her aunt in her shop. After taking her A-levels, Ann trained as a home economics teacher at Mary Ward College in Nottingham (1967-70) and then taught in Warley in the West Midlands. She also worked for several evenings a week in a hostel for older children. There she met Jeremy Ambache, a young social worker. He asked her out and for their first date she took him to a parents’ evening at her school. They married in 1973 and moved to London, where Ann became a supply teacher at Sacred Heart high school in Hammersmith. After a career break to have their daughters, Zoe and Lucy, she returned to Sacred Heart. Ann had a real curiosity and thirst for learning and completed a BEd at the University of Surrey in 1985 while teaching. Policy changes moved home economics into food technology, which inspired Ann to retrain. She gained a certificate in counselling at Westminster Pastoral Foundation in 1991; a BA (Hons) in psychology at the Open University in 1992; a diploma in information technology and education at King’s College London in 1993 and a diploma in education for those with special needs or dyslexia at Kingston University in 1995. With her new skills she developed a rewarding career in special needs education with responsibility for IT, joining Cambridge school in Hammersmith, where she remained until her retirement in 2008. She resisted school politics and management, preferring to stay in the classroom, and was famous among her students for her portrayal of a good and bad interview job candidate – everyone remembers her impression of a scruffy, gum chewing and uninterested teenager. Ann swam and attended the gym daily at Putney leisure centre, near her home in south-west London. She enjoyed London’s cultural opportunities, especially seeing Ibsen or Chekhov plays, and was the secretary of a women’s culture and theatre group in Putney, where she and I first met, for more than 20 years. She had a wicked sense of humour and was highly irreverent; she was a “giver”, especially to her family, looking after her six grandchildren during her 13 years of retirement. She was a wonderful cook and loved to grow and pick fruit and vegetables. Ann is survived by Jeremy, Zoe and Lucy, and her grandchildren, Eva, Ella, Una, Rory, Zander and Stella, and by her brothers, John and Francis, and sister, Kathleen.
5||In the restaurant where I work, Covid has brought out the worst in customersWaitressing can be a difficult job at the best of times. The hours are long, the work is exhaustingly physical and the customers have a tendency to take out on you whatever frustrations have been building in them all week. I fondly remember one weekend brunch shift when a woman berated me because we only had white sugar for her coffee, not brown; she insisted that this was a breach of “etiquette”. She was definitely not sweet enough. I took the job last summer as a way to make ends meet while I started a new life in Manchester after moving from London. It wasn’t exactly what I’d trained for in drama school, but it paid the bills and I love being around people. I took the good customers with the bad, and found solace venting with my partner at the end of the day. Then Covid hit. We endured the closure of the restaurant due to lockdown along with the rest of the country, but from July onwards we were lucky enough to be able to set up an ad hoc outdoor space for customers. It was a relief to be able to keep the place open and all we asked of customers was to register with the Covid app, wear a mask when they entered the indoor area and stay seated as we provided table service. Maybe waitressing would even become easier, I thought, as groups were restricted to no more than six. Surely this would be a simple enough bargain to make in order for us all to stay safe while enjoying a return to some semblance of our normal lives? Yet since customers have started to stream back through our doors, I have been faced with a different reality. When I greet them and ask them to scan the test-and-trace app barcode, many will ignore me or say they don’t have their mobile phones with them, only to sit down and put their phones on the table. It’s not just my restaurant that faces this sort of attitude; one of my favourite places to eat in the city was given a two-star review by a customer complaining about being asked to register on the app. Apparently the place was “brim with ridiculous rules and concepts”. Tell that to Boris Johnson, love, not the service staff. As we’ve moved into tier 2 and now tier 3, we have had to be alert to groups of more than one household turning up. Despite the rules, it’s patently obvious that we’re receiving parties of mixed households, unless communal living has really taken off in Manchester. There is only so much we can do: I can’t ask to see their house keys, or quiz them on each other’s preferred breakfast cereal. The rules are unsustainable and shouldn’t be our responsibility. Then there’s making sure people are wearing their masks to keep each other and staff like me safe. You’d think we were taking away people’s right to vote by asking them to pop a piece of cloth over their face while they nip to the toilet. All of this would be bad enough, but to compound issues, management have decided that the maxim “the customer is always right” endures, despite staff going no further than enforcing government regulations. When you eventually get everyone seated, you hope that the hard work is behind you. But then comes the shouting across the room to get your attention, and the eyes boring into your head as you finish up serving another customer. I’ve cried in work more than once because of the way a customer has treated me. In hospitality there’s always that one difficult customer, but nothing could prepare me for life post-lockdown. We all want to get back to normal and it can feel frustrating at times, but this situation has truly brought out the worst in people. If you plan to go out this week, please remember to be polite to your waiting staff: they’re living through exactly the same pandemic as you. The writer is a waitress in Manchester
17||Joan Hocquard, Britain’s oldest person, dies aged 112Britain’s oldest person, Joan Hocquard, who drove ambulances during the second world war, has died aged 112. Hocquard died at her home in Poole, Dorset, on Saturday. Her nephew, Paul Reynolds, 74, said she had always sought to live life to the full and that she “loved eating butter and cream and didn’t believe in dieting”. She was born on 29 March 1908, under the reign of Edward VII, the same day as the world’s former oldest man, Bob Weighton, who died in Hampshire in May. Their final birthday celebrations were held behind closed doors because of the national coronavirus lockdown. The pair also shared a birthday with Alf Smith from St Madoes in Perthshire, who shared the title of Britain’s oldest man with Weighton until his death in 2019 at the age of 111. Reynolds described Hocquard as an independent spirit who had refused a card from the Queen on her 100th birthday because “she did not want people to know how old she was”. Born in Holland Park, west London, Hocquard spent much of her childhood in Kenya, where her father was a colonial officer in charge of shipping on the Great Lakes in east Africa. She later worked as a cook in a French hotel near Geneva in Switzerland, and met her husband, Gilbert, through their shared love of sailing. During the second world war, she drove ambulances in London before she and Gilbert moved to the south coast of England. The couple travelled across Europe in a camper van and went on yachting holidays until his death in 1981. In the late 1980s she met widower Kenneth Bedford, who was 20 years her junior, at the Bournemouth Gramophone Society and they had lived together since in Poole. She lived “an extraordinary innings and died peacefully in her own home, which is all you could wish for”, said Reynolds. “She was a strong-willed character and loved telling stories about how naughty she was as a schoolgirl.” The oldest living Briton is now Lilian Priest from Swanage in Dorset, who is 111.
1||Party chair insists Republicans will hold Senate after Trump voices doubtAfter Donald Trump reportedly told donors it would be “tough” for Republicans to hold the Senate, and said he could not and did not want to help some senators, party chair Ronna McDaniel insisted the Senate would stay in GOP hands, saying: “I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president.” In fact, as the party faces strong headwinds at the polls, senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Martha McSally of Arizona and John Cornyn of Texas have sought to put daylight between themselves and Trump. Sasse predicted a “Senate bloodbath” and criticised Trump’s views and behaviour. McSally dodged opportunities to express support in a debate. Cornyn sought to portray himself as an independent thinker on policy. Sasse is a shoo-in for re-election but McSally and Cornyn are in tight races. “You know I don’t see these senators distancing themselves from the president,” McDaniel insisted on Fox News Sunday, before admitting: “I mean Ben Sasse is an exception, obviously.” Asked about McSally’s answers to the question “Are you proud of your support for President Trump?” – repeating that she was “proud to be fighting for Arizona every single day” – McDaniel said: “She’s going to rallies with him and she’s all over the state with him. Martha McSally supports the president.” According to FiveThirtyEight.com, while Trump trails Joe Biden by 2.6 points in Arizona, McSally is struggling in her battle with Mark Kelly, a former astronaut now a campaigner for gun control reform. Other Republicans facing tough fights include Cory Gardner in Colorado, David Perdue and Kelly Loeffler in Georgia, Thom Tillis in North Carolina, Lindsey Graham in South Carolina, Susan Collins in Maine and Joni Ernst in Iowa. Most forecasters give Democrats a good chance of retaking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47. Trump insisted again on Sunday that his party could take back the House but that seems unlikely, Democratic control firm enough that Speaker Nancy Pelosi barely created a ripple with her confirmation to CNN’s State of the Union that at the age of 80 she will seek to stay in the role. Corey Lewandowski, a Trump adviser, played down the president’s comments about the House but told NBC’s Meet the Press he had been “out aggressively campaigning for members of the US Senate” and had “asked his surrogates, including me, to go out and help.” Trump’s comments, to donors in Nashville, Tennessee before this week’s debate with Biden, were reported by the Washington Post. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” he said. “The Senate is very tough.” He also said: “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in. I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” McDaniel said Trump “has done more for the senators with what he’s done with helping the Win Red platform, with small-dollar online fundraising, with the ground game the RNC has put in place and all of these states. We want to keep the Senate.” Lewandowski said the president had “helped raise money. He’s got a great partnership with Senate leader Mitch McConnell. They’ve raised money together, and we feel very, very strongly that we’re going to retain our majority in the US Senate.” Frustrated by McConnell’s rush to confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court, Democrats are considering structural reform to both the court and the Senate. McDaniel said: “Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are not not hiding the fact they want to get rid of the filibuster” – the 60-vote threshold for new legislation – “and they want to fundamentally change the third branch of government [the court]. “This is a tight race, we know this, but the trend lines are good in these states. You’re seeing McSally gain momentum. You also didn’t mention candidates like John James [Michigan] and Jason Lewis [Minnesota], who are in competitive races against Democrat incumbents. “So we’re gonna keep the Senate, we’re working hard to do that.”
0||Kevin McCarra: a pioneer who changed football journalismIt was around about 1990, long before journalists had mobile phones. Kevin McCarra, the former football correspondent of the Guardian who died from Alzheimer’s disease on Saturday aged 62, was travelling from Glasgow to cover a game at Easter Road for Scotland on Sunday when his train got stuck somewhere near Falkirk. Time passed. It became clear Kevin wasn’t going to make kick-off. Still the train didn’t move. He wasn’t going to make half-time, either. Unable to contact his desk but knowing they had a space to fill and needed copy, he composed a piece about being on the train with frustrated fans, filed when he was finally able to disembark and somehow produced something true and insightful, and far more memorable than anything that had been written at the game itself. It was a moment of improvised unorthodoxy typical of Scotland on Sunday at the time. It was a bright, fresh paper, fizzing with imagination in every section. Kevin’s role was vital. In the era of Fever Pitch, fanzines and Italian football on Channel 4, Kevin was one of those who transformed football journalism. Out went the jaded hackery of old, and in came a far more literary sensibility. Kevin had been doing a PhD placing the 15th-century Scottish poet Robert Henryson in his European context when an arts centre where he worked part-time asked him to put on an exhibition about Scottish football. That led to him being commissioned to co-produce A Pictorial History of Scottish Football, published in 1984. He wrote it on an Amstrad PCW using the deeply unintuitive Locoscript. As anybody who sat near him during a game knew, it was the last thing to do with computers he ever really mastered. “Technology is a word we only use when it goes wrong,” he would say; he used it a lot. The contacts made during his research led to further writing opportunities. As disillusionment with academia set in, Kevin became a regular in Scottish Field before being invited to join Scotland on Sunday when it launched in 1988. He also co-founded the Mariscat Press, publishing poetry editions including Edwin Morgan’s 1984 work Sonnets from Scotland. Kevin later worked for the Sunday Times and the Times before succeeding David Lacey as the Guardian’s football correspondent after the 2002 World Cup. It was his dream job. He even took a pay cut to move, although only because he misremembered his salary during negotiations (characteristically – practicalities were never a forte). It was Lacey he most admired and Lacey whose prose his most resembled, crisp and free of cliche, capable of summing up a game with deceptive economy. Looking back at old pieces now what is striking is both his prescience and the unusual cadences of his writing. He was rarely controversial, although there was the incident after a friendly against Spain in 2007 when the England manager Steve McClaren referred to the upcoming Euro 2008 qualifier in Israel as “the real bull”, apparently a laboured bullfighting analogy. Kevin, taking his turn with transcription, was understandably mystified and decided McClaren had said “rainbow”, leading to McClaren being mocked up on the back of the tabloids with George, Zippy and Bungle. With somebody else, it might have created major issues, but McClaren and everybody at the Football Association knew that with Kevin it would have been an honest mishearing, no mischief intended; there was never any malice to either him or his writing. The affection in which he was held became clear during Euro 2016, when he went missing in Avignon. The football community rallied to appeal for help and the following day he was found, confused and dehydrated, by an England fan who had seen his photo on Twitter. Kevin never savaged anybody, remembered always the person behind the mistake he might be describing. Only once did a manager ever really lose his rag with him, and that was, of all people, Tommy Burns, who had been taught by his father. “I can’t believe Joe McCarra’s boy could write those things,” he hissed, pinning Kevin against the wall, before the preposterousness of the situation overcame the pair of them. It was Burns’s No 10 Kevin later had on the back of his Celtic shirt. He co-wrote a book on Celtic’s 1967 European Cup win and there was a sense he never enjoyed anything quite so much: Kevin was a famously terrible footballer – so bad that after he’d reluctantly agreed to make up the numbers for a team at Glasgow university, he was quickly subbed off as his teammates decided they would be better playing with 10 – but he enthusiastically acted out the key moments of that campaign as recreated for him by Jimmy Johnstone in his living room. Some journalists end up covering football because it’s where they are shunted, some do it because it’s a job; Kevin did it because he loved football. That perhaps came through most obviously in his broadcast work. Kevin was one of the original regular guests on Football Weekly and a huge part of its early success. After leaving the Guardian in 2012, Kevin returned to Glasgow and wrote another book, telling the history of Celtic through the biographies of nine key figures. Long after illness struck, he kept going to Parkhead and Partick Thistle. He was, as his friend Philippe Auclair put it, “a gentle fanatic”, obsessed by Celtic but never partisan. He was unashamedly erudite, but also had great warmth. He was a pioneer who changed Scottish football journalism but, most fundamentally, he was a thoroughly nice man.
3||Global report: Spain declares Covid state of emergency as Italians urged to stay homeThe Spanish government has declared a six-month state of emergency and ordered a nationwide curfew, while Italians have been strongly advised to stay at home as both countries impose tough limits on people’s movements in a effort to contain the second wave of the coronavirus. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said his cabinet had approved a state of emergency on Sunday morning that is set to remain in force until 9 May 2021. The decree will allow Spain’s regional governments to order an overnight curfew to run from 11pm to 6am, or to begin and finish and hour earlier or later. The only area of Spain exempt from the curfew is the Canary islands because of what Sánchez termed “the very positive epidemiological situation there”. Spain became the first western European country to record more than 1m Covid infections last week, and Sánchez said on Friday that studies suggested the real number was three times higher. The state of emergency also permits Spain’s regional governments to bring in full or partial lockdowns, and limits public and private gatherings to six people. “We have to protect our economic and work activity and preserve, as far as we can, the rhythms of our lives,” Sánchez said in a televised address on Sunday afternoon. “Sacrifices will be indispensable. No one, not the government of Spain nor its regional governments, want to impose a single restriction that isn’t necessary to flatten the curve and protect public health.” He said his government would seek congressional approval for the six-month state of emergency next week, and called on opposition parties to support the measures. The initial declaration comes into effect on Sunday night and will last a fortnight. Sánchez said the drastic decision had been taken following scientific and expert advice, but that it would not remain in force a day longer than necessary. He said the government believed the situation could be brought under control without the imposition of the strict national lockdown that tamed the first wave of the virus in the spring and early summer. “The more we stay at home and the fewer the contacts we have, the more protected we’ll be, and the more we’ll be able to protect our loved ones and the health of everyone,” he said. Italy’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, said the country’s escalating infection rate was already having a worrying impact on hospitals as he announced new restrictiions on Sunday. His government has ordered the closure of gyms and swimming pools, and while bars and restaurants can offer takeaway services they must stop in-house dining from 6pm. Cinemas and theatres will also close but museums can stay open. There will be no ban on inter-regional travel, although people have been urged not to leave their homes except on work, medical or educational grounds. Up to 75% of high school teaching should be done online to limit the number of pupils in schools, according to the decree. “The latest epidemiological data cannot leave us indifferent,” Conte said. “The analysis indicates a rapid growth, with the stress on the national health system at worrying levels.” Italy’s daily infection tally has increased five-fold since 8 October, rising by 19,644 on Saturday. There were 151 more fatalities on Saturday, bringing the total death toll to 37,210, the highest on mainland Europe. Conte said the measures were intended to avert the kind of tough lockdown the country experienced in the spring. “We need to do as much as possible to protect health and the economy … we know this is generating anger and inequality,” he said. A €1.5-2m funding package is being considered to support businesses penalised by the latest measures. There were clashes between protesters and police in the southern city of Naples on Friday night after a curfew was imposed across the Campania region. Dozens of militants belonging to the extreme rightwing group Forza Nuova also clashed with police on Saturday night in central Rome in response to a Lazio-wide curfew introduced on Friday. The number of coronavirus infections in the Netherlands rose by more than 10,000 in 24 hours, hitting a new record, according to data released by the National Institute for Public Health. The Dutch government imposed partial lockdown measures to contain the spread of the virus on 14 October, including the closure of all bars and restaurants in the country. Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boyko Borissov, became the latest political figure to test positive for the coronavirus. “After two PCR tests, I am positive for Covid-19,” he said on his Facebook page on Sunday, adding that he had mild symptoms and would self-isolate at home. The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, tested positive for coronavirus on Friday, joining a list of leaders who have contracted the virus that includes the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, the US president, Donald Trump, and his Brazilian counterpart, Jair Bolsonaro.
2||F1: Hamilton surpasses Schumacher with victory at Portuguese Grand Prix – as it happenedSo Lewis Hamilton takes Michael Schumacher’s astonishing record of F1 race wins, and will leave Portugal offering little prospect of anyone getting near it for the forseeable future, or derailing his hopes of joining the German on seven world championship titles. Here’s the updated list … Most F1 race wins 1 Lewis Hamilton – 92 2 Michael Schumacher – 91 3 Sebastian Vettel – 53 4 Alain Prost – 51 5 Ayrton Senna – 41 6 Fernando Alonso – 32 7 Nigel Mansell – 31 8 Jackie Stewart – 27 =9 Jim Clark – 25 =9 Niki Lauda – 25 And finally, here’s Giles Richards’s report from the circuit. Thanks for joining us and enjoy the rest of your weekend. Bye! 1 Mercedes 435pts 2 Red Bull 226 3 Racing Point 126 4 McLaren 124 5 Renault 120 6 Ferrari 93 7 AlphaTauri 77 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 1 Lewis Hamilton 256pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 179 3 Max Verstappen 162 4 Daniel Ricciardo 80 5 Charles Leclerc 63 6 Sergio Pérez 75 7 Lando Norris 65 8 Alexander Albon 64 9 Pierre Gasly 63 10 Carlos Sainz 59 11 Lance Stroll 57 12 Esteban Ocon 40 13 Sebastian Vettel 18 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 The Mercedes team principal in conversation with Sky Sports F1 … 92 race wins? Who would have thought that when we embarked on the project in 2013. It’s an almost surreal number of wins. The talent, the ability … he’s just standing out. Victory at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve means Hamilton has now, incredibly, finished in the points at 45 races in a row. Testimony not just to his own skill but the dominance in reliability terms that Mercedes offer compared to their rivals. His last failure to finish was at the Austrian Grand Prix in July 2018. The race-winner says: Today was tough. It was all about temperatures, and with the setup I pre-empted it. We got some slipping at the start. Into turn seven I got a huge oversteer moment, so I backed off massively … I knew I could come back later on. On taking Schumacher’s wins record … It’s going to take some time for it to fully sink in. I’m still very much in race mode mentally … I can’t find the words at the moment. Speaking to Sky Sports F1, the second-placed driver says: The opening lap was pretty good. Some cars behind with the soft tyre had the upper hand. After that though, I just had no pace today. I don’t understand. I couldn’t go past [Hamilton] … I was hoping to go for the soft tyre in the end but I don’t think it made a difference. 1 Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Bottas (Mercedes) +25.592sec 3 Verstappen (Red Bull) +34.508 4 Leclerc (Ferrari) +65.312 5 Gasly (AlphaTauri) +1 lap 6 Sainz (McLaren) +1 lap 7 Pérez (Racing Point) +1 lap 8 Ocon (Renault) +1 lap 9 Ricciardo (Renault) +1 lap 10 Vettel (Ferrari) +1 lap 11 Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 12 Albon (Red Bull) +1 lap 13 Norris (McLaren) +1 lap 14 Russell (Williams) +1 lap 15 Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) +1 lap 16 Magnussen (Haas) +1 lap 17 Grosjean (Haas) +1 lap 18 Latifi (Williams) +2 laps 19 Kvyat (AlphaTauri) +2 laps DNF Stroll (Racing Point) After a poor start, the Mercedes driver recovered brilliantly to take Michael Schumacher’s record! Lap 66/66: Hamilton goes into the lap 25 seconds in the lead. Bottas second, with 7.5secs in hand. Verstappen remains safe in third. It will take tremendous late drama to stop that being the podium. Lap 65/66: Gasly goes fifth! He refuses to settle for sixth, swings wide and away, and suddenly Sainz has a whiff of blood too. Lap 62/66: Perez, on soft tyres, climbs all over Gasly as they fight for fifth. Very dicey stuff given the relative lack of grip so late in the race. Lap 61/66: Drizzle alert! It may take something more substantial than that to upset the applecart, but it’s a late additional reminder to the drivers to keep their focus. Hamilton is 22 seconds clear, with history beckoning. Lap 60/66: Hamilton’s sluggish start feels a long, long time ago, and the race on the whole has settled down into fairly standard my-car’s-faster-than-your-car fare. The only drivers from the top 10 in the standings not currently in a points place are Norris, Albon and Stroll – Sainz, Ocon and Vettel are the trio punching above their recent championship weights. Lap 58/66: Bodywork issues for Bottas, who has debris hanging off to the right of his cockpit. Hamilton, muscles perhaps lulled into a bit of complacency, reports a touch of cramp. Surely no late drama to derail a one-two for the Mercedes pair? Lap 56/66: TEN LAPS TO GO! Ocon, Ricciardo and Vettel are in a Renault-Renault-Ferrari ding-dong-ding for eighth place. Four-times drivers’ champion Vettel has had a fairly unenjoyable weekend but has made up a handful of places for a points position. Lap 55/66: Still pretty serene up front for Hamilton – he’s almost 16 seconds clear of Bottas. He’s lapped everyone down to fifth place now. Kvyat, down in 16th, has attracted a time penalty. Lap 54/66: Spoke too soon – Stroll is the first retirement. Since his third place at Monza, that’s four successive failures to start or finish for the Racing Point driver. Lap 52/66: Still no retirements, despite Stroll’s earlier efforts. Still serene progress for Hamilton up front. Russell has now taken Giovinazzi, and meanwhile Albon has had two warnings for track limits and is on notice. Lap 50/66: Russell, down in 14th, is having an enjoyably competitive race, clambering all over the back of Giovinazzi despite the best efforts of his Williams, which hops off the track as the car loses downforce. Lap 47/66: Bottas has stopped the rot of ebbing pace and pulls away a little more from Verstappen – the gap is now 8.2secs. Sainz relegates Ricciardo to ninth, while Raikkonen rounds out the points places. Oooh – impressive work in the pits from Red Bull … a superb 1.8secs stop for Albon. Lap 46/66: Twenty laps to go. Verstappen is shortly to be within seven seconds behind. As things stand, there’ll be no constructors’ title for Mercedes today, but Michael Schumacher is looking a lot like ending the day with the second-most all-time F1 race wins. Lap 45/66: The gap from Hamilton to Bottas is holding steady, but the one from Bottas to Verstappen … not so much. The Red Bull racer is now within eight seconds of second. Gasly takes Ricciardo for seventh place. Lap 43/66 Full standings 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Pérez 6 Ocon 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Sainz 10 Raikkonen 11 Albon 12 Vettel 13 Norris 14 Giovinazzi 15 Russell 16 Kvyat 17 Grosjean 18 Magnussen 19 Latifi 20 Stroll Lap 42/66: Fake news … Bottas comes in, and he takes the hard compound as well. He rejoins behind Hamilton and is losing even more pace. Gap is now over 11 seconds. Verstappen, on the medium compound, is still third, 10 seconds behind the Finn. Lap 41/66: Hamilton pits, takes the hard compound, and rejoins in second behind Bottas … who is considering switching to softs. Lap 39/66: Everyone below Ocon in sixth position has now been lapped, but still no retirements to report. Bottas is falling even further behind Hamilton – the gap is about to be 10 seconds. Lap 38/66: George Russell pits from seventh. An encouraging opening stint from the Williams driver. He comes back out in 14th. Hamilton has pulled out another second from Bottas – suddenly the lead is around nine seconds. Lap 35/66: After all that, Sainz retakes 10th moments later. Vettel is up to third after Leclerc pits – the Ferrari re-emerges in fourth. Bottas briefly cut the gap to Hamilton by half a second, but it’s holding steadyish around the eight-second mark. Lap 33/66: Sainz and Raikkonen are slugging it out for that 10th place. They trade the final points position multiple times before Raikkonen emerges, chest puffed out. “Cool the car,” reports Bottas’s dashboard. Uh oh. Could another retirement be on the way? Standings at halfway: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Leclerc 4 Verstappen 5 Ocon 6 Pérez 7 Russell 8 Ricciardo 9 Gasly 10 Raikkonen Lap 30/66: As half-race distance approaches, the gap from first to second expands to over eight seconds. Lap 29/66: Hamilton is moving beautifully, seven seconds clear of Bottas. Leclerc is 23 back, with Verstappen 21 further behind in fourth. Raikkonen is back in the points in 10th. However Stroll, in last, has attracted another penalty, this time for exceeding track limits. Lap 26/66: Leclerc, in third after Verstappen’s stop, is 16 seconds behind Bottas. Sainz pits to switch for mediums, to leave Gasly the final racer on soft tyres. With Vettel in the pits, that leaves Hamilton, Bottas, Leclerc, Gasly, Ocon, Russell, Giovinazzi and Magnussen are the only drivers without stops to their name. Lap 23/66: Five-second penalty for Stroll! That’s small comfort for Norris, who is now down in 19th after their collision. The wins record is very much on for Hamilton – 3.3secs now the lead. You may have noted incidentally that Williams’ George Russell, without a point this season, is currently running ninth. He’s never finished higher than 11th in a grand prix. Lap 22/66: Bottas is suddenly slipping to almost three seconds behind the new leader. Always fun to see a top 10 shaken up as stops start playing a part btw … Current standings: 1 Hamilton 2 Bottas 3 Verstappen 4 Leclerc 5 Gasly 6 Sainz 7 Ocon 8 Vettel 9 Russell 10 Giovinazzi Lap 20/66: Hamilton’s quick progress has taken him right into Bottas’s slipstream, he makes use of DRS … to take the lead into turn one! A pretty regulation overtake and almost immediately he pulls a second out from his teammate. Lap 18/66: Lance Stroll spins while trying to go wide on the kerb to take Norris – suddenly he’s down in 11th, and there’s bits of front wing hanging off for the Racing Point driver. Some sweary testimony from Norris’s side of things on the radio. Lap 17/66: Sainz and Gasly are having a great little ding-dong for fifth. The McLaren driver shuts the door belligerently a couple of times to maintain his place. Eeeeeee Verstappen’s front right looks more than a little problematic. Lap 16/66: Hamilton sets the fastest lap of the race, despite his apparently dicky tyre. He’s been holding steady around 1.9secs behind his teammate. Lap 15/66: Ocon is in the points in 10th. Ricciardo is in and rejoins with medium tyres, while, intriguingly, Hamilton radios in to report discomfort with his left front tyre. Lap 13/66: Ricciardo more or less waves Stroll through into eighth. Raikkonen’s had enough of the soft compound and has rejoined in 20th on mediums. Verstappen is over nine seconds off the lead, 6.8secs behind Hamilton in second. Lap 12/66: Leclerc’s Ferrari is back up to where it started, taking fourth from Sainz. Vettel, incidentally, is down in 13th. Verstappen still third but he wants to pit. Lap 10/66: Those on soft tyres – Sainz, Verstappen, Norris, Raikkonen, Ricciardo, Gasly and Albon – will soon have a decision to make. They’re being outpaced by rivals on the medium compound. Gasly is up to sixth, while Stroll takes ninth from Raikkonen, whose incredible start suddenly feels like it’s from a different race weekend. Lap 9/66: Fastest lap of the race for Bottas. Leclarc takes Norris. Raikkonen’s brilliant start is fading, with Ricciardo now up to seventh, and Gasly also finds a way past. 1 Bottas 2 Hamilton 3 Verstappen 4 Sainz 5 Leclerc 6 Norris 7 Ricciardo 8 Gasly 9 Raikkonen 10 Stroll Lap 8/66: Verstappen relegates Sainz to fourth, while Leclerc – also on the medium compound tyres – takes Raikkonen’s sixth spot. Hamilton is just shy of two seconds down from his teammate, with Verstappen a further 2.5secs back. Lap 6/66: Bottas retakes the lead and straight away pulls clear from Sainz. Verstappen’s taken Norris and is lapping quicker than anybody on the track. Into lap seven, and Hamilton eases past Sainz as well, as the leading drivers running medium tyres start to capitalise. Lap 3/66: Verstappen’s interesting start has eased into a battle for fourth with Norris. Raikkonen is just behind, having made up 10 places from the start. Lap 2/66: Sainz LEADS! Hard to blame Bottas there as all drivers take interesting approaches to find the desired line. Hamilton still third. Lap 1/66: Oh my days. Rain IS falling. Cars lunging wide at corners two and three. Raikkonen spitting fire while on the charge to sixth. Sainz took second from Hamilton … before … Hamilton swallowed up … and Verstappen hits Pérez! Wild start, with the Dutchman taking second from Bottas, while Hamilton is unable to lead the charge from pole and loses the lead. A few corners later Verstappen is off the track after catching the Racing Point … LEAVING BOTTAS IN FRONT! Mirror, signal, ’AV IT. Go, go, go! They’re off for the formation lap. And apparently that rain I mentioned, that was due to just about miss the race, might actually be about to play a part … Gasly says a few spots have just landed on his visor. Given the tyre fun teams endured yesterday, that could really shake things up. STAND BY YOUR BEDS … race incoming … In seven minutes’ time, brace yourselves for a dramatic start. Stroll and Verstappen collided at turn one in practice on Friday, and Sainz is wary that it could cause a hairy situation at the start of the race. Speaking to F1.com, the McLaren driver said: “That Turn 1, it’s asking for some accidents. The angle of the corner and how fast the guys on the outside will approach it – and how slow the guys on the inside [will be] and which angle we will approach it – it will be tricky! It’s going to be a bit of an experiment this track, and hopefully it can create some cool racing.” The drivers have just been out to make the now-familiar End Racism gesture, with Hamilton wearing a Black Lives Matter shirt. Some fans are present at the circuit this weekend, and the message was warmly received. Speaking to Sky Sports earlier, Hamilton displayed a different shirt bearing the hashtag: “#ENDSARS”, a protest against Nigeria’s infamous Special Anti-Robbery Squad. Some more context here … While the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve makes its F1 bow, it’s not completely alien to everyone on the grid and working at some of the teams. Within weeks of the circuit’s completion in 2008, Ferrari and McLaren spent two days testing that December. Renault, Toro Rosso (now AlphaTauri) and Williams also spent some tinker time there in early 2009. Ricciardo won the British F3 championship on the circuit in 2009, while Pérez competed in GP2 the same year. Albon, Leclerc, Russell and Stroll all competed in the Formula 3 European Championship. Asked about the venue earlier this weekend, Hamilton said: “Oh god – it’s hardcore. It’s a really, really hardcore circuit. There are places where you can’t see where you’re going. You’re looking at the sky for periods of time. Understanding your braking points, there are no references when you’re looking at the sky. It really is one of the most challenging circuits I’ve been too.” In the drivers’ standings, Verstappen closed the gap on Bottas in second at the Eifel GP. The Finn’s failure to finish from pole due to a power problem left the way open for 23-year-old to take second place. Hamilton has a mammoth 69pt cushion at the top. Drivers’ standings 1 Lewis Hamilton 230pts 2 Valtteri Bottas 161 3 Max Verstappen 147 4 Daniel Ricciardo 78 5 Sergio Pérez 68 6 Lando Norris 65 7 Alexander Albon 64 8 Charles Leclerc 63 9 Lance Stroll 57 10 Pierre Gasly 53 11 Carlos Sainz 51 12 Esteban Ocon 36 13 Sebastian Vettel 17 14 Daniil Kvyat 14 15 Nico Hülkenberg 10 16 Antonio Giovinazzi 3 17 Kimi Raikkonen 2 18 Romain Grosjean 2 19 Kevin Magnussen 1 20 Nicholas Latifi 0 21 George Russell 0 Another subplot today is that, mathematically, Mercedes could secure their seventh successive constructors’ title. It would require them to better Red Bull’s points haul from the weekend by 40 or more, which would require both Max Verstappen (who starts third) and Alexander Albon (starting sixth) to both have days to forget. Constructors’ standings 1 Mercedes 391pts 2 Red Bull 211 3 Racing Point 120 4 McLaren 116 5 Renault 114 6 Ferrari 80 7 AlphaTauri 67 8 Alfa Romeo 5 9 Haas 3 10 Williams 0 The cars are on their way out on the pit lane, with the start 35 minutes away. On the first hot runs in Q3 Bottas led the Mercedes pair out and set the initial pace with a 1min 16.986sec, an advantage over Lewis Hamilton of four-hundredths of a second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was ultimately third, still in touch, a tenth back on the leaders. Their times, however, were down on earlier runs as the wind picked up in the hills of the Algarve and with the drivers still struggling for grip on the newly resurfaced track Mercedes offered both their men options for their final runs – what rubber to run and whether to make two or three laps. The latter was crucial – two laps carried less weight in fuel but three offered the possibility of the rubber working marginally better on the final run. Both Hamilton and Bottas switched from the soft to the medium tyre but Bottas chose a two-lap run and Hamilton the three. Hamilton had an extra lap to work his rubber, putting in two quick runs after his out lap. It proved inspired but it could not have been closer as the lead seesawed between them. Hamilton’s first flying circuit set the pace with a 1:16.934 only for Bottas to better it with a 1:16.754. But the Finn then had to peel off into the pits as Hamilton circled one more time, banking on having the very best of what grip there was at the death. It worked and he delivered as he checked out with a 1:16.652, a tenth clear of Bottas and two-tenths up on Verstappen. 1 Lewis Hamilton (Mercedes) 2 Valtteri Bottas (Mercedes) 3 Max Verstappen (Red Bull) 4 Charles Leclerc (Ferrari) 5 Sergio Pérez (Racing Point) 6 Alexander Albon (Red Bull) 7 Carlos Sainz (McLaren) 8 Lando Norris (McLaren) 9 Pierre Gasly (AlphaTauri) 10 Daniel Ricciardo (Renault) 11 Esteban Ocon (Renault) 12 Lance Stroll (Racing Point) 13 Daniil Kvyat (AlphaTauri) 14 George Russell (Williams) 15 Sebastian Vettel (Ferrari) 16 Kimi Raikkonen (Alfa Romeo) 17 Antonio Giovinazzi (Alfa Romeo) 18 Romain Grosjean (Haas) 19 Kevin Magnussen (Haas) 20 Nicholas Latifi (Williams) Before we get to a qualifying catch-up, an unsettling story from yesterday that has affected things behind the scenes in Portimão … Vitaly Petrov, the Russian former driver who was a steward at the Portuguese Grand Prix, has stepped down after his father, Alexandr, was shot dead at his home in Vyborg, 80 miles north-west of St Petersburg. He will be replaced by Bruno Correia, the Formula E safety car driver. On Thursday Petrov had been criticised for being used in the stewarding role by Lewis Hamilton in response to the negative comments Petrov had made on the British driver’s anti-racist stance this season. The FIA stated Petrov had stepped down from his position after “a personal bereavement” and Russian media is reporting the incident as an assassination. Petrov has returned home to Russia. Happy Sunday! Welcome to lap-by-lap coverage from the first Portuguese Grand Prix since 1996. It’s already been a dramatic weekend at the 12-year-old Autódromo Internacional do Algarve, making its F1 bow, with drivers frustrated by a broken drain cover that halted final practice and delayed qualifying, and then a brilliantly tight qualifying session (of which more in a sec). It’s all led up to a Mercedes one-two on the grid, fronted by defending champion and runaway 2020 drivers’ standings leader Lewis Hamilton, who has been racking up records in recent times, and today has his first opportunity at a big ’un, outright. Michael Schumacher overhauled Alain Prost for race wins at the 2001 Belgian Grand Prix, when he took his 52nd victory. Between 2001 and 2006 he added 39 more, leaving him light years ahead of everyone else. In recent times, Hamilton has reeled his haul in and two weeks ago at Nürburgring he joined Schumacher on 91. Given the British driver’s dominance in recent seasons, and his team’s superiority over the chasing pack, it’s a a question of when rather than if he will make the record all his own. His teammate Valtteri Bottas starts second, with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen third and Charles Leclerc an encouraging fourth for Ferrari. Rain is forecast to arrive at Portimão in a few hours, but as things stand we should just about get a full race in bright, cloudy conditions. With BST ending overnight in the UK, sending a nation into its six-monthly fart about to find instructions of how to change the clocks in their cars and on their ovens, the race starts at 1.10pm GMT.
17||Fijian-born British soldiers lose latest legal fight to stay in UKEight Fijian-born soldiers who served with the British army in Iraq and Afghanistan have been rebuffed in their initial attempt to seek a judicial review of the handling of their immigration claims. A high court judge said the Commonwealth veterans were “out of time” – but the veterans are able to demand a fuller oral hearing in December, where they will make a final attempt to win the right to remain in the UK. The British army actively recruits from Fiji and those who serve more than four years have the right to remain in the UK if they can afford the application fees. But the eight say that because of systemic administrative errors they were not properly informed of their rights when discharged. Esita Tuimanu, from Commonwealth Neglected Veterans, said the eight were victims of “institutional discrimination” from the Home Office and Ministry of Defence and they would “keep on fighting till the end”. The veterans and their lawyers say they intend to run a public campaign in the run-up to the final high court hearing, in the hope that ministers will allow them to remain in the UK without paying the usual application fees of £2,389 per person. One of those joining the campaign is Tuimanu’s 10-year-old daughter, Gracie-Ann Kelly, whose father, Etuate Bakaniceva, served in Iraq and Afghanistan. She has started making badges in support of the veterans and posting videos about her efforts on YouTube. “They must not be forgotten for their service to the Queen,” she said. She was born a British citizen because of her father’s service but has been unable to see him for the past six years, partly because of the immigration complications that followed after he had served in the army. Bakaniceva was prematurely discharged in 2010, a year after he had been injured in an RPG attack in Musa Qala, Afghanistan, that killed another British soldier, Cpl Danny Nield. Bakaniceva could not afford the cost of applying for citizenship for both him and his wife after he was discharged, and was suffering from tinnitus and PTSD. Struggling with his condition, he eventually returned to Fiji to get help. But Tuimanu said that because he had been away for more than two years he had to reapply to reenter the UK and see Gracie-Ann or obtain treatment. His medical and citizenship problems “tore his family apart”, she said, and his young daughter does not want others in a similar position to suffer in the same way. “Gracie-Ann is fighting for justice for these veterans because she wants to see the Commonwealth eight veterans get to have the peace and luxury to family and private life. This was a privilege she never had the opportunity to enjoy,” Tuimanu added. Most of the eight claimants have not been named, but one, Taitusi Ratucaucau, is facing a £50,000 NHS bill after a brain tumour, with the hospital waiting to see if his immigration status is being resolved before levying any bill. Costs of £12,000 were awarded against the veterans, who have been crowdfunding their campaign, by Mr Justice Lane following the initial ruling. As he ruled against the claimants, the judge accused them of “an inappropriate attempt to mount a legal challenge in respect of what is in reality a campaign to change the law”. A government spokesperson said: “The Home Office and Ministry of Defence work closely with our foreign and Commonwealth recruits to make sure they are aware of how they and their families can attain settlement in the UK, and the costs involved.” “Whilst legal proceedings are ongoing, we cannot comment on these cases.” The lawyers for the claimants, led by Anthony Metzer QC from Goldsmith Chambers and Vinita Templeton from Duncan Lewis Solicitors said they would “continue to pursue legal redress vigorously for what we consider to be a just and principled cause”. The final oral hearing is scheduled for 1 December.
2||Lewis Hamilton wins Portuguese GP to break Michael Schumacher's F1 recordOnly time will tell how long Lewis Hamilton’s extraordinary success story will run. At this moment, however, it is enough to acknowledge the world champion as he is now – in winning the Portuguese Grand Prix to become the most successful Formula One driver in history. A sportsman at the peak of his powers who has delivered now so consistently, for so long, that like the true greats he is almost making the extraordinary look commonplace. Which is to do him a disservice, everything about his victory summed up why he is one of the greatest of all time. His touch was exquisite, the win emphatic. As he crossed the line at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve to take his 92nd win, one more than Michael Schumacher, his race engineer Peter Bonnington summed it up succinctly. “What a race,” he said. “You are rewriting the history books.” Which he is. Schumacher’s records were thought untouchable. Hamilton has them all in his grasp and will likely shatter them to the winds. He already holds most pole positions and now race wins. This season he will match Schumacher’s seven titles and there is every chance next season surpass that milestone too. Yet much as this was a recognition of the accumulation of success, a numbers game, it was also a moment of sheer emotion for the world champion too. Two weeks ago, on equalling Schumacher at the Nürburgring, he had been moved, humbled, he said. Here in Portimao there was a sense of giving free rein to revel in the joy of having achieved something no other driver has ever managed. Having climbed from his car he went to enjoy a long embrace with his father Anthony, who had been so vital in supporting Hamilton’s career when he began racing. There were tears in his father’s eyes as his son stood atop the podium, doubtless made all the more poignant now the pair have reconciled after their once close relationship broke down in 2010. For Hamilton himself there was unalloyed joy and a distinct sense that this was a moment he would allow himself to savour. He deserves it and the recognition for it. It had been his remarkable judgment that led him to run an extra lap in qualifying that helped ensure he took pole. It is an almost other-worldly talent possessed by only a tiny number of sportspeople. He has combined this with an enormous natural talent and an intimidating ability to turn in performances that are so often flawless. In Portugal it was his touch in managing his tyres such that he had pace a class apart from his rivals. Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas, who was second, admitted he could do nothing to challenge the world champion. Indeed if there are chinks in Hamilton’s armour he guards them well. Physically and mentally the British driver presents a rock against which the waves of the opposition crash with futility. It has taken him 262 races to reach his remarkable 92 wins, having scored his first at Canada in his debut season in 2007. Now 35 years old, his record since then has been hugely impressive. He is the only driver to have taken a win in every season in which he has competed, now stretching across 14 years in F1. Since Mercedes proved so strong when the turbo-hybrid era began, he has been ruthless in taking every opportunity and returning an extraordinary success rate. He has 71 victories for the team and bar 2017 when he took the title with nine wins has scored 10 or more a season every year since 2014. It is relentless success that has perhaps made it sometimes feel almost as a foregone conclusion yet it is anything but. This trait, the repeated inch-perfect execution across circuits, conditions and machinery season-in, season-out is what other drivers recognise as making him so hard to beat. Max Verstappen, who was third for Red Bull, acknowledged it. “Everybody knows he is very quick but what has been his strong point is he is very consistent and very rarely makes a mistake,” Verstappen said. “That’s why he got to these numbers so quickly, it’s very impressive.” Hamilton did so in Portugal with a masterclass that epitomised Verstappen’s assessment. Recovering from a testing start when he lost places from pole on cold rubber, the world champion held his composure and put his head down to then manage his tyres to perfection. The track surface lacked grip and was a challenge but Hamilton had its measure, exploiting the additional pace he was able to eke out from not overworking his rubber to retake and then hold a significant lead over Bottas. Portugal has not hosted a grand prix for 24 years since 1996 when Jacques Villeneuve won at Estoril, in doing so making a memorable pass on Schumacher. This time Hamilton showed the same fine race management the great German so often exhibited. Indeed, he was on rails through the undulations of the hills of the Algarve’s rollercoaster. Once he had ensured he had put less wear into his tyres and regained his lead, he never looked back, taking the flag 25 seconds from Bottas. More is surely to come, this moment a special one but Hamilton’s entry in the history books is far from finalised yet. Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc an excellent fourth and there was a superb fifth for Pierre Gasly in the AlphaTauri. Carlos Sainz was sixth for McLaren, Sergio Pérez seventh for Racing Point. Renault’s Esteban Ocon and Daniel Ricciardo were in eighth and ninth and Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel in 10th.
18||Nightmare on asylum street: His House, the horror film about the migrant crisisThere has never been a whole lot of overlap between the social realism of Ken Loach and the twisted horror of A Nightmare on Elm Street. But that’s about to change with the release of His House, a strikingly original debut from the gifted British film-maker Remi Weekes, which was snapped up by Netflix at Sundance earlier this year for an eight-figure sum. His House follows a South Sudanese couple – Wunmi Mosaku as Rial, Sope Dirisu as her husband Bol – who are dumped on a bleak Essex housing estate while their appeal for asylum is considered. Their temporary home is blighted by peeling walls, dodgy wiring and hostile neighbours. Worse than that, it’s haunted. If they flee, Rial and Bol risk deportation for violating bail. Stay, however, and they will need to do battle with the wall-dwelling creatures, which appear to have followed them from Africa. This isn’t the first film to use the conventions of horror to address this modern crisis: Mati Diop’s Atlantics imagined the women of Dakar being possessed by the ghosts of migrants who had perished at sea. But it is undoubtedly the scariest. His House thrives on two types of threat, the social and the supernatural, each intensifying the other. Horror audiences will be accustomed to figures lurking in the back of the frame – it’s just that, in this case, there’s no knowing whether it will be a scuttling monster, a meddling immigration official, or a lout. When the idea of a horror story involving asylum-seekers was first proposed to Weekes by producers, he was unsure if he had any personal connection to the material. Although his grandparents are from St Lucia and Sierra Leone, he was raised in London. “But once I thought about it, I was reminded of how I felt growing up in this country,” says the 33-year-old, sitting in his home with a bicycle leaning against the wall behind him. “You’re torn. There’s one side that wants to assimilate and be accepted by a culture that is ambivalent toward you. Then another side wants to reject that, to be proud of where you’re from, to rebel against the norms. That’s always been in the background of conversations with my family and friends: which parts of us are English and which are from other places?” The theme of tribalism underpins His House. Back in South Sudan, Rial scarred herself with the markings of two warring factions to improve her chances of survival. Now in Britain, she finds it harder to move between tribes. In the film’s most provocative scene, she approaches a group of black British teenagers for help, only to receive a chastening reminder that skin colour is no guarantee of solidarity. Weekes consulted with Waging Peace, an organisation that opposes genocide and human rights violations in Sudan, and Right to Remain, which helps people navigate the UK asylum system. This was to ensure a realistic grounding for a story that takes flight into the nightmarish. “It was important to know how asylum seekers are treated,” he says. “The draconian rules, the uncaring bureaucracy, it all shows this lack of empathy.” Physical displacement and disorientation become, in the film, a breeding ground for internal horrors. “Being effectively under house arrest, you can really take a battering psychologically. All the spooky stuff that happens in the house I wanted to treat as tangible. Whether it’s real or not doesn’t matter – it feels real to the characters.” Weekes first made his name as one half of the partnership Tell No One, turning out playful, effects-driven video shorts with his childhood friend Luke White. The duo’s name suggests the sinister or the secretive, though nothing could be further from the truth. “We just wanted to put stuff online without telling anyone,” says Weekes. “It was more a reference to our psychology, to not letting ego get in the way. We’re very understated people. Get us in a meeting and we go quiet.” Posting their shorts on YouTube and Vimeo, the pair attracted commissions from fashion and advertising. Those films have an enchanting simplicity: in one, coloured umbrellas pop open like vibrant floral blooms, while another shows arms layered digitally on screen to create a tree of limbs. His House also features a multiple-arm scene, as does Weekes’s Channel 4 horror short Tickle Monster. Does he have a fear of limbs? “I don’t think so,” he says with a sheepish giggle. “Tickle Monster came from a conversation I had with a friend. He was dating someone who kept tickling him. Even though he hated it and it made him feel awful, his laughter seemed to the other person like some weird form of consent. I thought, ‘That could be a horror film.’” He has also encountered another kind of monster: Harvey Weinstein, who was desperate to get his paws on His House, back when it was a hot script doing the rounds. “When I turned the Weinstein Company down, they got upset and tried to sue me. They’re very aggressive about getting the rights to films. If it wasn’t for the #MeToo movement that blew up the company, they probably would have had their way.” Now that’s a scary story. • His House is in selected cinemas now, and on Netflix from 30 October.
19||Girlhood: Girlhood review – breezy, 90s-tinged electropopSinger-songwriter Tessa Cavanna and producer Christian Pinchbeck first crossed paths in 2017. He heard her singing, so the story goes, when she walked past his narrowboat in east London and was so impressed he invited her to hop on board and record in his studio. The resulting project, Girlhood, marry sweet, soaring vocals with iPad instrumentals, channelling the expansive spirit of the Avalanches and the gospel-tinged beats of Moby. In other words, at times they can sound anachronistic. It’s the older tracks, such as Bad Decisions and Milk &amp; Honey, that really shine on their self-titled debut – the former with its taut percussion and uplifting vocals; the latter all spiralling melodies and trip-hoppy scratches. Queendom, meanwhile, is smooth and soft, while Fever Sweat recalls the atmospheric warmth of producer Flume, and Keep On and The Love I Need possess a housey euphoria. So, while there’s nothing especially fresh-sounding here, Girlhood is a solid set of breezy electropop with a hint of future possibilities.
5||Sudan is being rewarded for its revolution with blackmailFew countries in the world have been subjected to as many punitive sanctions as Sudan. After the deposed president Omar al-Bashir came to power in a military coup in 1989, the country was gradually cut off from the rest of the world, with the upholding of human rights the rationale. Economic sanctions were followed by a spot on the state sponsors of terrorism list, and then by the indictment of Bashir by the international criminal court. At some point it became hard to keep up with all the legislation, punishment for the reckless harbouring of terrorists in the 1990s, and the brutal slaughter of marginalised ethnic groups in areas such as Darfur. There were sanctions on individuals, a US travel ban on all Sudanese-born people, acts of Congress and lawsuits by members 9/11 victims’ families. The country became a sort of human rights cause celebre, attracting Hollywood stars and a vast network of lobbyists in Washington who, whenever it seemed like there might be a relaxation of sanctions, campaigned fiercely to keep them going. Bashir was a president over whom it was easy to reach consensus. Here was an African brute in the classic mould, a military man who turned on his own people, and a sharia-wielding terror sponsor to boot. But it was not Bashir or his government that suffered. He remained in power, if anything getting stronger. He and his vast network of cronies had the means to circumvent sanctions, finding ways to do business and enrich themselves. The Sudanese people, those whom the global human rights community was ostensibly supporting, struggled in isolation, in poverty and with a lack of access to basic healthcare. Eventually, interest in Sudan faded. The war on terror ran out of steam after the killing of Osama bin Laden and the weakening of al-Qaida, and the moral outrage over Darfur found catharsis via war crimes indictments. The international community moved on, but all the sanctions stayed. The world remembered Sudan last year, when an epic revolution overthrew Bashir at long last. His removal came at a heavy cost. Many were killed in confrontations with security forces, and the economy, already on the brink, was pushed over the edge. But it was worth it. The feeling on the streets was that the blood, the economic instability, the political jeopardy were all worth it if the Sudanese were to have a shot at democracy and dignity. The United States, the Sudanese people’s alleged white knight, took one look at the success of the Sudanese revolution and decided to blackmail the country in return for taking it off the state sponsors of terror list, reintegrating it into the international financial and trade system, and providing aid. Last week Donald Trump made clear that the price tag would be $335m (£256m) of compensation for terrorist attacks that took place under the old regime. Alongside this, the US is forcing the fragile new interim government, already struggling to maintain its mandate amid worsening economic conditions and the plotting of Bashir loyalists, to recognise Israel and normalise relations – a move that is hugely unpopular with the Sudanese people, and about which they weren’t consulted. Even for those of us in Sudan who had given up expecting more, this naked exploitation of a country brought to its knees but still crawling to freedom is hard to stomach. The choice for the Sudanese government is to risk economic collapse and a resurgence of the old forces – essentially the overturning of the revolution – or to accept all of the US’s conditions. That is no choice at all. Trump crowed about the deal, tweeting that Sudan had “agreed” to pay the $335m, and that this was “justice” for the American people. The agreement to normalise relations with Israel was announced last week, and has already triggered anger domestically. The condition seems to have been thrown in just because the US could, and amounts to bullying a country with which Israel is not likely to have many trade or diplomatic ties anyway. It’s about building numbers and momentum in the Arab world so that more valuable regional assets, such as Saudi Arabia, can be convinced to normalise relations too. That is all Sudan is – a weak pawn. It’s a case study in how the moral framework within which human rights law is drafted and enforced is designed not to bring about regime change and the safety and security of people suffering under despots, but to leverage the victimhood of those people to advance other interests. The first of these interests is self-image. Western powers can maintain their charade of virtue by coming down hard on poor countries that have little strategic importance. The second is a need to divert scrutiny away from allies, such as Saudi Arabia, that have never been in the dock to answer questions about sponsorship of terrorism or the quashing of internal dissent. Who has attempted to hold Riyadh accountable for its palming off of Osama bin Laden to other countries to wreak havoc, its exportation of dangerous hardline Islamism? Indignation, sanctions, censure and condemnation are instead reserved for countries such as Sudan. Even with these burdens, the Sudanese people managed to liberate themselves from Bashir’s grip. But the injustice they have suffered was compounded by the very system that was supposed to help them: the west’s hypocritical, counterproductive human rights regime. • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist
15||The Knife of Dawn/New Dark Age review - isolation meditationsThe goodwill that inevitably greeted this double bill – a proper staged event with live music! – couldn’t quite hide the disappointment with the first half. Hannah Kendall’s opera The Knife of Dawn, originally staged at the Roundhouse in 2016, is a rather laboured and didactic piece that succeeds only in informing us about a largely forgotten moment in colonial history. It follows the aftermath of the 1953 elections in British Guiana, the first under universal suffrage, which were overturned by British authorities. The story is told from the point of view of the Guyanese poet Martin Carter, one of the many members of the victorious People’s Progressive Party who was jailed. He is on hunger strike and is starting to hallucinate, haunted by offscreen female voices – his wife and daughter, other political prisoners, long-dead Guyanese slaves – who drive him to the brink of madness. Despite a fine performance by baritone Peter Braithwaite, the monologue lacks any dramatic momentum, mistaking showing for telling. We are told that Carter is a great poet, which he was, but it’s not evident from Tessa McWatt’s excruciating libretto, which spends an hour outlining the historical background and ends just as it starts to explore any artistic and emotional ramifications. Much more effective is the second half of the bill, New Dark Age, in which existing compositions by three leading contemporary composers are reworked into a 10-part song suite that narrates post-pandemic life, accompanied by Grant Gee’s artful slow-motion film. The only original piece is Anna Meredith’s swooping Fly By Night, but even the compositions that are more than five years old, such as Missy Mazzoli’s quartet from Vespers for a New Dark Age, setting poems by Matthew Zapruder, seem to have an eerie post-Covid resonance. The shimmering Vivaldi-meets-Philip Glass textures of Meredith’s Stoop seem to sum up a locked-down population straining to enjoy the bright sunshine of April 2020, while Anna Thorvaldsdottir’s two choral pieces – a blend of austere medieval plainsong and holy minimalism – serve as a threnody for the victims of the pandemic. By the end of the suite, with Meredith’s bleak a cappella Heal You (text by Philip Ridley) and her icy, discordant, malfunctioning harpsichord-and-strings piece Low Light, the bemasked audience at the ROH seemed emotionally prepared for a second lockdown. • Available to stream on demand to ticket holders until 23 November.
20||Serco staff told to wear masks in courts and cells after complaintsEscort and security officers working for Serco and other firms have been told to wear face masks in courts and cells amid complaints about inadequate social distancing in the criminal justice system. The abrupt policy change, which comes into force on Monday, has been imposed by the Ministry of Justice on the outsourcing company, which also runs a widely criticised contact-tracing service for the government that is supposed to limit the spread of coronavirus infections. The MoJ instruction also requires all security staff, including those working for GeoAmey, another outsourcing company that carries out similar prisoner guarding and transporting duties, to wear masks when on duty. Until recently it was assumed by the court service that work inside courtrooms was sufficiently socially distanced or individuals adequately protected by perspex screens. But the rapid rise in infections during the pandemic’s second wave has forced a review of health safety measures. The Guardian has been told of one incident in a criminal trial where a judge requested security staff to put on face masks but they declined to do so. Concern has been expressed by lawyers and other court staff over the more relaxed regulations inside court buildings compared with compulsory mask wearing in shops. Last week, the barrister Sarah Forshaw QC tweeted that mask-wearing for security at court would be desirable. Another barrister tweeted: “Well, none of us could have predicted this. Also, why are GeoAmey etc not telling the cells staff to wear masks or providing PPE? In every cell area I’ve been in during the pandemic, gaolers have been maskless.” Concerns have also been expressed by Intermediaries for Justice, the experts who sit alongside vulnerable witnesses and defendants in court, helping them to understand and communicate during proceedings. Catherine O’Neill, the chair of the charity, said: “Our members are concerned that dock officers are not wearing masks. The conference rooms are extremely small and intermediaries throughout the country are reporting concerns that when they visit the custody suites there’s poor ventilation but no one seems to be wearing PPE [personal protective equipment]. “I have seen barristers wearing visors and masks. One judge used gloves. But the dock officers in Serco uniforms were not wearing any PPE. Serco is running the test-and-trace contract. I cannot understand why they do not have a duty to look after their employees and to the prisoners who will be the last to have a voice. “After being in court the other day where no masks were worn in the building, it felt like a different world when I stepped outside and all the cafes and shops were compliant and doing their best.” A Serco spokesman said: “As of 21 October [the date the MoJ letter arrived], all Serco officers have been mandated to wear PPE face masks by our customer, the MoJ. “Prior to that date, safe systems of work were in place which were endorsed by the MOJ, where a risk assessment process determined whether a mask was to be worn; for instance for confirmed or suspected Covid cases only or where the 2-metre rule could not be met. “All safe systems of work and risk assessments were aligned to PHE guidance; this has clearly now changed to reflect more stringent measures.” A spokesperson for GeoAmey said: “With limited exceptions, from Monday 26 October it will be mandatory for GeoAmey employees to wear GeoAmey-provided medical-grade PPE face masks when entering an HMPPS establishment, within the court custody suite and associated docks, and aboard vehicles and in offices where social distancing cannot be maintained.” An MoJ spokesperson said: “All custody and security staff are required to wear masks where social distancing is not possible. Following consultation with partners this will be extended to all circumstances.” Judges are understood to have been given discretion to decide whether security staff need to wear them while sitting in the dock alongside a defendant.
19||Royal Northern Sinfonia/Cottis – buoyant return with Mozart and an intriguing rarityThe autumn season has started late for the Royal Northern Sinfonia – as it has for almost every British orchestra. But this weekend it embarked on an initial seven-week series of concerts in its home auditorium at Sage Gateshead, with a socially distanced audience of around 300 in the concert hall, and an online audience watching via a livestream. The programmes are a nice mix of reassuringly well-known pieces with rarities and new works. In the opening concert, which was conducted by Jessica Cottis, the familiar feelgood music was by Mozart – the overture to The Marriage of Figaro and the 39th symphony, K549, both given suitably buoyant, if slightly routine performances, with just the occasional moment when the ensemble was not quite as precise as it might have been had the orchestra been playing regularly together for the last seven months. If a short piece, Strum, by the composer-performer Jessie Montgomerie seemed a disappointingly routine workout for strings here, never conveying the freshness and energy reported for her music, the real collector’s item was Jean Françaix’s Double Bass Concerto, with the RNS’s newly appointed principal double bass, Philip Nelson, as the soloist. Françaix wrote concertos and chamber music for a huge range of instruments, but unlike Hindemith, another neoclassicist who was equally prolific, he generally did so with a sense of humour. The gruff little march with which the double bass concerto opens is surely tongue-in-cheek, and the lyrical episodes in the later movements seem to have been inserted just to take the solo instrument as far out of its comfort zone as possible, though Nelson obviously relished every opportunity to put it in the spotlight. The home stream didn’t run as smoothly as those we’ve seen from other orchestras and halls – just teething problems, I’m sure. But it’s a shame the concerts are only being made available online live, and those who pay to watch them are unable to view them again, while others who couldn’t make the live cast, can’t catch up with them later. • Sage Live 2020 continues until December.
11||NHS denies elderly people were refused care during early CovidNHS bosses have denied claims that thousands of frail elderly people were denied potentially life-saving care at the peak of the pandemic in order to stop the health service being overrun. NHS England took the unusual step on Sunday of issuing a 12-page rebuttal to allegations in the Sunday Times that patients deemed unlikely to survive were “written off” by being refused intensive care. Prof Stephen Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “These untrue claims will be deeply offensive to NHS doctors, nurses, therapists and paramedics, who have together cared for more than 110,000 severely ill hospitalised Covid-19 patients during the first wave of the pandemic, as they continue to do today. “The Sunday Times’ assertions are simply not borne out by the facts. It was older patients who disproportionately received NHS care. Over two-thirds of our Covid-19 inpatients were aged over 65. “The NHS repeatedly instructed staff that no patient who could benefit from treatment should be denied it and, thanks to people following government guidance, even at the height of the pandemic there was no shortage of ventilators and intensive care.” The newspaper claimed the high coronavirus infection rate in the UK before lockdown began on 23 March and the NHS’s limited supply of mechanical ventilators going into the pandemic meant that “the government, the NHS and many doctors were forced into taking controversial decisions – choosing which lives to save, which patients to treat and who to prioritise – in order to protect hospitals”. The Sunday Times said its claims were the result of a three-month investigation that involved speaking to more than 50 sources in the NHS and the government about the health service’s response to the pandemic. As a result, they decided to stop “large numbers of elderly and frail patients” going into hospital in the first place, so that intensive care wards would not be overwhelmed, which meant that many patients died of Covid-19 at home or in care homes, it added. Ambulance crews and hospitals were told to be more selective than usual about who should be admitted, “with specific instructions to exclude many elderly people”, the Sunday Times said. Dr Alison Pittard, the dean of the Faculty of Intensive Care Medicine, said patients had not been denied care. “Throughout the first wave of Covid-19 the NHS did not run out of critical care capacity, which remained available to everybody who would benefit from it,” she said. The Sunday Times pointed out that of the 59,000 excess deaths in England and Wales in the first six months of the pandemic, only 8,000 occurred in hospital, while 26,000 were in care homes and 25,000 in private homes. It also claimed that an “age-based frailty score” commissioned by Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, played a key role in the alleged policy of denying care. A spokesperson for the Intensive Care Society said, however, that while an expert group did undertake work on developing guidance for doctors on which patients should be prioritised for admission, it was “subsequently stood down on 28/29 March 2020, with Department of Health and Social Care or NHS implementation, after a review of capacity and pandemic trajectory”. NHS sources are adamant that “NHS hospitals did not run out of intensive care beds, so there was never a need to refuse anyone treatment on the basis of NHS capacity. There was categorically no blanket national decision to refuse care to any group of people, including on the basis of their age”.
8||Scottish Tory leader: I still can't see why Dominic Cummings did not resignThe Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross, has reignited the row over Dominic Cummings’ Durham lockdown trip by indicating that he could not see how the prime minister’s most senior aide did not resign over the incident. Ross, who quit his junior ministerial post in protest at Cummings’ 264-mile journey from London at the height of Covid-19 restrictions, said the actions of Boris Johnson’s adviser were “indefensible” and that they had undermined the government. In a fresh intervention unlikely to prove popular in Number 10, Ross stood by his decision to stand down and suggested Cummings should have followed his lead. Pressed on whether he believed Cummings should have resigned over the affair, Ross told the Guardian: “If someone who was not involved at all resigned then, yes, I don’t see how the individual themselves couldn’t take that position. I was so far removed from the actions yet even that far away from it I felt what he did was indefensible and that’s why I would assume, or I feel, he would take the same decision but he didn’t.” Ross was particularly unconvinced by Cummings’ excuse that he had gone on a separate drive with his family while he was in Durham to nearby Barnard Castle, apparently to test his eyesight. “I felt the only way I could be true to myself was to resign from government and to express my opposition to what he’d done, particularly the driving 60 miles to test your eyesight.” Noting his wife’s job as a police officer, he said: “I did think, how would she manage if she pulled someone over for driving issues and they used the defence that they were testing their eyesight?” He has no regrets: “Several months on, I still believe it was the right decision to take.” Rather than setting back the 37-year-old MP’s career, within months of his resignation in May from the role as parliamentary undersecretary of state for Scotland he was thrust back into the frontline of politics when he became the Conservatives’ leader north of the border uncontested. He has since set about reinvigorating the Scottish Conservatives’ approach as the SNP renews its calls for a second independence referendum. Nicola Sturgeon’s party is riding high in the polls ahead of next year’s Holyrood election. Ross, who has a seat in Westminster but not in the Scottish parliament, appointed Ruth Davidson, who held his job until 2019, to be his party’s leader in Holyrood. Davidson has been no fan of Johnson and any apparent attempt by Ross to differentiate himself from No 10 could play well with the home crowd, given the prime minister’s popularity in Scotland is questionable. In his conference speech this month, he called on his party to end the “defeatism and disinterest” over the country’s future in the UK, arguing that an SNP majority in next year’s Holyrood election was not inevitable. Reflecting on the speech, Ross said he had wanted to “make it very clear that it’s in our name that we are both Conservative and unionists”. “I said in my speech it’s in our DNA and if you don’t believe in strengthening the union and the bonds that we share across four nations of the United Kingdom then you’ve got to reflect on if you’re in the right party or not,” he said. “The feedback I’ve had back since is people at various levels in the party think it is right that that message was delivered just now because the defeatism and disinterest only benefits the SNP and their agenda to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK and I want to do everything I can to stop that.” It comes as a poll this month put backing for independence at a record high of 58%. The SNP constitution secretary, Mike Russell, indicated on Thursday that Scotland could face a second independence referendum as early as next year, following the victory for the Better Together camp in 2014. Ross called Russell’s comments “deeply disappointing but sadly predictable”. Reports also emerged this month about a leaked memo from a political consultancy firm given to senior Tories which said continuing to dismiss calls for another independence referendum could be counterproductive. It proposed potentially handing more power to Edinburgh. Ross said he did not receive the memo, but dismissed the suggestion of more powers going to Holyrood, suggesting the current ones should be used to better effect. On Sturgeon’s handling of the pandemic, Ross highlighted her communication skills in what some might characterise as a subtle dig at Downing Street. “No one would doubt that Nicola Sturgeon is a highly effective communicator but when you look at the response to the pandemic in Scotland, and across the UK, it has been largely similar,” he said. “So people who suggest there has somehow been a different approach to dealing with coronavirus in Scotland to the rest of the UK are simply unable to point to anything substantial that has been done differently. But there has been a difference in terms of the communication.” Asked about Downing Street following Scotland in U-turning over the summer on exam results, Ross said: “From students receiving their exam results in Scotland, the U-turn took longer by the Scottish government than it did by the UK government. Now I think the UK government should have seen what happened in Scotland and changed the decision before exam results south of the border were even delivered … but the fact is that it took the Scottish government longer.”
14||‘We had nudity on the greens!’ The battle over Britain’s golf coursesHollingbury golf course is a big splodge of green bleeding into Brighton’s grey urban sprawl. For more than a century, its 18 holes have risen above the seaside city towards the ruins of an iron age hillfort, which is now enclosed by holes nine, 12, 13, and 14. From Hollingbury’s highest point, it is possible to look west on a clear day and see the hills of the Isle of Wight. As housing has spread around the course, which is owned by the council, so has tension between golfers and walkers, who are permitted to cut across it on a network of footpaths and old drovers’ tracks. Relations seem calm on the autumn day I visit, but I gather “Fore!” is not the only four-letter exclamation to have bounced along the manicured fairways. In late March, the awkward relationship flipped on its head when a lockdown ban on golf coincided with a yearning for green space among Britain’s confined households. A national campaign, supported by the Brighton MP Caroline Lucas, called for golf courses to be opened to the public to relieve crowded parks. At Hollingbury, which has no fences and is part of the South Downs national park, residents responded like calves put out to pasture. They cartwheeled on the fairways and picnicked on the greens. “It was like being in the mountains up here, with that open-space feeling that makes you feel immediately better,” says Michaela Spryanova, an office administrator who lives just beyond the course’s western edge. Rachel Henson, an artist and translator, came here every day, basking in the spring sunshine and sweeping views over Brighton and the Channel. She taught her daughter to ride a bike on the sloping fairway of hole 10. “We learned all the common birdsong together,” she says. But then, in June, golf was permitted once more – and golfers reclaimed the course. “We knew it was coming, but it was a terrible shock,” Henson says as we walk with Spryanova from their children’s school after the morning drop-off. We stroll up towards the hillfort on one of the old paths to which non-golfers are again confined. “It depressed me so much I couldn’t come up here for a while,” Henson adds. The struggle for space at Hollingbury – and a second council-owned golf course two miles to the west at Waterhall – reflects a wider debate about conservation, ecology and democratic access to green space. As a pandemic triggers a revolt on many of Britain’s fairways, it poses a vexed question: is it time we opened up all golf courses to the public for good? One of the joys and challenges of golf is that it requires a lot of nice green space. How much space is disputed. A common claim that Britain’s golf courses occupy more land than housing is based on dodgy estimates, but it is a lot of land. The American writer Malcolm Gladwell once considered the scale of gated golf courses in Los Angeles, a city of few parks. He calculated that if you gave each player on a basketball court the space a golfer commands, the court would cover 12 hectares (30 acres); the hoops would be more than 400 metres apart. “They’d have to play on motorcycles,” Gladwell wrote. Yet this calculation depends on a course being busy. Not all courses are busy. Steve Garrioch, who has been the captain at Hollingbury since 2009, tells me he was one of significantly more than 500 members when he joined 20 years ago. There are now 122 members and about twice as many season-ticket holders. Garrioch, a leather merchant, blames an oversupply: Hollingbury is one of six courses within five miles of Brighton Palace pier in a city of about 300,000 people. But its decline is not unusual. According to a participation report by KPMG late last year, membership of golf courses in Great Britain dropped to a low of slightly more than 850,000, down almost 20,000 in a year. In Scotland, membership has dropped by 14% since 2014. Yet the number of courses – more than 2,000 – is relatively stable. Hollingbury, which opened in 1908, is not exclusive. “It’s for working-class people,” Garrioch says. “We’ve got taxi drivers, builders … there’s nothing elite about it.” Yet perceptions fuelled the debate about the role of courses in lockdown. “I think a certain US president has done golf no favours,” says Guy Shrubsole, a campaigner and the author of Who Owns England?. For Shrubsole, Donald Trump – and the eponymous courses on which he has played out a large part of his presidency – exemplifies the image of golf as a gated, gilded pursuit. In early April, when many councils threatened to shut the gates of crowded parks, Shrubsole launched a petition at change.org calling for golf courses to be opened. More than 7,500 people signed it. Lockdown was highlighting space inequality; studies show that people in poorer postcodes not only have smaller gardens, or none at all, but also less access to smaller parks. Pushing open the gates of golf courses began to feel like a moral imperative. “There’s a sense that golf is played by a small number of people and that they are potentially quite wealthy, retired, white men who don’t necessarily represent society,” Shrubsole says. It is not known how many courses opened to the public. It was a fraught process for many that did. “We had nudity on the greens and kids riding bikes straight over the bunkers,” Garrioch says. Elsewhere, there were reports of quad biking, horse riding and rampant picnicking. One couple were spotted playing a rather different sport in a bunker at Glenbervie golf club near Falkirk in central Scotland. “This isn’t Butlin’s,” an anonymous member of the club told the Daily Record. “It’s frustrating that members aren’t even allowed to get their daily exercise by playing a round on their own in the fresh air, yet you’ve got locals having sex in the bunkers. Where’s the social distancing in that?” But for the responsible majority, including Henson, Spryanova and their families, the overnight arrival of new parks was a revelation. “I wanted to shift debate and say there was something deeper going on here – this was about our exclusion from public space and our inability to provide enough of it,” Shrubsole says. That debate was big in Brighton before the pandemic. Ten-year management contracts at Hollingbury and Waterhall were due to expire on 31 March. “It came up at pretty much my first committee meeting last year,” says Marianna Ebel, a German-born IT engineer who was elected as a Green party councillor for Goldsmid ward in May 2019. Brexit inspired Ebel, 35, to enter local politics. She is now the joint chair of the council’s tourism, equalities, communities and culture committee, so council-owned golf courses are her responsibility. For a while, it was assumed a new operator would simply take over the leases. “But I remember looking at the membership numbers,” Ebel says. “I thought: ‘Instead of continuing, how about rewilding the courses?’” In October, the council appointed an estate agent to market the courses, offering 25-year management leases. But they also invited bids for other uses, including projects to restore the wildlife-rich chalk grassland on which the courses were laid. “We simply cannot miss this exciting opportunity to create a health &amp; wellbeing sanctuary and a wildlife haven for all,” read a petition launched in late December by the Brighton branch of Extinction Rebellion (XR), the environmental campaign group. Counter-petitions called for golf to be saved. Meanwhile, Liberal Democrat councillors pushed for the space to be used for affordable housing. More than 5,000 people signed the rewilding petition, including Chris Packham, the presenter and campaigner. In January, XR Brighton held a protest outside a committee meeting. They marched on Hollingbury. “We’re not anti-golf,” insists Ben Benatt, an ecology surveyor and XR member. “It’s about a sustainable solution that addresses the climate and biodiversity emergency.” In January, the council awarded a new contract for Hollingbury, securing its future as a golf course. It was a blow to campaigners and the families who had roamed the course. But the council also announced that Waterhall, where membership was in steeper decline, would shut down for a rare experiment: the rewilding of a golf course. “They call chalk grassland rainforests in miniature,” says Kim Greaves, as we crouch low on the first green at Waterhall. The 37-year-old played here briefly as a teenager. These days, he works with adults with learning disabilities and teaches Brazilian jujitsu, a martial art that relies on skilful leverage. He is also an amateur naturalist and part of the campaign to restore Waterhall. Golfers abandoned the course when lockdown stopped play just seven days before the old lease expired. It had stood here since 1923. Six months later, the greens are cracking up. Daisies and ragwort are growing and the old holes and bunkers are filling with soil and debris. The clubhouse, which sits just above the first green, has sweeping downland views. There is one proposal to move the building towards a rugby club, where dog walkers now park to enjoy the old course, and turn it into an education centre. For now, it is a symbol of a lost era. Abandoned trophies left in the window of the Spike Bar collect dust next to a golf glove, on which a large bumblebee has expired. The very thin layer of soil that covers chalk in valleys across the south-east of England – the result of centuries of grazing – lets rain drain straight through it. Nutrients are scant, so dominant grasses, and the shrubs and trees that would succeed them, tend not to do well. Instead, an array of resilient wildflowers cling to the earth, supporting rare species of butterfly and birds. Diversity on the old greens is still low; it will take years for the effects of mowing and pesticides to be flushed out. But Greaves wants to show me what is happening on the fringes of the fairways. Wildflowers with evocative names – betony, harebell, devil’s-bit scabious, lady’s bedstraw – are creeping in from the rough. “I even saw a round-headed rampion in the middle of the fairway,” Greaves says of a survey he did in the summer. “It might have been there without flowering for decades.” The delicate blue flower, also known as the Pride of Sussex, is a magnet for the chalkhill blue butterfly. Rewilding here will require management. Without any intervention, ecological succession will do its thing, even on thin soil. Last month, the council took responsibility for the project after a leaseholder pulled out. Greaves is anxious to start controlling the hawthorn that is already dominating areas between fairways. In other ecosystems, big fauna would do this kind of work. “Perhaps we’ll introduce elephants here eventually,” Greaves says with a smile. Golf still offers pleasure and exercise to hundreds of thousands of people. Many clubs enjoyed a growth in visitor numbers when they reopened in June; golf is nothing if not a socially distanced sport. Even XR Brighton says a sensitively managed links is far from the worst way to preserve green space, “especially if it brings a revenue stream that can help manage it in the right way”, Benatt says. Housing can be an obvious – and lucrative – alternative, especially when privately owned courses can rescue their finances with a sale to developers. Reading golf club, another old, struggling course, will next year merge with Caversham Heath, a club two miles to the west. A controversial housing development will take its place. But Waterhall’s fate adds weight to campaigns for old courses to remain green yet public, making permanent the freedom that excluded communities briefly enjoyed this year. Four years ago, Lewisham council closed a municipal 18-hole golf course that had occupied an old Georgian estate in Beckenham, south-east London. It is now a public park with a restored lake for swimming and boating. “It shows what local campaigns can do,” Shrubsole says. It will take time for balance to be restored at Hollingbury. Today, walkers and joggers outnumber golfers by far. “It’s just getting ridiculous,” says Brian Coomber, a club member who is looking for his ball in the rough next to the 10th fairway. He says people have been using the footpaths way more since golf resumed, interrupting play and messing up the fairways. “Don’t get me wrong, I’ve got a dog myself, but at the end of the day this isn’t common land,” he says. His friend, Dave Slocombe, nods in agreement. Days later, the men leave Hollingbury to join East Brighton golf club, which is only three miles away. Henson and Spryanova still walk on Hollingbury, where Spryanova says a few comments from golfers have made her children feel uncomfortable on their walk to school. Lockdown inspired Henson’s art. She made videos of the course, in which images of cartwheeling children fade into more recent footage of golf. Birds sing in the background. As we stand at the hillfort, taking in the sweep of Brighton, she can still picture those weeks. “At sunset, everyone would have been sitting here looking west, each little group taking a mound,” she says. “It looked a bit like a very spaced out village green.”
5||Tenants are facing eviction again, despite the UK government's promisesAfter a seven-month gap, the housing courts are open. Although many of them will not be operating at any capacity until early November, some cases are starting to be heard. In mid-October I represented a typical couple, Monty and Lola (not their real names). They were in court to prevent a bailiff’s appointment that had been scheduled for the Friday. The government has insisted that such hearings should continue. It has set in place two main protections for tenants. First, in the majority of cases, landlords have to wait several months after serving notices on tenants before issuing proceedings. Second, where cases were begun during the first lockdown, landlords must serve a “reactivation notice”, telling the courts whether a tenant has been affected by Covid. The idea of both provisions is to filter out the cases where the justification for eviction is clearest. Monty and Lola were excluded from either protection because a final possession order had already been made against them before Covid. In drafting the rules, the government refused to include any safeguards for people in that situation. Eighteen months earlier, their landlord had served a section 21 notice, a document that requires a tenant to leave without the landlord needing to show the tenant has done anything wrong. Monty and Lola went to their local Citizens Advice office and were told that the landlord could not win. He had taken a deposit from them but had not registered it within the statutory time and any section 21 notice would be invalid. The government has promised, many times, to repeal section 21 – however, it has indefinitely postponed acting on that promise. Although Monty and Lola had been in a strong position, they tried to be fair. They told the landlord’s solicitor they just needed to stay in their home until June 2020 when their son was due to leave school. The solicitor offered Monty and Lola a compromise: they could stay till the summer so long as they promised to leave then. They signed a consent order granting the landlord outright possession against them, never imagining that the pandemic would destroy all their plans. The issue before the court was simply whether that order had been properly made. The hearing was supposed to start on the Wednesday at 2.45pm using the court’s cloud video platform. Fifteen minutes beforehand, I logged into an online waiting room. I could see an icon representing me and one for my opponent. I could see a blue dot by the names of the people in the hearing, as the judge invited each of them to speak. But I could not hear them, and nor could they hear me. By now, my pulse was racing at around 200 beats a minute – think what it was like for my clients. The hearing was stopped and began again by telephone at 3.30pm. The judge had promised us a decision that day, but I needed to explain my client’s case, and the landlord’s barrister had to reply. Time wore on: past four, four thirty … We stopped at five, with no decision but the promise of a judgment on the Thursday. On Thursday morning, I spoke to my clients and asked how they were. “Terrible,” said Monty. “We couldn’t sleep,” added Lola. Monty was focusing on their son who is in year 12. He suffers from dyslexia and has a statement of special educational needs. They had been expecting to take him out of school after his GCSEs. But his mock grades had been so poor (and, because of Covid, they had become his final results) that he had been forced to stay at school another year to re-sit his exams. That was why they were trying so hard to stay in a home they had previously been planning to leave. Lola was focusing on the practicalities: they would not be able to find a moving company in the short time available to them. She and her husband had already driven more than 20 times to storage, they had moved everything they could. What they had left was heavy furniture, things they could not move without someone else’s assistance. They had asked the local authority to help, but it had refused. She could not imagine how they would move everything before the bailiffs arrived. “We can’t do it,” she told me, “we just can’t.” I had my telephone on speakerphone as the judge gave us her decision. She spoke gently and softly, but with urgency. The judge noted the decision of the higher courts that I had quoted. She referred to the cases my opponent had cited. The tension was so great, my hands clawed up. I could not type. She said that she agreed with me on the law – a consent order is binding in possession cases only if both parties had been absolutely clear in recording the factual admissions that would justify granting possession. That hadn’t happened in this case. Accordingly, she set aside the possession order and dismissed the warrant. Court officers would call the bailiffs and tell them the appointment was cancelled. When I rang Lola and Monty later, they sounded drunk with relief. Covid made everything rushed. It meant my clients had no proper warning of the bailiff’s appointment. It caused the hearing to be listed just days before the bailiff’s date. It meant that if we lost there would be no time to appeal to another judge. If the local authority had ended up moving my clients to emergency housing, it would have been shared accommodation – including possibly with people who might be ill. The government is aware that there is a problem, and has recently begun a process of negotiating with the bailiff’s bodies, inviting them to hold back from evictions in tier 2 and tier 3 areas. While this is to be welcomed, it doesn’t go far enough. There isn’t any proper legal basis on which bailiffs can refuse to carry out court orders, even at the government’s request. The new measures also are not being properly publicised, when (as we saw in Monty and Lola’s case) the problem in evictions is repeatedly that tenants don’t know their rights, and landlords rely on their ignorance. Much better would be a return to the summer’s ban on evictions. That system worked well and protected people who needed it. Until we do, many tens of thousands of people like Monty and Lola are going to suffer unnecessarily. • David Renton is a housing barrister at Garden Court Chambers
21||Bubble review – tetchy, tender tale of love under lockdownThe playwright James Graham has suggested it is too early to address the politics of the coronavirus crisis head-on in dramatic form. Instead, he gives us a “Covid romcom” that captures the domestic isolation and claustrophobia of pandemic life. On the brink of lockdown, Ashley (Pearl Mackie) and Morgan (Jessica Raine) have had an “amazing” first date just as the “whole frigging world is shutting down”. Should they take a leap of faith and quarantine together or face isolation alone? This one-hour drama enacts both outcomes in parallel narrative strands. In one reality, they end up in Morgan’s open-plan attic flat. In the other, they conduct an app-based courtship. As a part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival, it was staged in the theatre and simultaneously streamed online. Sleekly directed by Adam Penford, it takes place on a stripped-down stage that mirrors the stripped-down nature of the relationship evolving on it. Online, the camera shows the women more intimately on a split screen. As a drama, it is an eloquent survey of the past eight months with lively repartee, and it is impressive that Graham can take the over-familiar (jokes about face coverings, the horrors of shopping, and the insomnia induced by it all) to make it freshly witty, with sparky moments of insight. Reflecting on Zoom technology, Ashley says: “It’s like a historical re-enactment of talking.” Later, she observes how gardens have become the “new class divide”. Graham has proved himself to be a master of political playwriting, with shows such as Brexit: The Uncivil War, The Vote and This House. While this is primarily written in a comic vein, there is politics here. We are reminded of Boris Johnson’s Covid-19 experience and the killing of George Floyd. Both become heated points of contention between the women, and the play flares to bigger life as a result, if only briefly. “This fucking virus, man, it’s racist,” says Ashley, as a comment on the uneven burden of key work on BAME communities, including her mother. There is clever observational comedy in both narratives, and the two versions of coupledom push against each other, rather like the parallel worlds in The Last Five Years, but the “together” version is better investigated with all the awkward domestic intimacies, quibbles and moments of bonding. Ashley is a classic millennial – an upbeat vegan yogi who owns a micro-pub and watches reality TV. Morgan, a school teacher, lives off white wine and espressos and is more bristly. Both actors steer their characters from over-excitability to growing tetchiness and occasional tenderness. The nature of love and togetherness is explored, too, though perhaps with too light a touch. “What was it you liked about me?” asks Morgan as the couple sink into the fug of quotidian home life, and she dismisses love as nothing more than manipulation, though the play offers up its own happy ending. There has been a steady output of Covid-era romances over the course of the pandemic, both online and latterly on stage, such as in Sunnymead Court, which also has lesbian love at its centre, and the recently revived Lungs, so it is all the more of an achievement that Bubble finds freshness against this backdrop. Morgan and Ashley’s relationship does not particularly gather in emotional intensity or even in romance, but it always stays joyfully warm and entertaining. • Bubble is part of Nottingham Playhouse’s Unlocked festival.
3||'He was a father figure': loved ones remember victims of UK's Covid second waveWhen Roehl Ribaya left intensive care after 60 days in the summer, his family thought his battle with coronavirus was over. In July, he left the doors of Blackpool Victoria hospital to applause from staff as lead consultant Dr Jason Cupitt said it signalled the hospital had “survived the first wave of this silent killer”. But the 47-year-old experienced difficulties from then onwards, finding tasks such as walking up stairs challenging. He was breathless and fragile. On 13 October, he had a cardiac arrest, leaving him in a coma until he died two days later. Complications from Covid-19 led to Ribaya’s death and his story is among recent tales of loss as the UK experiences a second wave of the virus. “He was depressed when he came out of the hospital because he is 47 and should be fit and well but he felt like a 90-year-old man,” said his close friend Mark Delabajam. Delabajam and his wife, Angela, had formed a strong bond with Ribaya and his wife, Stella. When the couple first moved to Blackpool from the Philippines, Ribaya had offered them his house to stay in after only meeting them that day. They spent Christmas and holidays together. He said that when Ribaya came out of the hospital, even though he had challenges he would always try to be positive for those closest to him. “He was strong for his family and friends but we knew he was struggling with his breathing,” Delabajam says. “I had a conversation with his wife who said he would often cry in the middle of the night.” Ribaya was an aerospace engineer who came to the UK from the Philippines, following in the footsteps of his wife who got a job as a nurse here. “He was like a father figure to many, not just us – there are lots of overseas workers coming in from the Philippines at the moment as hospitals are short-staffed. All those Filipinos that come over, he is like the father figure to most of them,” Angela Delabajam said. The couple said they saw Ribaya the Sunday before he died and he seemed all right although he had been complaining of shortness of breath. If he could send a message now, Mark said it would “lecture people if they gathered in groups or in crowds … He would say my experience and what I went through hopefully will give you an insight into how bad or worse it could be.” Hambi Haralambous, 69, a music legend in Liverpool and the founder of the Motor Museum Studio in Lark Lane, which has hosted bands including Oasis and the Arctic Monkeys, died from coronavirus on 16 October. Haralambous posted photos of himself from his hospital bed, warning people about not taking Covid-19 seriously. His son, Narada, says his father had to wait three days before getting his coronavirus test and was told he would have to go to north Wales for it. Eventually, he got a diagnosis but his health got worse and he was admitted to intensive care. Haralambous was born in London to Cypriot parents who came to the UK for work. He was seven when he moved to Liverpool and as a young man, he went to art college before travelling in India. He met his first wife around this time and had two children. He later remarried and had another son and daughter. Haralambous fronted the popular synth band Hambi and The Dance in the early 1980s, which were signed to Virgin Records. He then moved into recording and managing for other artists, and later retrained in film. “When my dad was ill in hospital he told me about how unfair this was and how angry he was as he had so much more he wanted to do,” said Narada. “I asked, what it is you want to do, Dad? He said he wanted to finish off certain [creative] projects. That was his passion and what he was thinking about.” He said the family went through periods of thinking he was getting better.“After a while, he seemed to improve and the doctors were happy with his progress … then he called me one morning and he said the doctors said he was not going to make it. I was shocked as they had just moved him to a different ward.” “I spoke to the doctors. I wanted to do that before telling the family and they reassured me a bit. They said that they had not told my father he wasn’t going to make it but they had said he had deteriorated a lot and worried and concerned about him.” Narada said his father’s condition got worse and he died not long after this conversation. “People are not taking this illness seriously and I am sick of seeing it … People don’t understand what this is doing but seeing doctors and nurses, and what have to deal with [shows the toll]. They are doing such a good job of looking after people. No one has a clue until it hits you,” he said. Another local legend, Rotherham taxi driver Haji Tanveer Hussain, who worked up until his death to support his family, also died from the virus, on Wednesday 7 October, a few weeks after getting ill. Tributes flooded in for the Pakistan-born driver since his death, with colleagues and customers of Gold Star Taxis worker expressing their sadness at the loss of a “humble” and “joyful” man. Nasar Raoof, a friend, said Hussain always offered him golden nuggets of advice when he was feeling hopeless. Raoof recalls one particular time when he bumped into him at a local garage and he had had a tough day and felt people were being ungrateful for his hard work. He said Tanveer told him satisfaction comes from within and “by what you do and how you help people”. “It brightened up my day because it was not going well and it was hectic. It brought a smile to my face,” Raoof said. He had conversations with Hussain about his concerns working at a time when cases were so high, particularly in Rotherham. “He was worried but he said it was always about striking a balance between being able to provide for your family and being able to stay safe while you do your work,” Raoof said, adding that he always joked that he wished he had a job in an office instead. During the peak of coronavirus, Hussain was one of a few drivers who offered to do free pharmacy runs for vulnerable people unable to go outside and get their medication. “Every customer really loved him. He was really just a smiling joyful person. He was polite and courteous – putting himself out there in harm’s way to provide a service. These were the messages that came through social media. There were customers ringing in to offer their sympathies and condolences,” Raoof said.
12||In brief: Solo; The Forger's Daughter; Little Weirds – reviewsSolo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind) Rebecca Seal Souvenir, £14.99, pp304 Could there be a more apt moment for a book about working on your own? The former Observer journalist Rebecca Seal is a long-term “soloist” who knows all about the glories and gut-churning grind of self-employment. Deep-diving into productivity literature, economics and social sciences, as well as hard-won experience, she’s crafted a primer that covers topics from resilience and focus to procrastination and the curse of comparison. It contrives to be kind, realistic and genuinely helpful, all without lapsing into business speak and psychobabble. Install a copy on whatever surface is functioning as your desk, and you may even feel a little bit less alone. The Forger’s Daughter Bradford Morrow Grove Press, £12.99, pp288 According to Bradford Morrow, literary forgers are coy about their craft, preferring to think of it as creative endeavour rather than crime. His hero, Will, is just such a man – or he used to be, until he got caught. Now, decades later, a villainous character from his past has materialised, demanding that Will create a copy of the rarest book in American literature, Edgar Allan Poe’s Tamerlane and Other Poems. The novel flits evocatively from upstate New York farmhouses to Manhattan auction houses, and there’s an aptly gothic tinge to the tense drama that ensues. Little Weirds Jenny Slate Fleet, £9.99, pp240 The actor and comedian Jenny Slate works hard at being weird in her debut essay collection. Must we really think of her as a homemade croissant, oozing “antique decadence” and made up of “layers and layers of fragility and richness”? Peel away the artifice, and she turns out to be rather like the rest of us, albeit with the volume turned way up. She’s a gardener, a dog-lover, and “very divorced”. She gets stage fright still. And, when she stops trying quite so strenuously, she becomes a writer of tender, zestful prose. • To order Solo: How to Work Alone (and Not Lose Your Mind), The Forger’s Daughter or Little Weirds go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
5||Brexit was no aberration. The European Union needs to learn from itIn fewer than 100 days, Brexit will have been completed. Britain will be outside the European Union customs union and the internal market. But Brexit poses questions for the EU as well as for Britain. It challenges what might be called the ideology of Europe. It is, after all, a serious matter for a democratic organisation when a major member state decides to leave. “It would,” declared Donald Tusk, then president of the European council, shortly after the Brexit referendum in 2016, “be a fatal error to assume that the negative result in the UK referendum represents a specifically British issue … the Brexit vote is a desperate attempt to answer the questions that millions of Europeans ask themselves daily.” President Macron of France was honest enough to confess to the BBC’s Andrew Marr early in 2018 that it was possible a referendum in France could even have yielded the same result as in Britain. What, then, are the lessons? In her Bruges lecture of 2010 (as important as Margaret Thatcher’s lecture of 1988, though less noticed) German chancellor Angela Merkel pointed to a continual and creative tension between two Europes – supranational Europe and intergovernmental Europe. If that tension is disturbed, and supranational policies intrude upon national identities, there will be popular resistance. The problems sparked by migration and the euro show in graphic form how the EU can arouse such resistance, if it goes beyond what is acceptable by seeming to challenge the national identity of member states. The strong executive action needed to resolve the euro and migration crises could only be taken by national governments working together. These crises were confronted primarily by the governments of the member states in the European council: the commission and the European parliament played a distinctly secondary role. The Covid crisis, like past crises, is leading to talk of further integration. Some EU leaders seek new economic and budgetary instruments culminating in fiscal union so as to place the euro on stronger foundations. But with fiscal union, what issues would be left for national elections and national governments when so much economic policy has been removed from the agenda? Further integration, let alone treaty amendment, is the last thing Europe needs. For supranationalism is now a threat to the fulfilment of the European ideal, not a facilitator of it. As long ago as 1990, when Jacques Delors, former president of the commission, told the European parliament that he wanted Europe to become a “true federation” by the end of the millennium, the then French president François Mitterrand, watching on television, burst out: “But that’s ridiculous! What’s he up to? No one in Europe will ever want that. By playing the extremist, he’s going to wreck what’s achievable.” Few in Europe seek to submerge their country’s national identity in a federation. Instead, they seek to pursue their own national interests constructively within a co-operative European framework. Perhaps Britain should have done the same. There is, paradoxically, a sense in which Brexit Britain, together with Gaullist France, were in the vanguard of European development, rather than hindrances to it. For both appreciated – Britain, thanks to its long evolutionary history, and the Gaullists as a result of France’s experiences during the war – what the sacrifice of sovereignty would actually mean in practice. When, in the 1990s, prime minister John Major declared that Europe was not yet ready for a common currency, his warnings were ignored and he was regarded as an obfuscator. But perhaps the other member states should have heeded what he said. That would certainly be the view of those young people in the Mediterranean member states who find themselves unemployed as a result of the austerity policies caused by the euro. For those member states emerging from dictatorships, it was easy to say, rhetorically, that they were eager to sacrifice sovereignty. But all of them found their acceptance of shared sovereignty was subject to very strict limits: Germany, when it came to sharing debts; Greece, when it came to budgetary restrictions; and the Visegrad countries of central Europe (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia), when it came to accepting a due quota of Syrian migrants. What Europe needs, as Tusk frequently pointed out, is not more Europe but better Europe – practical improvements, such as completion of the European services market. Services, after all, make up 70% of economic activity in the EU, but there are still about 5,000 protected professions. Europe also needs a digital single market, which Mark Rutte, prime minister of the Netherlands, has calculated would add €400bn (£370bn) to Europe’s GDP. The EU, then, must remain primarily an intergovernmental institution in which the member states, through the European council, dictate the pace of change. But such a Europe of states would be an intergovernmental organisation with a difference, since member states would be considering not only their own national interests but the interests of the whole continent. Europe has suffered in the past from the absence of such a perspective. Had it been there in 1914, had national governments considered the interests of Europe as a whole rather than merely their own national interests, war would have been avoided. Brexit, then, was not an aberration. Instead of applauding or condemning it – for, after all, Brexit is yesterday’s argument – the EU must seek to learn its lessons. • Vernon Bogdanor is professor of government at King’s College London, and author of Britain and Europe in a Troubled World
19||Billie Eilish review – immersive adventure with fish and spidersOf all the online attempts to fill the gaping chasm where live music used to be before coronavirus, Billie Eilish’s livestream has attracted the most attention. Understandably so. The 20-year-old has a far keener visual sense than any of her peers, expressed through her album covers and self-directed videos. If a pop artist can come up with something eye-catching enough to make you temporarily forget there’s no chance of proper gigs for the foreseeable future, goes the thinking, it’s probably her. For your 30 bucks, you get a 55-minute performance, a “pre-show” that involves clips from a forthcoming Eilish documentary and a variety of celebrities – including Lizzo and Eilish’s “surrogate dad” Steve Carrell – imploring fans to vote in next month’s US election. A lot of fuss has been pre-emptively made about the “extended reality” technology used in the staging of Eilish’s performance, but what the show itself most closely resembles is a souped-up version of a late-60s or early-70s pop TV special devoted to a single artist, an impression underlined by the fact that between-song changes to the set are masked by the screen fading to black. Clearly, though, things have moved on. The technology means Eilish and her fellow musicians – brother Finneas and drummer Andrew Marshall – appear to be performing underwater, with fish swimming around them, or in the middle of a glistening cartoon forest, or, for All the Good Girls Go to Hell, in a corridor of images of environmental catastrophe and protest marches that stretches into infinity. It isn’t clear how live the music is, although Eilish’s vocals audibly are, and all the more impactful for being devoid of the showboating latter-day pop singers tend to go in for: during Xanny, a kind of 21st-century teenage equivalent of Neil Young’s The Needle and the Damage Done, her voice comes out as a kind of sighing mumble, as if she’s so bored with druggy excess she can barely be bothered to articulate her contempt. Occasionally, you’re struck by the feeling that the simplest staging ideas are the most effective: a single spotlight that strobes and casts a Nosferatu-like shadow behind the singer, a vast spider that crawls around the stage during You Should See Me in a Crown. And occasionally the technology is used to create a simulacrum of the communal experience of a gig. Fans watching at home find webcam images of themselves flashed up on the screens. Some of the fans appear prepared for this, holding up homemade signs and making heart shapes with their hands. Others do not: one girl is so startled by the sight of herself, there seems every chance she’ll be carried away from her computer on a stretcher. It’s both striking and entertaining – no one who stumped up the cash is likely to feel short-changed – but it doesn’t feel anything like being at a live show, as Eilish acknowledges. “The only benefit of not having a crowd,” she says, “is that none of you are in the pit, fainting, like usual.” The time may come when someone harnesses technology in order to produce an online live music experience that’s fully, game-changingly immersive. This isn’t it, but as stopgap exercises go, it’s impressive, if haunted by the sense that no one really knows how long the gap it’s stopping will last. “One day, if we vote the orange man out, we might see each other again,” says Eilish, before the screen fades to black again and the credits roll.
1||'Sue if you must': Lincoln Project rejects threat over Kushner and Ivanka billboardsThe Lincoln Project “will not be intimidated by empty bluster”, a lawyer for the group wrote late on Saturday, in response to a threat from an attorney for Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner over two billboards put up in Times Square. “Sue if you must,” Matthew Sanderson said. The New York City billboards show the president’s daughter and her husband, both senior White House advisers, displaying apparent indifference to public suffering under Covid-19. Kushner is shown next to the quote “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem”, above a line of body bags. Trump is shown gesturing, with a smile, to statistics for how many New Yorkers and Americans as a whole have died. According to Johns Hopkins University, more than 8.5m coronavirus cases have been recorded across the US and more than 224,000 have died. Case numbers are at record daily levels and one study has predicted 500,000 deaths by February. New York was hit hard at the pandemic’s outset. The Lincoln Project is a group of former Republican consultants who have made it their mission to attack Donald Trump and support Joe Biden. On Friday, Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented the president against allegations of fraud and sexual assault, wrote to the Lincoln Project, demanding the “false, malicious and defamatory” ads be removed, or “we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages”. The Lincoln Project responded that they would not remove the billboards, citing first amendment rights of free speech and the “reckless mismanagement of Covid-19” by the Trump White House. In a legal response on Saturday night, attorney Matthew Sanderson told Kasowitz: “Please peddle your scare tactics elsewhere. The Lincoln Project will not be intimidated by such empty bluster … your clients are no longer Upper East Side socialites, able to sue at the slightest offense to their personal sensitivities.” Due to a “gross act of nepotism”, Sanderson wrote, citing supreme court precedent and “substantial constitutional protections for those who speak out”, Trump and Kushner have become public officials whom Americans “have the right to discuss and criticise freely”. Kasowitz claimed Kushner “never said” the words attributed to him on the billboards, and Trump “never made the gesture” she is shown to make. Vanity Fair reported the Kushner quote, from a meeting in March, in which Kushner criticised New York governor Andrew Cuomo. Trump tweeted the pose used by the Lincoln Project in July, controversially promoting Goya foods. The “bruised self-image” of the president’s daughter, Sanderson wrote, “does not change the fact that this billboard accurately depicts her support of a federal response that has utterly failed to prevent an unmitigated tragedy for the United States”. “May I suggest,” he added, “that if Mr Kushner and Ms Trump are genuinely concerned about salvaging their reputations, they would do well to stop suppressing truthful criticism and instead turn their attention to the Covid-19 crisis that is still unfolding under their inept watch. “These billboards are not causing [their] standing with the public to plummet. Their incompetence is.” A footnote to Sanderson’s letter cited “one of the seminal libel-proof plaintiff cases”, that of a well-known mobster whose reputation was “so tarnished … he could claim no damages for defamation”. “Mr Kushner and Ms Trump’s claims will fare no better than Boobie Cerasini’s given their tarnished reputations on Covid-19,” it said. Sanderson also said “this isn’t over” and added: “Sue if you must.” As University of Richmond law professor Carl Tobias told the Guardian on Saturday, that seems unlikely. Donald Trump “has honed litigation abuse, as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias said. But “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.”
3||Europe's Jewish population has dropped 60% in last 50 yearsEurope has lost almost 60% of its Jewish population over the past 50 years, mainly as a result of the collapse of the Soviet Union after which many Jews left eastern Europe as borders opened, a study shows. Only about 9% of the global Jewish population now lives in Europe, compared with nearly 90% in the late 19th century – but similar to the proportion 1,000 years ago. In total, an estimated 1.3 million Jews live in Europe in 2020, about 0.1% of the continent’s population. Two-thirds of them live in France, the UK and Germany. The figures are in a report produced by the London-based Institute for Jewish Policy Research, which attempts to give a comprehensive picture of Jewish populations in European countries. “Jews have not only been an integral part of European history and culture but are actually one of its oldest and original component groups,” says the report, titled Jews in Europe at the Turn of the Millennium. “However, throughout history, the inherent weakness of a landless and powerless minority vis-a-vis territorially based societies and their constituted powers often put theJewish people in a condition of dependency and instability, and translated into powerful ups and downs in the Jewish presence.” Between the end of the 18th and 19th centuries, the number of Jews in the world rose to more than 10 million, and climbed further to 16.5 million on the eve of the second world war. Most of the growth was in eastern Europe, then America and then Palestine and Israel. The murder of 6 million Jews in the Holocaust reduced the global population to around 11 million, “radically disrupt[ing] what had been up to that moment the continuous build-up and transformation of European Jewry”. In 1880, 88% of the world’s Jews lived in Europe. By 1945, this share had fallen to 35%, then to 26% in 1970 and to 9% in 2020. Most of this decline happened in eastern Europe, where the share of the global total fell from 26% in 1945 to 2% in 2020. In the latter decades of the 20th century, the “opening of the doors of the Soviet Union” meant that more than 1.8 million Jews left eastern Europe between 1969 and 2020, resulting in “a drastic shift in the Jewish population’s centre of gravity from the east to the west of the continent”. The study also reports that almost 70,000 Israeli-born Jews now live permanently in Europe, about 25% of these in the UK. The vast majority of European Jews – including 90% of British Jews – are not actively planning to emigrate to Israel or elsewhere. A minority of European Jewish families have more than five children, with the highest proportion (24%) in Belgium, which has a large ultra-Orthodox population. The lowest proportion (5%) is in Poland. More than three-quarters of Polish Jews are married to non-Jews, but only 14% of Belgian Jews. Intermarriage has been a “significant factor in the erosion of the Jewish population size” as children in such families are often not brought up as Jewish. The UK Jewish population had the smallest proportion (4%) of converts to Judaism, and Spain the largest (25%). In every one of 12 EU countries , Jews were more pro-EU than the non-Jewish population. In Hungary, there was the biggest gap, with 51% of Jews saying they had a strong attachment to the EU, compared with 19% of the total population. There were also big gaps in Poland, Austria and Hungary.
21||Lone Flyer: The Last Flight of Amy Johnson review – soaring spiritAmy Johnson is, in many ways, still the epitome of the romantic female adventurer. Finding international fame as the first woman to fly solo from England to Australia in 1930, she lived fast and died young, breaking a host of records before crashing to her death at the age of 37. In this revival of Ade Morris’s 2001 play about her life, we glimpse the woman behind the celebrity pilot and aviation engineer, as frustrated by social convention as she was determined to embrace adventure. We meet Johnson in her dying moments and her life flashes before our eyes over the course of the play. We flit back and forth from that frantic, final flight to her early years in Hull and at Sheffield University, then to finding her passion for flying and meeting the loves of her life. Lucy Betts’s direction navigates a socially-distanced stage so cleverly that we barely notice the lack of touch between its two actors. In flying jacket and cap, Hannah Edwards, as Johnson, is spirited, sparky and full of yearning for a remarkable life . She steers between steeliness and vulnerability in the narration of her story, while Benedict Salter switches with virtuosity between several roles, including Johnson’s gentle father, her remote first lover, Franz, and her husband and fellow pilot, Jim Mollison. It is Johnson’s poetic subjectivity that leads the storytelling and the script zings with colour as she speaks of a near-drowning in a “huge fist of sea” – the freezing waves were “a million needles of icy hot”. She refers to wartime zeppelins as “flying badgers” and to a teacher who has “a face like cold suet pudding”. A revolving trolley is the central prop and mostly functions as Johnson’s Gipsy Moth plane. Jamie Kubisch-Wiles and Thom Townsend’s sound design, together with Harry Armytage’s lighting, signal scene changes without any other big shifts in the set. The sea is suggested by undulating white light; a cinema hall is evoked with flickering illumination and piano music; and the sound of a school bell or an aeroplane engine’s thrum instantly create an atmosphere, alongside the eloquence of Morris’s script. It is clear that Johnson is a maverick, pushing against norms to be the woman she wants to be rather than the “teacher or nurse” she is expected to become. She speaks of her fear of being stuck in an unfulfilled life which, it is hinted, led her sister to kill herself. Travelling through a series of dull jobs, from a typing pool to the lingerie department of Peter Jones and a law firm, she finally trades it in for a “more precarious existence at Stag Lane aerodrome” in London. Her dilemmas feel strangely – even sadly –contemporary as she reflects on marriage, motherhood and personal freedom. “Love makes me dependent and I hate that it saps all my adventure,” she says, though she craves it, too. The play also, obliquely, shows how the world judges female heroism. She is described as a “blonde” and as a “daughter” by the press, even after her extraordinary accomplishments as a pilot. At the height of her fame, she seems to be caught in an uncomfortable and intrusive alliance with the press. “Fame is like battery acid – use it, don’t drink it,” she says, almost as a warning to herself. This aspect, while not heavily investigated, again feels contemporary and reminiscent of the way in which adventuring women such as the late Alison Hargreaves – the first female mountaineer to scale Everest alone and without supplementary oxygen – have been judged. Discordant cello music signals a return to her final moments in the air. It sounds slightly shrill by the end and we return to this scene too often, but the play holds its power right until that final crash, and all the hope of a magnificent, adventuring life in it. • At the Watermill theatre, Newbury, until 21 November.
18||Honest Thief review – low-stakes thrillerLiam Neeson is Tom Carter, AKA “the In and Out Bandit”, a bank robber who has swindled 12 banks in seven states, accruing $9m. Importantly, he’s “met a woman” and is ready to hand over the money and turn himself in. In this low-stakes thriller, FBI agents Niven and Hall (Jai Courtney and Anthony Ramos) scupper his plans for a quiet life by attempting to kill him and steal the money for themselves. Former marine Tom is having none of it. With Neeson well within the confines of his comfort zone, tailed by corrupt cops and diving out of hotel windows, the film should be better. Yet it drags, not least in tedious scenes of him earnestly telling new girlfriend Annie (Kate Walsh) how she’s put him on the straight and narrow.
20||Royal Mail to hire record number of Christmas tempsRoyal Mail is to hire a record 33,000 temporary workers for the Christmas period – two-thirds more than usual – to handle the UK festive parcel frenzy triggered by the surge in online shopping. Christmas is always the busiest time for the postal service, but this year it is seeking record numbers of temporary recruits to help to sort an even higher flow of packages as high-street closures during the pandemic have forced shoppers online. The UK has about 90,000 postal workers and Royal Mail typically hires 20,000 seasonal workers. This year, the extra staff will work mainly in sorting offices, delivery vans and data centres. Sally Ashford, the Royal Mail’s chief human resources officer, said: “During these unprecedented times we believe it is critical that Royal Mail continues to deliver. We want to do our best to deliver Christmas for our customers and support the effort on the pandemic. This helps the whole country to celebrate and stay safe during these difficult times.” The company aims to fill more than 13,000 vacancies in mail sorting offices in England, 1,400 in Scotland, 700 in Wales and 500 in Northern Ireland. About 1,000 additional workers are also sought for Royal Mail’s dedicated Covid-19 testing kit collection team, while other sorting and driving roles are on offer in logistics and at its Heathrow international hub. There are also temporary positions in data inputting. The pandemic has accelerated the shift to online shopping, with restrictions closing non-essential high street shops for months during 2020 and further closures not being ruled out. Royal Mail staff have worked throughout the pandemic, despite significant safety concerns from unions. Last week, Royal Mail announced that its postal workers would for the first time collect parcels on the doorstep, in one of the biggest changes to the service as it adapts to the decline in letters and rapid growth in online shopping. Royal Mail reported a £139m increase in total revenue in the five months to 30 August, as the pandemic caused a surge in parcel deliveries. While letter deliveries collapsed, parcel volumes during that period rose by a third year-on-year – an increase of 177m parcels. It normally carries 1.3bn parcels a year. Rivals such as Amazon and other parcel companies have, however, helped to erode its market share.
20||Desperate UK Covid home workers renting solace from nimble-footed firmsTired of working on the kitchen table or juggling conference calls and family life, and with no return to their desks in sight, many of the country’s office workers are seeking out alternative workplaces – from hotel rooms and cocktail bars to fitness clubs – for a change of scene. Businesses are hoping that the offer of a desk, reliable wifi and refreshments will attract workers weary of half a year of working from home, while boosting their income in challenging times. On a wet weekday morning, Edmund Weil has bagged a cosy corner table at Swift Shoreditch, a cocktail bar in the hip east London district. But he’s there for a business meeting rather than the drinks. “Everyone has seen a lot of home,” Weil said. “Lots of people who don’t have a home office are at the stage where if you have to choose between a face-to-face meeting and Zoom, they choose face to face.” The father of three children, including a four-month-old baby, Weil has been looking for places to work where there are fewer distractions. As a bar owner, he is more used than most to spending daylight hours in venues dedicated to night-time socialising, but he is part of a growing number of workers finding temporary desks in different locations. Coral Anderson, the general manager of Swift Shoreditch, said the 10pm curfew has hurt trade at bars that usually make most of their income in late-night trading. Swift Shoreditch has signed up to a “work from bars” initiative created by Fraser Campbell, ambassador for whisky brand Dewar’s. Its intention is to highlight venues that are now welcoming workers, while bringing new customers to businesses struggling with reduced trade and government regulations. “Bars have changed their opening hours to open at 12 o’clock, they have started doing food, they have amazing wifi, and tables with distance between them,” Campbell said. Campbell’s online map of 150 venues across the UK, from London to Aberdeen, has been visited almost 20,000 times in the four weeks since launch. Anderson hopes joining the map will help Swift Shoreditch to reach a wider audience. The number of British workers travelling to work has been falling since early October, according to official figures, and a quarter of workers are still working exclusively from home. Following the government’s U-turn over the return to the office in September, some of the country’s largest hotel chains have begun to offer daytime room rentals to workers in search of peace and quiet, as hotels grapple with a lack of international tourists and slump in business travel. Hilton has launched day rentals across the majority of its more than 160 UK hotels, from one of its most luxurious hotels, the Conrad London St James, which costs from £150 a day, to £44.85 a day for a room in York’s Hampton by Hilton. Meanwhile, European hotel group Accor, owner of brands including Novotel and Ibis, has launched a similar offering at about 220 locations from Brighton to Edinburgh. Hilton offers rooms with a desk and chair, facilities to make hot drinks, as well as room service and wifi, and use of the gym or swimming pool, with a promise of high levels of hygiene. “Hotels are having to be creative,” said John Rogers, the head of brands and franchise operations for Europe, the Middle East and Africa at Hilton. “Where historically there would have been large volumes midweek of corporate business, clearly those volumes are lower.” Beyond hotels, the David Lloyd fitness club chain has reported a 40% increase in online inquiries for corporate memberships, which it attributes to employers wanting to provide staff with gym access and a workplace. Growing demand for one-day desk rentals has sparked a change at flexible workspace provider Fora, which previously rented out offices for a minimum of one month. Fora, with 11 buildings across London and Reading and plans for more, offers a day pass at a cost of £40 in the capital and £25 in Reading. “People aren’t certain how much office space they need right now and how often they want to go into work,” said Enrico Sanna, the chief executive of Fora, who is himself working from the stylishly designed building on Broadwick Street in Soho. “There is a hardcore of people who don’t want to be at home. These are people who can do it for three months, but not past that, as it’s not the right setup mentally or physically.” Opening a new business during a recession is for the brave, but Dominic Cools-Lartigue jumped at the chance to open a restaurant, gallery and co-working venue in Shoreditch. The building, which houses the Tramshed Project, once an East End tram generator, became available after its former occupier, a fine dining restaurant, collapsed into administration in April. When the Guardian visited a few days after its reopening, about half of the well-spaced tables in the 1,860 sq metre (20,000 sq ft) building were occupied by laptop users. Laurent Louvrier, the chief executive of the artificial intelligence firm SuccessData, had booked one of Tramshed’s booths for a brainstorming day with three of his 11 staff. The startup terminated its lease in a building run by flexible office provider WeWork during lockdown, saving a “not negligible” amount of money. Instead, small groups from SuccessData meet once a week at venues such as the Tramshed Project, where a four-person booth requires a minimum daily spend of £30 on food and drink. “This is all we need at the moment,” said Louvier. “Just opening this vast space as a restaurant right now wouldn’t be viable,” said Cools-Lartigue. “The co-working will help the with the evening restaurant bookings. Hopefully one will feed the other.”
20||Sunak must extend universal credit or be forced into another U-turnRight from the start of the Covid-19 crisis the government was never in any doubt about the implications of putting the economy into deep freeze. The Treasury knew it was going to be bad, so there was a furlough scheme for employees, financial assistance for the self-employed, grants, loan guarantees, a business rates holiday, a deferral of VAT, and a £1,000-a-year increase in universal credit. The last of these – the £20 a week increase in UC – has tended to be overlooked in recent months as attention has focused on what should replace the furlough, but as things stand the temporary increase will be reversed next April. Make no mistake, this has all the hallmarks of a slow-burn crisis for the government that it would do well to address while it has the time. Otherwise, it will eventually be forced into yet another U-turn at a moment not of its own choosing. The Treasury says it is keeping UC under review, but its message is that the extra £20 a week comes at a hefty cost – £9b this year – and that there is only so much money to go round. More for welfare means less for other public services. It is as simple as that. Except that it isn’t. The increase in UC was supposed to be temporary for the same reason that the furlough was supposed to be temporary: the Treasury assumed that by now the Covid-19 crisis would largely be over and that the economy would on its way to a complete recovery. Rishi Sunak’s decision last week to beef up his job support scheme was an acceptance that the effects of the pandemic are going to be felt until at least next spring. New restrictions, either through the two-week circuit breaker in Wales or the tiered systems in England and Scotland, mean businesses will close and workers will be laid off. Sunak hopes that most of the closures and the layoffs will be temporary but many of them won’t be. It’s Sunak’s job to worry about the public finances and there is no question that the government has been borrowing a lot. The deficit stood at just over £200bn in the first six months of the 2020-21 financial year – comfortably a peacetime record. Yet faced with the threat of mass unemployment, the chancellor last week made the only possible decision: to extend the furlough in all but name and ignore the impact on the deficit. Sooner or later he is going to be faced with a similar decision over universal credit – and if he has any sense he will come to the same decision. The original increase in UC back in March was the right thing to do. Although no Conservative would admit to it, years of benefit cuts had left the UK’s welfare system unfit for purpose in normal times, let alone during a government-imposed lockdown that was certain to cost many jobs. Torsten Bell, the director of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, noted last week that low earners have been at the centre of the economic storm. Not only have they borne the highest health risks while higher earners have been working from home, they have been three times as likely to have been furloughed as high earners, and four times as likely to have lost their jobs in the first phase of the crisis. It’s not hard to see why. Many low earners are in consumer-facing jobs in sectors such as hospitality, tourism and leisure. These are the bit of the economy that faced the biggest hit in the spring and in the case of hospitality are about to suffer another tough period. Bell adds, though, that income inequality has not changed all that much during the pandemic, with the blow reasonably equally distributed among low, middle and higher income brackets. Why? Partly because those on the lowest incomes were less likely to be working going into the crisis, partly because of the wage top-ups provided by the furlough, and partly because of the cushion provided by UC. “This increase in income from the state, coming at the same time as the decrease in income from the labour market, meant that the overall incomes of the poorest fifth were close to being unchanged in the first phase of this crisis,” Bell said in an article for the online magazine Tortoise. “Without this policy action they would have fallen a full 8%.” There is one other reason why Sunak needs to make the welfare system more generous: it would be good for the economy, and ultimately the public finances. A paper produced by the TUC and the thinktank, the Institute for Public Policy Research, models the impact of either doubling child benefit or increasing the child element of UC by £20 a week. Either measure would lead to a reduction in child poverty, which would be welcome in itself, but the IPPR researchers found there were also sizeable multiplier effects, under which each one pound of stimulus produces more than one pound’s worth of output. The reason is that the poorest 40% of the population have a higher tendency to spend any extra income than richer groups. Put simply, if you are having trouble putting food on the table, the first thing you do if your UC goes up is to head down to the supermarket. The money feeds straight back into the economy, creating work for food suppliers and cashiers, who in turn spend some of their extra income. The study estimates that multipliers could be as high as 1.7 or 1.8 for the changes it is proposing. Something for Sunak to consider as he works out when to fly the white flag over UC. • Sign up to the daily Business Today email here or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk.
2||NRL grand final 2020: Melbourne Storm beat Penrith Panthers– as it happenedAnd with that, we should leave the Storm players to their celebrations. And the Panthers to their commiserations. Melbourne won it in the first half; Penrith ensured there was a period of squeaky bum time for the Storm as time ran out, but ultimately, Cam Smith’s team held on and are NRL premiers once again. Thanks for joining us. Here’s Emma Kemp’s match report: The Storm players get up onto the stage and one-by-one receive their premiership rings from Craig Bellamy. Time for Cameron Smith to speak again - plenty of thank yous, respect for Penrith etc. Peter V’landys and Andrew Abdo get a mention for getting the competition back up and running. But nothing about his future plans, natch. He signs off with some words of wisdom for his teammates: “Lastly, fellas, this 2020 season, it’s one like no other and what we’ve been able to achieve tonight, it’s - we’ll never forget it. We’ll remember it for the rest of our lives and a big congratulations to everyone, particularly the boys that are celebrating their first premiership. Hold on to that forever, boys.” Cue Tina Turner.... The kid looks a bit overwhelmed. “This is unbelievable,” he says. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history. “It’s been a great year. Been able to play with the GOAT and these boys again, thanks, Penrith. You are really good. 17 in a row is an unbelievable achievement. Well done to you guys. Thanks to our fans who stuck strong. Especially our ones back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back in Victoria. It’s a tough time back there at the moment and we wear the V on our jersey proudly. Can’t wait to go back there and celebrate with you guys, so thank you.” And your Clive Churchill medal winner is.... Ryan Papenhuyzen! Clive Churchill medal announcement is on its way... Josh Addo-Carr and Cam Munster, being nice about Penrith. Here’s JAC: “We knew the Panthers would come out firing. We got the start that we wanted. You know, full credit to Panthers. They will be a very tough side for many years to come.” And Munster: “We know what Penrith are like, the best team. Their attack outstanding. That’s the reason why they are the minor premiers. We knew we had to start well. We didn’t off the kick-off, but 50/50 in some tries there, just ended up getting the right bit of green. But full credit to Penrith tonight. It’s been the best team all year like I said.” And the maestro Cameron Smith: “We did it the hard way there, 11 men in the end. Penrith were coming home with a wet sail and playing the footy they played all year. It’s just been terrific. “As a club and team and organisation, we’ve admired what Penrith have done this year, to win 17 in a row in this competition, it’s a special effort. On top of what everyone’s been through this year, as I said before the game, it is going to be a great contest. There’s another couple of minutes on the clock, I don’t know what would have happened there. You’ve got to give credit to Penrith. They fought to the end. “I’m just really proud of this - not just this football team that played tonight, the entire squad. There’s a handful of players there that they trained, they trained hard every year and applied it every day, applied themselves every day to help the 17 going out on the weekend and they didn’t even get a game of football this year. You know, the entire squad has done a fantastic effort. We haven’t been home for about five months. You know, just with the conditions that we’ve been under, I think it’s just a remarkable effort to be here tonight and to get a victory.” A disappointed Nathan Cleary: “Super disappointing. I thought I let the boys down, but, yeah, hopefully we’ll be back. “There were a few moments through our intercept and obviously the one at half-time, and, just let in too many ordinary tries. They were too good. “We’ve got a taste of it now. It’s going to hurt for along time, but it’s fuelled us for next year. Train harder than ever now.” Melbourne tryscorer Ryan Papenhuyzen: “I’m so emotional.Oh, wow! The whole day was just the unknown. You don’t know what’s going to happen. You’re so confident in the boys, but these guys coming off 17 in a row, the most butterflies I’ve ever had. These boys, we’ve done it so tough this year. We have the V on our jersey because back home they’re doing it a lot tougher than we are. That is unbelievable, so proud of the boys. I didn’t think I would be able to do one of these and we’ve done it. “Our first half, that’s the best defensive performance I have seen from our side this year. We had confidence after last week that we could start well and done that. They came back strong at the end, but our first half definitely set the platform. That’s unbelievable.” What a finish to the game! My goodness, the Panthers made you think they could actually pull off a miraculous comeback. In the end, they fell just short, as Melbourne Storm once again prove they’re the best in the business. Stick around for the post-match interviews. 80 mins: Such drama late on but the Storm hang on! Melbourne are NRL premiers! 80 mins: Cleary scores! He runs at the Storm defence all on his own and goes over! He declines the kick and they’ll have one final chance to score - one play to go the length of the pitch... 79 mins: It’s been one hell of a fight by Penrith, but they’ve simply run out of time. Melbourne look like they’re going to hold on. Meanwhile, Smith is sinbinned for a professional foul and the Panthers will finish with 11 men on the pitch. 77 mins: Time is running out for Penrith. Mansour can’t get on the end of a loose ball in the Storm in-goal following a Kikau kick... it’s not going to be their night. 74 mins: The Storm defence looks slight ragged as Penrith turn up the offensive heat. Lui kicks a high swirling ball forward which Papenhuyzen does really well to hold in the Storm in-goal. It’s now that the nerves will be heightened and errors can be made. 73 mins: The Panthers are back in this! Incredible scenes in Sydney! Lui throws a brilliant ball over the top to Mansour who’s all alone out wide and touches down! Cleary’s kick is askew, but still, we have a game on our hands here. Are the Panthers about the stage one of the greatest comebacks of all time? 72 mins: The Panthers have the wind in their sails now - they can smell a comeback. They get anther six as the crowd turns up the volume. Clearly jinks forward... 71 mins: Panthers ball. Crichton threatens. Storm repel the attack. But hang on - they’re looking into a professional foul now – Hughes on Kikau as the Panthers man looked to race onto a kick. Cam Smith argues the toss but it’s ruled as a professional foul and Hughes is off! Drama at ANZ Stadium with nine minutes to go in the 2020 grand final! 69 mins: The crowd erupts as Crichton gives the Panthers a glimmer of hope! Cleary is at the centre of the move, passing to Lee who in turn feed Crichton. The youngster steps inside and out before barrelling across the line and, with 11 minutes remaining, do we have a game on our hands? 67 mins: Papenhuyzen! What an athlete! He leaps yards over the touchline to knock a high kick back into play. Amazingly he keeps it alive - tremendous effort! 65 mins: A brief moment of excitement for the Panthers as they look to break on the left hand side, but Mansour’s unexpected attempted kick is smothered and the move fizzles out. The groan from the stands is audible... 63 mins: The Storm are nearly through again here after a brilliant pass from Kaufusi to Lee, but he is held up. Last tackle is called and the pressure eases. 61 mins: Melbourne hold a 20-point lead, with 20 minutes to go, and they begin a new set on the 20m line. But they make a mess of it and Penrith come away with the ball. 60 mins: Even if Penrith received a boost from that try, time is rapidly running out for them to capitalise. A quarter of the grand final remains, and the Storm are again pressing forward. 57 mins: Dale Finucane is hit hard by Kikau, and the big man gets up gingerly. In fact, he’ll have to come off for an HIA. It’s a brutal game, rugby league. 54 mins: Are Penrith back in this one now? Certainly the crowd have been revived by that try - and the slice of luck finally afforded to them. 53 mins: But hang on, Penrith look to have got one back! Yeo dinks a kick through and Brian To’o races onto it and grounds the ball right in the corner! There’s a degree of controversy over the legality of the kick in the first place, Yeo having taken advantage of running behind one of his own players, but the Bunker isn’t bothered about that. To’o is adjudged to have stayed in play and the try stands! Cleary adds the two, off the post and through. 52 mins: It looks like the Storm have scored again, as play is switched from left to right. Hughes kicks through and Vunivalu sprints ahead of Mansour to touch down! But replays show it wasn’t a clean touch down, and the try won’t stand. Worrying signs for Penrith, regardless. 51 mins: Here come the Storm, surging down the left hand side of the ANZ Stadium pitch. The passing is slick, the running is hard... 48 mins: Mansour gets dragged back about 10m by three Storm players - not the direction the Panthers need to be going at this stage. Melbourne look in total control - and that feeling doesn’t go away as moments later Kikau is pulled up for touching the ball a second time as he tries to roll it under his boot. Oh dear, these errors are going to be costly for Penrith. 46 mins: Papenhuyzen scores! Is that it? Brilliant play from the Storm man who spots a hole in the Panthers’ line, puts his head down and hoons off to score what could be a crucial try for the Storm! Smith... misses with the extras! But still, a healthy lead has just got even healthier and the Panthers have it all to do. 45 mins: Moments later Penrith are called for a Leota knock-on. He challenges the call but after a brief break, it’s unsuccessful. 43 mins: Cleary launches a huge kick under pressure that Vunivalu allows to bounce. He recovers and the Storm go again with a fresh six. But Addo-Carr makes a hash of his handling, some confusion follows and there’s a knock on somewhere. Penrith will feed a scrum. 41 mins: And we’re back under way in Sydney. Given what Cleary just said, can the trophy engraver crack on with writing Storm on the premiership trophy as soon as Melbourne score again? Here they come early this second half... Munster kicks at the end of their six - a decent one at that. Ivan Cleary still believes. “Obviously didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next. Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try. We can do that. Anything can happen. Get some momentum going. That’s the goal at the moment. They don’t score again and we’re next to score.” Sterlo on the TV has just said it will be the greatest premiership comeback if the Panthers can get back into this one. He’s not wrong. Billy Slater, meanwhile, says of his old mate Smith becoming the all-time top points scorer in grand finals (42): “Just another record for Cameron Smith. Boy, didn’t he go to work in that first half. The great No 9, it started with an early kick out of dummy half. He turned the Penrith Panthers around and allowed his aggressive defensive line to get up and apply the pressure on it. He kicked multiple penalty goals and it’s just his true indication in defence, he’s so effective in that middle third of the field. He’s suffocating Penrith Panthers, but picking up the right options and also picking up the first try of his grand final career. So this is his grand final career. So this is his first grand final try. If this is his last game, he’s certainly making it count.” The first 40 minutes in brief: Melbourne took the lead through a penalty try after Tyrone May stuck out a leg on Justin Olam Suliasi Vunivalu scored a second after intercepting Nathan Cleary’s pass and running nearly the full length of the pitch Cam Smith, who also kicked two penalty goals, took advantage of a loose ball on the stroke of half-time to score Melbourne’s third Luckless Panthers have had two tries disallowed - first Josh Mansour and then Stephen Crichton What a half of NRL football! It’s going to take quite some comeback from the Panthers if they are to catch the Storm after the break. Penrith will feel disappointed to be 22 point down without a reply, but many have found out to their cost that Cameron Smith in this kind of mood is an awful proposition. The irrepressible Smith has been immaculate with his kicking this half, and added that try late on for good measure. If this is going to be his last game, he’s going about making it a memorable personal performance. There’ll be plenty more twists and turns to come. Time to take a breath for now though. Half-time show coming up... 40 mins: Smith celebrates a try! The immediate call is “no try”! Koroisau knocks the ball out of Smith’s hands as he tries to pass, but the veteran picks it up quickly, spots an opening and dives over the line. There’s no problem with that and Smith has his try! He adds the extras and the Storm will head into the sheds with a commanding lead! 38 mins: Oof, Asofa-Solomona surges forward as Melbourne threaten the Penrith line again. 36 mins: The intensity-ometer has just been turned up, as a couple of bone-crunching tackles come in from the Storm defence. The ball eventually goes forward and Melbourne will feed a scrum. The challenge for Penrith now is to keep Melbourne out until the half-time siren sounds. 34 mins: Melbourne get another set of six - and another chance inside the Panthers half to trouble the scorekeepers. Smith goes to Munster, who is brought down 5m out from the line before Kaufusi attempts a kick that is smothered. The Panthers survive. 32 mins: Channel Nine has done the analysis and Vunivalu was travelling at 33kph as he raced off towards the tryline there. Incredible sequence of play, and the Panthers must be feeling like it might not be their night already. 31 mins: Here come the Panthers, looking to get on the scoreboard for the first time tonight. Martin looks to break through on the right hand side, it comes back inside to Cleary who looks to fling a long high ball back to the left flank... but Vunivalu is there! He plucks the ball out of the air, falls to the ground but springs back up and hares off towards the Panthers’ try line. They’re not going to stop him in a foot race! Vunivalu takes to the air in customary fashion and dives over the line! No bother for Smith with the conversion. Again. 27 mins: With the resulting kick, Smith makes no mistake from a very similar position to his last kick and the Storm extend their lead again! 26 mins: Some big hits coming from all angles at the moment. Fisher-Harris is pulled up for a late hit on Brandon Smith, who joins Welch off the pitch for HIA. 24 mins: Smith attempts a kick to touch but it hits Martin in the legs, so it’ll be a Penrith feed in a scrum. 22 mins: It’s been quite the opening quarter of this match – hectic to say the least, and filled with plenty of attacking moments. And there’s more drama now as Kikau is called for picking the ball up in an offside position. Smith will have a chance to add another couple for the Storm. He’s deadly accurate and Melbourne edge further ahead. 17 mins: The crowd can sense something here... Martin leaps like a salmon to take an AFL-type mark to the delight of those in the stands, but it comes to nothing. An aside: it’s great to hear real fans and real reactions in a proper sized crowd at a sporting event. There must be plenty looking on from afar with a touch of jealousy that there’s a major sporting event that fans are able to enjoy in person. 16 mins: Now the pressure turns to the other end - Cleary flicks to Kikau, who bursts forward before Crichton gets the ball and tries to dive over the line! The call is no try, and judging from the Panthers’ muted reaction, that’s probably the case. Yes, he doesn’t get it down and we’re stil at 6-0. 14 mins: The Storm had momentum here, but Bromwich is hit hard and loses the ball. With that goes a bit of the pressure on Penrith, who can breathe again and look to build from deep in their own half. 12 mins: Here goes Mansour, making some metres for Penrith. Then Kikau takes up the mantle, but he turns the ball over to Melbourne after playing the ball after his arm hit the ground. Danger looms here. 10 mins: That’s two Bunker decisions that have gone against the Panthers already tonight. Not a great way to start the game for them, but both looked to be correct. 8 mins: Mansour leaps over in the corner to get the Panthers back on level terms! They look to get a little stuck in the middle of field, but some quick hands from Luai to Kikau and then to Mansour on the outside opens things up. But the Panthers are left disappointed by the review system again - this time Crichton is penalised for running into the defensive line and the try won’t stand! 5 mins: Well, that’s a turn-up for the books - penalty tries are a rarity in the grand finals. How will the Panthers respond to that now? 4 mins: Is this a the first try of the game? No, says the referee, despite Melbourne’s celebrations!. Addo-Carr keeps the ball alive for the Storm, flicking it back inside to Olam, who tries to burrow under May to the line. He doesn’t get the ball over, but on review the call is that May’s leg prevented Olam from scoring and he’s given a penalty try! Smith adds the extras from the sideline, and the Storm lead early! 3 mins: Melbourne hold their line despite the early pressure from the Panthers though, and will now get a first chance to move downfield. 1 min: And we’re off! Cleary boots the Black Hawk-delivered ball down field, where the Storm struggle to pick it up. Hughes let the ball bounce, the Panthers pounce and it’s Penrith ball from a scrum! Great start for the team in black. National anthem: Chloe Zoule has some pipes! She delivers a rousing rendition of Advance Australia Fair. And we’re just about ready to go (just the six minutes behind schedule so far, which isn’t too bad). Here they come! Smith leads the Storm down the tunnel and out into the stadium... to a chorus of boos from the “home” crowd. The reception as the Panthers arrive could not be more different. The minor premiers burst out of the tunnel to a rock soundtrack and a hearty welcome. 40,000 fans are inside the stadium tonight. The match ball has been delivered onto the pitch by.... a Black Hawk helicopter. Because, why not? We’re nearly at kick-off. The teams are just getting ready to leave the sheds and enter the arena. Ivan Cleary talks: “[This week has been] a little bit less commitments than usual but can still feel the buzz. In Penrith, the community is right into it so it’s been really cool. It’s obviously a difficult season for everybody involved. I just - the fact we have been so consistent’s been probably the thing that’s really pressed me andI’m most proud about. “[The weather] is definitely a factor, how you control are the ball, kicking game. Defence particularly in their end of the field is going to be key tonight. “We’ll have some definite things about how we start but you’ve also got to play the game. There are going to be moments out there tonight and you’ve got to be alive and ready to play. We have been able to do it all year and I think we can do it again tonight.” Craig Bellamy talks: “A bit excited, a bit nervous. You never get sick of coming to a grand final but it has been a lot different this year. Only came down yesterday. Usually you’re down here three or four days before the grand final.The guys have been great all year and they’ve handled what we’ve had to handle and it’s been a great year and hopefully we can finish off in style today.” Asked what his message was to the Storm players, Bellamy said: “I want them going out and playing their strengths. Back themselves and do what they do well. That’s why they are in the team.They are in the team for a certain reason, what they do well. We need them to go out and do that well today.” NRLW: In case you missed it earlier, the Broncos underlined their utter dominance of the women’s competition with a 20-10 win over the Roosters. That’s an incredible three straight Brisbane titles since the competition’s inception. The pre-match entertainment is under way at ANZ – Amy Shark has just wrapped up her set. If you want a view on that, head to Twitter – there are plenty of opinions on that website. I’ve no intention of labouring the point about what the NRL has been through to get to this point, so will instead point you in the direction of this, by Emma Kemp: Much like some sports stars, coronavirus does not adhere to regulations, and the line between risk and reward was as fine as they come. The NRL operated at the behest of the pandemic, and just about got away with it. Read the full piece here: Channel Nine’s update on the weather has the conditions “wreaking havoc”. Can’t wait. Cameron Smith: Will he? Won’t he? The Storm great is still giving nothing away (officially) about his future after tonight’s game. It’s been the talk of the town all week (and for ages before that to be honest), but Smith is not going to be drawn. Earlier Freddie Fittler had a go at getting him to, but with no joy. “I’ll just try to keep the team with a level head,” Smith said on Channel None. “A result won’t determine my decision past this year. Whatever the result is, I will go away and think about it after this game. Whatever will be, will be.” Team news: No late changes for the Storm, but Ivan Cleary has sprung one with Tyrone May starting in the centres for the Panthers. Brent Naden will start on the bench. It is just the eighth time utility May has started a game this season Panthers: Dylan Edwards, Josh Mansour, Tyrone May, Stephen Crichton, Brian To’o, Jarome Luai, Nathan Cleary, James Tamou (captain), Apisai Koroisau, James Fisher-Harris, Viliame Kikau, Liam Martin, Isaah Yeo. Interchange: Brent Naden , Kurt Capewell, Moses Leota, Zane Tetevano. Reserves: Mitch Kenny, Dean Whare, Matt Burton, Spencer Leniu. Storm: Ryan Papenhuyzen, Suliasi Vunivalu, Brenko Lee, Justin Olam, Josh Addo-Carr, Cameron Munster, Jahrome Hughes, Jesse Bromwich, Cameron Smith (captain), Christian Welch, Felise Kaufusi, Kenneath Bromwich, Nelson Asofa-Solomona. Interchange: Brandon Smith, Tino Faasuamaleaui, Dale Finucane, Nicho Hynes. Reserves: Tom Eisenhuth, Paul Momirovski, Tui Kamikamica, Ryley Jacks. Tonight’s referee is Gerard Sutton. The toss: This happened earlier – the Panthers won it and will kick off proceedings later tonight. Weather update: It’s been steadily raining pretty much all day in Sydney – the opening round of the Women’s Big Bash League has already been impacted by the rain – and slippery conditions, both underfoot at ANZ and in terms of ball-handling could well be factors in deciding the NRL grand final. My weather sources (the internet) tell me there’s a lot more rain to come tonight too. Well, here we are then. The final act of an engrossing, unique and plain bonkers season, the likes of which we will surely never see again. Coronavirus did its best to derail the 2020 campaign, but, given we are about to enjoy the spectacle of a grand final at ANZ Stadium, you could say it failed. Sure, the NRL had to demonstrate a degree of agility and deal with a few curveballs along the way, but a mix of stubbornness, determination and a large slice of luck has meant we are in a position where there will be a 2020 premiership winner. You could argue there will be an asterisk by the name of either the Panthers or Storm later this evening, given the disruption to the season, but that’s a discussion for another time. For now, there’s a grand final to be played, some elite rugby league to be enjoyed and a Kick off is scheduled for 7:30pm AEDT, which is about an hour away. Plenty to talk about before then, so why don’t you drop me a line at mike.hytner@theguardian.com or tweet @mike_hytner. It’s always more fun having others on board.
2||Melbourne Storm hold off late Penrith charge in grand final to claim fourth NRL premiershipIt started with an illegal outstretched leg and finished with a frantic flourish that was very nearly a Penrith comeback for the ages. Ultimately, though, Melbourne Storm confirmed they are the dominant NRL team of the 21st century. The Panthers were less than four minutes into their first grand final in 17 years when Tyrone May’s stuck out his right limb, which stopped Justin Olam burrowing under him and over the line. Josh Addo-Carr had kept the ball in play with a smart flick at the corner but, for the few moments after on-field referee Gerard Sutton ruled this a “no try”, May had seemingly done his job. Seconds later the indefatigable Cameron Smith had made the first of three conversions – he finished the 80 minutes with 14 points – in the Storm’s 26-20 triumph, a turbo-charged, sometimes grotesque, often spectacular affair. The scoreboard at ANZ Stadium read 22-0 at half-time; the Panthers scored three times in the last 12 minutes. That early penalty try was the first since one was awarded to Jamie Lyon in 2013. These oddities tend to happen in season-deciders. Just utter the phrase “six again” and every Canberra Raiders fan will understand its significance. Yet in the strangest of seasons, and after a 16-team competition somehow side-stepped a pandemic, order was, in a sense, restored via Melbourne's sixth grand final win – albeit the 2007 and 2009 titles were stripped due to salary cap breaches. And while Penrith must wait at least another year to add to their 1991 and 2003 premierships their counterparts, displaced amd living out of suitcases since June due to Covid-19, ensured their era of superiority continued. This was the Storm’s 10th grand final in 23 years, and one up against the youthful vitality of the minor premiers. But it was their first premiership without the other two-thirds of the big three in Billy Slater and Cooper Cronk, and may yet send the last out on a high, should 37-year-old Smith retire. He refused to shed any light on the subject on the night. It was also an individual triumph for coach Craig Bellamy who, at 61, is the oldest coach to win a decider, overtaking super coach Wayne Bennett who was 60 when he guided St George Illawarra to glory over the Roosters in 2010. And while Bellamy’s charges were pushed until the death – not to mention the late sin bins for Brandon Smith and Jahrome Hughes – the brutal first-half dismantling they had already inflicted proved a fine safety net in a game where little is safe. There was a sense in those first 40 minutes that luck was on the Storm’s side. Olam’s penalty try was the start. Then, Josh Mansour’s seventh-minute try was disallowed for Stephen Crichton’s obstruction. Soon thereafter Crichton himself thought he had touched gold only to be told he had only made contact with a bit of air. Smith kicked two penalty goals. There were also periods – before the frenetic finale – during which the Panthers’ play warranted a 19th straight win, when set after set and wave after wave had the Storm stretched thin, their every sinew strained. But there were others, too, like when Nathan Cleary misdirected a pass and had the misfortune of watching the intercept fall for Suliasi Vunivalu. The Fijian took it to ground, then he flew, melting away 80 metres at 33km/h as mere mortals in black chased vainly in his wake. This turn of events had a distinctly Houdini flavour - the Panthers appeared to have buried themselves alive despite their clear capacity to get themselves out of a bind. Except that, instead of emerging intact, Ivan Cleary’s men never resurfaced. The whole escapade wreaked of Vaudevillian wickedness, headlined by a Cameron Smith caricature. The veteran of “will he or won’t he?” fame made another cut 60 seconds before the break, right when Penrith needed to stem the bleeding. The initial call was “no try”, on the assumption Smith had dropped the ball before retrieving and dashing through an opening. But replays showed Apisai Koroisau had knocked it from his hands, and another conversion later it was 22-0. “Obviously it didn’t go quite to plan in the first half, but I think it’s important we score next,” coach Cleary said at half-time. “Doesn’t have to be straight away. We can’t concede another point, another try.” Five minutes into the second half, Clive Churchill medallist Ryan Papenhuyzen sprinted 70 metres after the break to score untouched from a scrum. The game looked gone, but it was not the death knell it should have been. With 28 minutes to play, Penrith raced from 26-0 down, reducing the margin to six with three seconds remaining and one final play to level it from the kick-off after a late Cleary try. But after a cross-field back and forth the ball landed in Felise Kaufusi’s hands to wrap up Melbourne’s fourth title. “This is unbelievable,” Papenhuyzen said being named player of the match. “I’m pretty speechless. I got pretty emotional after the game. It’s been a bloody tough year. We didn’t know where we were going. We were sitting on the tarmac at Bankstown Airport and we didn’t have a clue where we were going. We just stuck together, we overcome and adapted and we got history.”
3||Possible Veronica Guerin murder weapon found in Spanish drug raidSpanish and Irish police are examining a revolver found during a raid on the Alicante villa of the convicted Irish drug trafficker John Gilligan to determine whether it was the weapon used in the murder of the journalist Veronica Guerin. Gilligan, whose gang murdered the campaigning reporter on the outskirts of Dublin in 1996, was never convicted in connection with her killing. He did, however, threaten Guerin and her young son when she investigated his wealth and lifestyle. A Dublin court acquitted Gilligan of ordering Guerin’s murder in 2001. Despite the judge having “grave suspicions” about Gilligan’s involvement, the uncorroborated evidence of his former criminal associates was not enough to convict him of murder. Spain’s national police force said in a statement on Friday that the weapon, a Colt Python, had been recovered during a series of raids in Torrevieja and Orihuela Costa. Gilligan and five others were arrested following the operation, which was carried out in collaboration with officers from Garda and the UK’s National Crime Agency. “Those arrested were led by a known Irish criminal and were part of a group of violent drugs and arms traffickers and were specialists in shipping illegal merchandise to the UK and Ireland from Spain,” the Policía Nacional said. The investigation led to the seizure of three 9mm pistols, eight kilos of marijuana and 26,000 pills, and a more unexpected discovery. “In one of the searches carried out in Alicante as part of the investigation, a Colt Python, the same model of revolver that was used in the journalist’s murder, was found buried in a garden,” said the statement. “Spanish officers are working with the Irish police to determine whether it is the same weapon.” At the end of Gilligan’s trial almost 20 years ago, Judge Diarmuid O’Donovan said he was responsible for a “haemorrhage of harm” and for which he had shown no remorse. “Never in the history of the state has one person been responsible for so much wretchedness to so many,” he said. The judge, however, told the no-jury court that he had no choice but to acquit Gilligan of murder because the main prosecution evidence, from one of his former accomplices, Russell Warren, a state-protected witness, was unreliable and uncorroborated. Gilligan was jailed for 28 years for importing 20,000 kilos of cannabis resin worth £32m, but found not guilty of four charges of possessing weapons and ammunition. Gilligan was released from prison in October 2013. He fled Ireland the following year after being the target of two gun attacks.
22||Saturday Night Live: Adele hosts as cast pulls off the Jeffrey Toobin gagsThis week we kick off with a send-up of the second and “praise Jesus, final” presidential debate. Donald Trump (Alec Baldwin) tries to play nice by complimenting moderator Kristen Welker (Maya Rudolph), although he’s his usual unhinged self when directing nutty personal attacks and lies against Joe Biden (Jim Carrey), who struggles to keep his temper in check. From the get, the sketch is riddled with awkward pauses, missed cues and bungled lines – a frustrated Carrey exclaims ‘Damnit!’ – and it quickly devolves into a mug-off between the guest stars (Carrey’s rubber-faced caricature captures almost none of the real Biden’s idiosyncrasies, serving instead as pure ego trip). Puttering to a weak end, it’s the worst of the election cold opens so far, which is really saying something. Adele hosts for the first time, talking about how her 2008 performance on the show was the catalyst for her breakthrough in America. She thanks Sarah Palin directly. She then addresses confusion over why she’s not pulling double duty as host and musical guest – “I’d rather put on a wig, have a glass of wine or six and see we happens” – tabloid obsession with her weight loss, and her penchant for cursing when nervous. There’s little in the way of humor, but Adele comes off as laid back, which is a nice change of pace from a couple of noticeably nervous hosts. The first sketch is set in 2019 and sees a group of friends visiting a fortune teller, Kate McKinnon, who relays blurry visions of the hellscape that is 2020, which none can comprehend. (She tells one, “In 2020 you do something so terrible none of your friends will ever speak to you again … you eat inside a restaurant!”) The best sketch of the season thus far, it really sticks the landing with a final revelation that one of the friends is Jeffrey Toobin’s daughter. A new Chad sketch finds Pete Davidson’s laconic slacker visiting a haunted house and being confronted by a restless ghost, who tries to confide in him about her murder but accidentally kills him. It’s slight even by Chad standards, but Adele acquits herself well as the spirit. On a new season of The Bachelor, Adele is a contestant. Looking for love after a series of public heartbreaks, she refuses to pace herself emotionally, breaking into song at the drop of a hat, much to the chagrin of the bachelor and the other contestants. It’s a mostly lazy excuse to have Adele belt out some her hits, but it’s hard to complain since she gives it her all. A campaign commercial for Trump Addicts of America sees Biden voters admitting their fear of a post-Trump world: “My entire personality is hating Donald Trump. If he’s gone, what am I supposed to do? Talk to my kids?” The premise is solid, since previously apolitical anti-Trumpers definitely deserve to be mocked, but SNL is absolutely no position to sit in judgement. It’s impossible not think, “The lady doth protest too much.” The night’s musical guest is HER, who performs the soulful Damage. On Weekend Update, Colin Jost compares Biden’s performance in the debate to Giants quarterback Daniel Jones much-memed trip at the 20-yard-line earlier this week (a comparison that doesn’t seem to bear out the post-debate snap polls, but whatever). In another bit of SNL’s patented both-sidesism, Jost laments how old and out of it both candidates are: “This election is the equivalent of a baseball team giving a four-year deal to Willie Mays NOW.” Melissa Villasenor joins the desk to talk about her summer quarantine. She quirkily rolls through a number of random impressions – the little Rascals, Link from Zelda, Stevie Nicks and Sia. Then, following another solid dig at Toobin, this time courtesy of Michael Che – “He’s from the New Yorker, so you know that jerk was dry as hell!” – they welcome the Village People, who respond to Trump’s playing their music at his rallies by singing “Cease and Desist” to the tune of YMCA. Next, Rudolph plays a grandmother paid a socially distanced visit by her grandchildren. They try to sugarcoat their struggles with jobs, money and marriage with millennial jargon, but her constant refrain of “WHA?” breaks them down until they’re forced to air their failures in the most basic terms: “We had a three-way and he liked the other girl more!” It’s good to see Rudolph playing a purely silly character again. A message from the tourism board of Africa sees Adele and McKinnon playing horny divorcees hot for the “tribesmen”. It’s a seemingly problematic bit – let’s see if it provokes the same outrage Bill Burr got for calling out white women a few weeks ago – but it’s hard to focus on anything other than Adele’s full-bodied breaking throughout. Then HER takes the stage for a performance of Hold On, taking a break from crooning for a solid guitar solo. The final sketch sees Adele and Rudolph in a commercial for Ass Angel Perfume Jeans – women’s jeans that use a dangerous amount of chemicals to cover up embarrassing “lady smells”. It hits all the beats of a modern-day prescription drug ad, despite being set in the 80s. This strikes me as indicative of one of the major problems of current-day SNL– half-decent ideas fail to land because the writers can’t commit to a basic premise. This episode was about on par with the last three, although it contained a few more laughs. H.E.R. put in a very good performance and Adele held her own, save for breaking in the penultimate sketch. Mercifully, we’ll only have to weather a few more election cold opens, although we can only pray a Biden victory won’t result in Carrey sticking around like Baldwin did.
8||Labour vows to force another Commons vote on free school mealsLabour has thrown down the gauntlet to Downing Street by pledging to force another Commons vote if it does not U-turn on its refusal to provide free school meals in England during the holidays, as a senior Conservative MP admitted the government has misjudged the country’s mood over the issue. In a fresh intervention that will boost the campaign being led by the footballer Marcus Rashford, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said on Sunday his party would push for another vote if there is no change of course before Christmas. Labour was defeated by the government in a vote on the policy last week, prompting businesses and councils – some of them Tory-led – to step forward to offer to feed children in the October half-term break, but the government has so far dug in to defend its position. In an apparent softening of tone after a No 10 spokesman last week refused to praise councils and firms offering help, the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, said Rashford deserved “huge credit” for his work on the issue although he stood by Downing Street’s line. It comes as Sir Bernard Jenkin, the Conservative chair of the influential Commons liaison committee, said the government had “misunderstood the mood of the country” on free school meals. As the government continues to resist appeals to reverse its move, Jenkin told the Sophy Ridge on Sunday programme on Sky News: “I think we have to admit that we have misunderstood the mood of the country here.” Highlighting that the government had funded local councils to provide support, he added: “The public want to see the government taking a national lead on this and I think the government will probably have to think again on that, particularly if there’s going to be more votes in the House of Commons. “I think when you have got the chairman of the education select committee [Robert Halfon] not supporting the government on this – and he’s a Conservative – I think the government has to listen to the Conservative party.” Asked how he would vote in any further Commons divisions, Jenkin said: “I shall wait to see what the government says and how they respond to the situation.” Halfon, who voted against the government on the free school meals motion on Wednesday, wrote in the Spectator on Saturday: “Combating child hunger should, therefore, be a cause that all Conservatives can embrace. That should include the temporary extension of free school meals over the holidays while (and only while) the economic impacts of the pandemic continue to be felt.” Downing Street has already been forced to perform a U-turn once on the issue, deciding to provide £15-a-week meal vouchers to eligible children over the summer after Rashford campaigned on the issue, but it has refused to do so for the holidays ahead. Asked what had changed, meaning children who got them then should not get them during the autumn or Christmas holidays, Lewis told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday: “There’s a couple of things [that] have changed. Obviously, back in the summer we had all the schools were closed, we had that full lockdown period. Things have moved on, we’ve now got about 99% of schools and children back at schools … that’s really good. So we are in a different place but there’s more than that.” He added: “In the holidays, what we’ve put in place actually is not just the uplift in universal credit, because obviously the schools are closed so it’s about making sure the welfare system can cover and support what people need. So we’ve put the uplift into universal credit, around just over a £1,000 a year, but also very specifically we’ve put £63m into local authorities to support and help people in hardship … and a number of local authorities are using it to do exactly that.” Dr Rosena Allin-Khan, Labour’s shadow mental health minister, told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: “We are honestly hoping that the Conservative government dig deep and look introspectively and perform a U-turn on this, but we certainly will be pushing for a vote before Christmas.” The children’s commissioner, Anne Longfield, told the same programme she thought the government should provide free school meals over the holidays, adding: “I’ve been horrified by the debate, really disappointed about the debate over recent days. We’re a wealthy country, it’s 2020.” “To have a debate about whether we should make sure that hungry and vulnerable children should have enough to eat is something which is strikingly similar to chapters, I think of you know, what we’d expect to see in Oliver Twist, a novel published in the 19th century. So let’s stop the divisive and distracting conversations, and start focusing.”
20||How are restaurants going to survive the winter? Outdoor heatersIt’s been a tough year for many small businesses, particularly restaurants and retailers. But they’ve been doing their best to survive, despite all the restrictions. In my home city of Philadelphia, many restaurants have moved their operations outdoors – and some with success. Tables are filled. And just last night I walked by an entire spin class going on outside a local fitness center. People are doing their best to adapt. That’s good news and I’m happy for them. But there’s a looming problem: winter is coming! Can these businesses keep operating even as temperatures begin to drop? “For sure,” a friend who owns a diner told me recently. “As long as we can get more heaters. Know where I can find a few?” The pandemic has created some booming markets in games and puzzles, cleaning products, technology tools, pools, organic cat food and just about anything you can buy online. When the pandemic began people were desperate for toilet paper. But now there’s a craze affecting many desperate business owners: outdoor heaters. “We couldn’t get any at Lowe’s, Home Depot, Ace Hardware – the only place where we were able to source them is [party rental company] Tablescapes, and they charge thousands for rentals,” a Chicago restaurant owner told Eater Chicago. “It doesn’t make sense financially to spend $8,000 on four heaters.” It’s not just restaurants that need the heat. My local fitness center wants to continue outdoor classes as long as possible and a zoo in Oregon wants them to keep visitors coming. (“After getting open and figuring out how to operate safely through Covid times, having outdoor space every year, we always have to think ahead,” Portland zoo co-owner Mark Miller told local TV station WGME). Many homeowners are putting in outdoor heaters on their patios as they plan for a winter of potential lockdowns. All of this means good news if you’re in the business of making, supplying, servicing and selling outdoor heaters. The Boston Globe has reported a 70% increase in heater searches on Wayfair’s website and the phrase “patio heaters” has its highest Google search volume, according to a report in USA Today, which also provides a handy list of places where you can try your luck finding one. “We’re ordering as much as possible,” Josh Rookstool, the director of sales for Sunheat outdoor heaters, which are stocked by Wayfair and Home Depot, told the Marker. “However, there are still major backups in production.” Rockstool’s company says that sales have increased more than 400% this year. And it’s not just small businesses selling heaters that are profiting. Companies that provide propane, accessories and repairs are also seeing enormous increases in demand. Can’t find an outdoor heater for your small business? Maybe you should consider what one restaurant owner is doing: building mini igloos for your customers. Yes, that’s right. Igloos. David Lahousse, who for the past 20 years has owned Kay’s Restaurant in Woonsocket, Rhode Island, has added two greenhouse-style igloos to his parking lot and plans to add eight more. The igloos, which cost about $1,400 each keeps the temperature 20-30 degrees warmer than the outside, with one party inside at a time. “I want to make it a winter wonderland, you know?” he told local news station WPRI. “It’s not all about the money for me. I want people to have these jobs. I don’t want to lay anyone off.”
18||Cordelia review – atmospheric but uneven thrillerIn Adrian Shergold’s uneven thriller, actor Cordelia (Antonia Campbell-Hughes) continues to suffer the aftershocks of trauma from an event that took place 12 years prior. When her twin sister (also played – though less convincingly – by Campbell-Hughes) leaves her alone in their London flat for the weekend, the fragile Cordelia begins to spiral, convinced a stranger has been rifling through her knickers. Johnny Flynn is fun to watch as sleazy upstairs neighbour and violinist Frank, and with its flocked wallpaper, claustrophobic hallways and dingy paisley curtains, the flat helps create a creepy atmosphere. Still, tension is frequently punctured by clunky dialogue. “I got mired in real life, and Rada was useless,” Cordelia says wistfully.
12||On Connection by Kae Tempest review – persuasive and profoundKae Tempest has added one more string to an already crowded bow: On Connection is the first nonfiction work by this Mercury prize-winning musician, Ted Hughes award-winning poet, acclaimed playwright, novelist, and chief creative chronicler of the last decade. It’s also Tempest’s first publication since changing their name from Kate, and using they/them pronouns. On Connection is a book-length essay whose subject has been somewhat overtaken by recent events. Its thesis – that our need for connection can be fostered by creativity in general and live art in particular – has become all the more compelling since lockdown. Who hasn’t missed the electric charge that crackles between artist and audience? Or felt frustrated at how live music and theatre are undermined and dismissed by a government that fails to recognise their immense value? But Tempest isn’t talking about merely missing a good night out at a gig or show. On Connection looks at creativity as a means of counteracting the numbness of the modern world. We get so caught up in an ever-spinning consumerist hamster wheel that we neglect what is true within ourselves and one another. “In a disconnected state, self-awareness is one of the first frequencies to be scooped out and muted,” they write. “When this happens, I need creativity to reconnect me.” Throughout, there are familiar shades of mysticism and mindfulness, of anti-capitalist theorising and the hippies’ tune-in, drop-out arguments. More explicitly, Tempest writes about being inspired by Carl Jung’s The Red Book and his theory that we possess a wild, inner “spirit of the depths” as well as a “spirit of the times”, the everyday ego that’s concerned with more immediate goals and ambitions. Both are needed, Tempest feels, but we’ve got them way out of whack. “In order to regain our balance, we need to remaster the ability to go deep, to ‘turn away from outer things’. To face what is in ourselves.” Each chapter is prefaced by William Blake quotations, and it’s no wonder his writing appeals to Tempest: both artists’ work is concerned with tapping into something ancient and mythic. Tempest’s call to reconnect with what Blake terms the “infinite” within ourselves proves persuasive and profound. Anyone who has seen Tempest live has likely witnessed their talent for sparking connection, even if they insist this is a mysterious, unreliable thing. But when it does come, it is wondrous: “I am granted access to a freedom so resolute it leaves me shining head to toe… Looking out at the crowd, I see reality at last. People really feeling things.” While some of their thoughts may not be new, they are surely worth repeating in this disconnected, distracted world. And Tempest, as you’d expect, delivers them gorgeously, rhythmically, but also with clarity and a fierce grace. I drank On Connection down like a fresh glass of water. • On Connection by Kae Tempest is published by Faber (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
1||'Deep down, he's a terrified little boy': Bob Woodward, John Bolton and others on TrumpBob Woodward: ‘I can’t think of a time I’ve felt more anxiety about the presidency’ Bob Woodward is associate editor of the Washington Post and the author of 20 books on American politics. In 50 years as a journalist he has covered nine presidents. His reporting on the Watergate break-in and cover-up with his colleague Carl Bernstein helped bring down Richard Nixon and won the Post a Pulitzer prize. His latest book about Donald Trump, Rage, is based on 10 hours of interviews, spread over 19 taped phone calls, often initiated by the president himself, in which Trump proved “only too willing to blow the whistle on himself”, as the Observer’s review noted. There is an atmosphere in Washington of high anxiety. Trump is melting down, to put it charitably. His campaign has been about lashing out, about wanting his former political opponents – President Obama and Joe Biden, who’s now running against him, of course – to be indicted then charged. Then there was his announcement that he is not necessarily going to accept the electoral result against him. The idea that the president would put in doubt the basic process of democracy and voting is not only unacceptable, it is a nightmare. Now you have the added factor that Trump’s also had Covid-19 and he’s on steroids, saying things like, “It is a blessing from God that I got the virus”. I can’t think of anything more absurd, or crueller, than calling it a blessing from God. More than 210,000 people have died in the US. For the president of the US to talk like that is unbelievable, but I think people have become numb to it. The outrages pile up, in a way. People have forgotten the risks. I think Kamala Harris put it very well in the vice-presidential debate: what’s happened in the US with Covid-19 is the biggest failure of the president to exercise his responsibilities, perhaps in the history of the US. This is a really dangerous period before the election. I got to know Trump very well in hours and hours of interviews I did with him for my book, Rage, and I think if there were to be some accident, some problem, during the final campaign weeks, he would capitalise on it. Henry Kissinger, of all people, was warning recently that we should worry about some sort of crisis, and reminded people that the first world war started because of an accident. Probably no one’s wanting to start a war right now, but we have a climate in the Middle East, and in the South China Sea, which China has really militarised, where you could have some spark trigger a mild confrontation – not that I think Trump’s going to manufacture that. Trump is not sufficiently tuned into the attitudes and experiences of other people, which is an essential requirement of a leader. After George Floyd was killed, I asked him about the tensions ignited in this country not seen since the heights of the civil rights movement. I said we were men of white privilege, that we’ve got to understand the pain and anger black people feel in this country. That’s when he said something that astonished me: “Wow, you sure drank the Kool-Aid! I don’t feel that at all.” He just rejected the idea that somehow white people have to understand the pain and anger of others. I think that’s one of his chief problems. He thinks in terms of his own pain and anger, and what he wants to do, which is to be re-elected. Trump also told me the US has nuclear weapons that are so devastating even President Putin and President Xi of China don’t know about them. I’m not exactly sure even today whether he was exaggerating or talking about something real. But what’s a really important question to consider here is how much power is in the presidency: when we decide to go to war, whether you look at Vietnam or Afghanistan or Iraq, it’s all been led by the president, essentially, as commander in chief. As we’ve gone into a media environment of impatience and speed because of the internet, the president is also in this position to seize the airwaves. As his son-in-law Jared Kushner said, the news is going along and then Trump tweets something and everyone drops whatever it is. Trump realises this. He uses it. He has that power. He loves being in control. He loves the spectacle. The circumstances have all converged here to give him extraordinary power. Looking to the aftermath of the election, Trump’s set the table to say that if he doesn’t win, he’s going to be suspicious of mail-in votes. I think the question is: if he loses, will his political party get together and go see him and talk to him, and say, you can’t do this? You can’t do it to the Republican party and most importantly you can’t do it to the country. There has to be an orderly transference of power, if that’s what it comes to. This is the level of anxiety I have now as a reporter: I go to sleep and get up in the middle of the night and start checking the news because God knows what might have happened. We are sitting on pins and needles in this country about every moment, every action, every assessment, and it is draining. I think lots of people have got to the point where they are tuning Trump and the political situation out as well as they can. Unfortunately, the impacts on people’s lives carry on, given the virus, given there’s no plan, or organised way of dealing with this. It’s all seat-of-the-pants impulsive decision-making. I can’t think of a time – and I’ve been a reporter for nearly 50 years – where I’ve felt more anxiety about the country and the presidency and the future. JR Mary Trump: ‘If he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over’ Mary Trump is a psychologist and the niece of Donald Trump. Her father, Fred Trump Jr, the president’s older brother, died when she was 16. Her tell-all book about the president and the Trump family, Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man, sold almost 1m copies on the first day it was published in July this year. My theory about the way Donald has run his campaign is that he knows he’s in desperate shape, so he’s going to burn it all down, sow more chaos and division, because that’s where he succeeds. He knows that he’s losing – he’ll deny it mightily – and at some level he understands what’s at stake. If he loses, he’s probably going to prison. So, if he’s going down, he’s going to take us all down with him. I’ve always believed that deep down Donald is a terrified little boy. The amount of fear he’s feeling now has got to be unhinging him. Not only did he get sick with the virus, there’s the tax story and his prospects in the election looking really bad right now. He’s got to be absolutely panicked. Throughout the campaign I thought that the absolute worst scenario would be for him to get the virus and then get well. I know that sounds awful. He’s ignored the severity of the pandemic all year because the idea of illness as weakness is so deeply ingrained in my family, that even an association with it is unacceptable, and that’s why now we’ve got 210,000 Americans dead. But now his statement – you can beat it, don’t be afraid of it – is going to result in more people becoming sick, and many of those will die. Even before he said that, I believed he was engaging in mass murder, but that sealed it for me. Anybody who’s capable of putting hundreds of millions of people at risk to avoid looking bad doesn’t care about you. Since Donald was elected, I’ve been surprised by nothing he’s done or said. But I have been shocked by the wholesale abdication of responsibility by the Republican party during this election campaign and throughout the past four years. I didn’t understand the extent to which they would be willing to enable him in Congress and in his cabinet. If they had done their job and acted as a separate branch of government, he would have been contained. By siding with him 100% of the time, they have ensured we are now faced with several concurrent disasters that are getting exponentially worse. No other president in history has been able to push the envelope the way Donald does. He’s always trying to see what he can get away with and, as I have seen through the course of his life, he’s always got away with everything. No one holds him accountable. He constantly gets rewarded for failing. The Republicans understood what he was capable of and have allowed him to push through an agenda that is completely at odds with what the majority wants. In Donald, I see somebody who is afraid, lonely, desperate, unloved. I hesitate to paint a compassionate portrait of him because he’s so culpable. However, I do have compassion for the three-year-old who was without his mother for a whole year when she was sick. That loss of affection and having no one to soothe him was deeply harmful. And when she recovered to the extent that she did, she did nothing to heal the wounds of that separation, and that’s before we get to my grandfather, who was always an awful person, capable of such abject cruelty and sadism. So now we have an adult Donald who is sad, lonely, ignorant but who also has immense power – and that is a terrifying prospect. People need to stop worrying about what might happen if he loses but doesn’t accept the results and laugh in his face. That’s the best way to undermine him. If he wins, it won’t be legitimate. He’s already using the powers of his office to shake people’s confidence in mail-in voting at a time when people want to be voting by mail during the pandemic. He’s telling his followers if Biden wins it will have been rigged, telling them to show up at the polls to make sure there’s no fraud, which is voter intimidation. If you’re a black person in America and a bunch of white guys with automatic weapons are standing outside the polling station you won’t want to vote, which is exactly what Donald wants to happen. If he stays in the Oval Office, I’m going to try to get a British passport because I don’t think I’ll fare well. He’s an extraordinarily vindictive person surrounded by people who are willing to help him be vindictive. But that’s personal: in terms of the country, if he wins, it’s over. Democracy is over. The western alliance is over. We’ll be entering an incredibly dark period of autocracy on a global scale. JR John Bolton: ‘He was envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan’ John Bolton was US national security adviser under Donald Trump from 2018 to 2019. Having started his career as a lawyer, he held senior roles in the state department and justice department during the administrations of Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush and George W Bush, who appointed him 25th US ambassador to the United Nations. His book about the Trump presidency, The Room Where It Happened, was published in June this year. People complain that Trump has a short attention span, myself included. But when it comes to his own re-election he has an infinite attention span. Decisions are made not on the basis of the pros and cons of the policies being debated but on what the domestic political blowback could be. Every president takes politics into account but with Trump it’s qualitatively different. It’s not just a factor. It’s the factor. Everything is a distinct transaction – maybe that’s how you’re successful in the real-estate business. If he doesn’t see the immediate bottom line impact, he wants to move on to something else. For example, with our close allies, he says things like: “Here we are defending you and you don’t pay for our bases and you have trade surpluses with us.” Well, we’re not there to defend them. We’re there because we have a mutual defence alliance. We think it’s in our interest as much as the allies’ interest to be forwardly deployed. We’re not there as mercenaries. And we wouldn’t want to be there as mercenaries. But he doesn’t get that. I think his election campaign is in deep trouble. Because of what happened in 2016, when everybody thought Hillary was going to win, he can say the polls are fake news and that he’ll win anyway. And he’ll say that right up to election night and probably after it. But unless the pollsters have done absolutely nothing to try to fix their methodology since 2016, you have to say that he’s in trouble. Each day you get closer to the election, by definition it’s that much harder to make up the gap. Nothing in life is certain but it looks like he’s heading for a pretty substantial defeat. He’s trying to turn his Covid-19 infection to his advantage. I assume that’s what he thought he was doing with his grand entrance to the White House, posing on the balcony like Il Duce. I think it had the opposite effect. One thing I’ve been waiting for is the wave of sympathy that you would expect from the American people when their leader is taken ill. Maybe it’s out there but there isn’t any evidence of it at this point. I had certainly heard all the criticisms of Donald Trump before I took the job of national security adviser but I felt that the gravity of the presidency, the weight of the responsibility, would have an effect on him the way it’s had on every contemporary American president once they took office. It turned out I wasn’t right. The transition and opening six months were bungled and a lot of Trumpian habits and attitudes were formed in that period. Although I had aspirations to create more orderly policy processes in the national security area, it was too late to do it. I was in retrospect overly optimistic that I could correct problems that were inherent in Trump’s approach to the job from the get-go. It became clear in ways that I previously found impossible to contemplate that he had no philosophy, no grand strategy, he didn’t think in policy terms. Every day was a new adventure. And the way I think successful foreign policy is laid out is by careful analysis and deliberation, careful implementation, review and persistence. All of these are things that basically don’t exist in the Trump administration. There was so much that he didn’t know and he has very little inclination to learn it. It’s hard to have an evolving conversation when his data base never changes. I don’t regret taking the job. I went in and lasted for as long as I could and then I came out and wrote a book so everybody would know exactly what was going on. There are still people in there now who are trying to get him to do the right thing. One thing I worry about in a second term is that people like that will simply not join the administration. Up until now, it was reasonable to say, I’ve got enough confidence I can make a difference. It’s very hard to make that argument now after four years. I don’t think he has the character or fitness to be president. I once said to a psychologist that Trump doesn’t have character and the psychologist said, sure he does, he has a character defect. So I’ll leave that to the shrinks. We never should have nominated him. Nobody ever said that politics ends up with the best people for government. But there’s something wrong when someone like this can prevail. I think he was kind of envious of leaders like Putin, Xi Jinping and Erdoğan. They are big guys and they do big guy things and he wants to be a big guy too. I can’t explain why he has this affinity for authoritarian leaders but there’s no doubt he does. I don’t believe he was reluctant to employ me because of my moustache, as some people say. Would he have made a flip remark about it at some point? Sure, that’s entirely possible. Whatever his flip remarks – and he’s derogatory about almost everybody, sooner rather than later – he did hire me and I actually lasted 17 months. If Trump loses and leaves on 20 January, of the four national security advisers, I will be the longest serving. It’s not like there was a battle between us over two competing worldviews, because he doesn’t have a worldview. And that was the hardest thing for me to understand and appreciate. AA Anthony Scaramucci: ‘He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world’ Anthony Scaramucci was a little-known New York financier when Donald Trump made him the White House director of communications in July 2017. He was fired just 11 days later after a string of public relations gaffes but remained a vocal Trump loyalist for the next two years. However, the president’s racist attacks on four Democratic congresswomen of colour led Scaramucci to withdraw his support. Since then he has become an outspoken critic of Trump, who frequently lashes out at Scaramucci on Twitter. His book, Trump: The Blue-Collar President, was published in 2018. In our country we’re so polarised now you have to hate the person you disagree with. But I don’t hate Donald Trump. If anything I’m somewhat sympathetic to him because there’s obviously something wrong with him. There’s a screw loose and you don’t have to be a psychiatrist to see that. You just have to look at the manic behaviour, the absurdity, the lack of maturity. He’s not a fully developed adult. He’s out there doing ridiculous things and I fear for the world and I fear for the country. There’s something wrong with him and the people around him are too afraid of him to intervene on his behalf. He talked about “draining the swamp” but the swamp is now like a gold-plated hot tub. He’s taken the corruption up to a whole new level. I think if he loses the election, it’s over for him. I don’t see how he can survive this. He’ll probably get indicted. However, if he does, he probably won’t serve in jail – I don’t think America likes putting its ex-presidents in jail. So he’ll most likely get prosecuted with his sentence commuted. He likes to mud-wrestle his opponents but he can’t do that with Joe Biden because Biden is an old-school disciplined politician. His positive-negative differentials are 20% higher than Hillary Clinton’s. But I’m smart enough to know that the polls are closer than people think. If Trump wins, there is going to be a further destruction of American society. He’ll start to dismantle the institutions of our democracy, and the country will become weaker as a result of it. There’ll be more disorder, more protests, more racial tension. The move back to the White House, after hospital, tried to create these optics that he’s a superman. But you’ve got 210,000 Americans dead, so if you do a matrix, there’s about 9 million Americans who have had family or friends hurt by the virus, so that’s not going to play with them. He’s a minority politician, he’s a minority president. He’s never had the popular vote; he will have won the electoral college twice, and lost the popular vote twice. The fact is he’s an idiot. He’s unfit to serve in the office of the president. He doesn’t have the management capability. He doesn’t have the ability to empathise. He’s not a leader. He’s an un-American bully. You could say he had a lot of those attributes as a candidate in 2016 so why did I support him? And I would say, yes, I chose to overlook that because I was trying to be loyal to my party and its nominee. I started out disliking him. Then I thought, OK, I’m in the Republican party, he’s going to be the Republican candidate and now he’s won the presidency, so he’s going to be the first Republican president since George W Bush, let me figure out a way to like him. I worked for him and I have to own that for the rest of my life. I’ve acknowledged my mistake, I’ve apologised for it, and I’ve admitted that I was wrong in my political judgment and assessment of him as an individual and as a political leader. People say to me, he hasn’t changed at all, and I accept that. But I’ve changed. I’m way more psychologically minded. I’m more aware of the pain and trouble he’s causing people. I’m very happy I got fired. It probably saved my marriage and my business career. I was loyal to him for two years but the year after my book came out he told four women who were democratically elected to Congress – three of whom were born in the US, the other a naturalised citizen – to go back to the countries they originally came from. They told my Italian-American grandparents that 100 years ago. When I said that he was being racist, he started going after my wife on Twitter. I told Mayor Giuliani: “You’re disavowing your personal integrity and your family’s history by supporting this man.” You can’t talk like that as the American president in 2020. He’s a despicable guy. I don’t think most of his supporters think he’s the best man for the job. They see him as a culture warrior, though. The conservative news outlets have told them that we have a full-on culture war going on in the United States, and he is the last white man standing to protect America from the black and Hispanic latte-drinking transvestites who are going to take over their government and culture. The president’s strategy is let’s see if I can turn out every racist in America, and he hopes there are enough to beat the non-racists. The secretary of state Mike Pompeo’s supporting him because Pompeo looks in the mirror and sees a future president. We have 63 million people in the US who have voted for Trump for one reason or another, and what I can do is explain my change of heart. We now have almost four complete years of data on his ineptitude. It’s nothing personal, he’s not the right person to be president of the United States. AA
3||'Cycling capital of death': Bogotá bikers battle violence on city's streetsAndy Villalba, a tattooed and scrawny bicycle mechanic in Colombia’s capital, has long been wise to the dangers of cycling in such a chaotic city. Now, amid a boom in both cycling and bike theft, he is giving workshops in road safety and self-defence. “Welcome to Bogotá,” said Villalba, who has lost count of the number of times he has been threatened for his bicycle. “The cycling capital of death.” Cycling in Colombia is thriving. As in other cities around the world, the pandemic has prompted many commuters to forgo taxis or buses, and bike use is up 40% since last year. More than 100km of bike paths were laid in Bogotá during the lockdown. Meanwhile, professional cycling has proven to be the country’s most successful sport: elite riders have won medals at tours across Europe and last year Egan Bernal became the first Colombian to win the Tour de France. But as more people step into the saddle, bicycle thieves and homicidal drivers are forcing them to fight back with self-defence classes and weapons. “The most effective use of violence is to avoid a physical confrontation, but if it comes to it, the D-lock is your best friend,” said Villalba, 33, at a recent workshop. “Hold that in one hand and with the other use the frame of the bike as a shield.” Villalba also advises cyclists to build a network of fellow cyclists, avoid slow bike paths at night, and to cover any expensive branding on their bikes with stickers. Though Bogotá has significantly reduced violent crime over the past two decades, robberies are still a daily reality. From January to September this year, 8,023 cases of bicycle theft have been reported, up 36% on the same period the previous year. Some riders have taken to carrying baseball bats and extendable batons to protect themselves. “Carrying bats and weapons is necessary in some of the rougher neighbourhoods on the edge of the city,” said Jaime Mercho, an enthusiast. “But D-locks and chains are just as good.” Cyclists across the country united in outrage this month after José Antonio Duarte, a 56-year-old security guard, was killed by a van driver while cycling over a bridge north of Bogotá. Footage of the incident went viral, showing the van running straight into Duarte, flipping him over the railing to fall 4.5 metres, landing on his head. “Do me a fucking favour,” tweeted Bernal, when he posted the video. “How easy it is to end someone’s life … I hope there’s justice.” The local governor promised a thorough investigation, though many cyclists said they were unsurprised by the incident. Abdon Bermúdez came to Colombia four years ago from Venezuela, and works as a bicycle messenger. “My bike is my means of transport and work,” he said. “And I see all the time that drivers don’t respect cyclists – they don’t care that we have as much of a right to be on the road as they do.” A common complaint of cyclists is the lack of consideration from other road users. In Bogotá, drivers routinely neglect to use indicators, and all road users run red lights. A law passed in 2016 gave cyclists more rights on the road, though motorists often honk at riders in their lane. Sandy Millares runs a small bike messaging company in Bogotá, covering dozens of miles a day across the city. During her five years as a courier, Millares has seen it all. “People have used their cars to drive into me, motorcyclists have run their hands over me as they pass, and I’ve had bikes stolen,” the 30-year-old said, taking a break after a delivery. “I love my job but I know it’s dangerous,” she said. “And I love my city, but I know there’s certain neighbourhoods and routes that I can’t go to – as a cyclist and as a woman.”
11||Tory leader’s £1bn office buying spree ‘leaves dangerous legacy’ for councilIan Harvey cannot help but chuckle when recalling how easy it was to borrow £385m from the Public Works Loans Board to buy BP’s vast Sunbury-on-Thames research centre soon after he became Conservative leader of Spelthorne borough council, Surrey, in 2016. “I found it laughably easy, to be honest with you,” he said. “There was no real control over it. I’m told it was pretty much a phone call. It took about three days.” Harvey, who was ousted as leader of the council in the summer, went on to borrow millions more from the PWLB, a Treasury agency, to purchase seven other commercial buildings, including £170m on an office in west London and £285m on three offices in the Thames valley. By the end of his four-year reign, the council had borrowed £1.1bn – about 100 times Spelthorne’s core spending power of £11m. “There were other local authorities that did small-scale things before us, but BP broke the mould because it was so much bigger than anything else,” he said. Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spree is just the most dramatic example of how councils have been encouraged to make commercial investments to offset budget cuts during a decade of austerity. Richard Watts, the chair of the Local Government Association’s resources board, said some councils are now faced with mounting losses: “Ten years of massive cuts to local government forced councils to look elsewhere for money, but as a result of the pandemic some of these new sources of income are drying up . “If the government doesn’t step in to make up the shortfall, the losers are going to be ordinary residents because we’re going to see another very deep round of local council austerity.” The latest local authority financial returns to the government – which have not yet been published – show English councils have already lost £372m of income from market investments, including commercial property, since the country went into lockdown in March and expect to lose a total of £541m by March 2021. While many councils have invested within their boundaries to improve local areas, some smaller councils – like Spelthorne – have poured millions of pounds of borrowed public money into speculative property acquisitions much further afield. This has prompted concerns that authorities dependent on rents from largely empty office blocks and struggling shopping centres may find it increasingly difficult to service the huge debts they have built up, and ultimately be forced to cut services. Councils are supposed to base their investment strategies on a statutory code, which prohibits borrowing to invest solely for profit. Don Peebles, the head of policy at the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, which is responsible for the code, said public money is being misused: “It is like somebody going to a building society to borrow money to buy a house, but instead of buying the house they put it on a horse.” Peeebles adds that councils are taking huge risks: “It means public services are exposed to the vagaries of the market. If there is some volatility in the market, then it could impact adversely on their ability to deliver those essential services – and that is what we are seeing at the moment.” The backdrop to Spelthorne’s debt-fuelled spending spree was the tight squeeze on local government budgets after 2010. Harvey argues he was forced to look for other sources of revenue because the council’s funding from central government was forecast to sharply fall. “We were basically living on reserves and selling things off. Morale was on the ground because [council officers] couldn’t achieve much,” he said. “It was hugely unfair.” However, nearly 30% the council’s budget for services is now dependent on rent from properties purchased by Harvey, who resigned from the Conservative party after he was deposed. While the financial figures so far released indicate the vast majority of the rent has been collected, the council admits: “Covid poses the most extreme economic stress test for more than two centuries”. Since the beginning of the pandemic it has already agreed £1.27m worth of rent deferrals. Restricted council papers seen by the Observer show that Harvey, in one of his final acts as leader, agreed to another deferral, worth £4.46m, with the troubled workspace firm WeWork to help “absorb the difficulties brought about by the Covid crisis”. Harvey admits this is “not ideal” but insists the council is performing better than other commercial landlords. “There is risk in anything, but it is negligible,” he said . Not everybody in Spelthorne is reassured. Lawrence Nichols, a Liberal Democrat who chairs the council’s audit committee, said Harvey left a “potentially dangerous” legacy for the borough that could unravel in 10 or 15 years when all break points in the contracts come up. “High-value decisions are not getting the scrutiny they need. The financial acumen here is really thin,” he said. “It is a rotten borough.” This month it emerged that KPMG, the council’s auditors throughout most of Harvey’s leadership, warned in August that the investment properties the council purchased in 2017-19 might be unlawful because the authority failed to have regard to the statutory code prohibiting borrowing purely to profit from investments. Spelthorne council said it had complied with all legislation and guidance, including having regard to the prudential code. It said it was completely transparent, with the council’s investments listed on its website. It added that it had assembled an experienced team to manage its commercial investment strategy and had built up a £20m sinking fund to protect services from fluctuations in rental streams: “Even on the worst case modelling, the figures indicated that we have more than sufficient sinking funds to ensure that the revenue budget is not adversely impacted at any point over the next 10 years.” The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government said it had provided councils with £6.4bn worth of support during the pandemic. It added that councils must properly consider the risksand opportunities when they made investment decisions: “We share concerns about a minority of councils that continue to expose themselves and taxpayers to unnecessary risk. We have a set framework which councils must observe and we will continue to monitor this,” said a spokesperson.
0||Chelsea dig in to foil Manchester United in a game that felt out of timeOle Gunnar Solskjær can do one big thing well, and that is sit his side deep and attack on the counter. Frank Lampard has one big thing he has struggled to do well, and that is set his side up to defend well against the counter. That’s why when these sides met at Old Trafford last season, Chelsea had 54% possession, won the shot count 18-10 and lost 4-0. Everything Lampard did on Saturday seemed aimed at avoiding a repeat. And it worked. As in last season’s FA Cup semi-final, Chelsea set up with a back three, left no space behind their defensive line, and successfully thwarted United. At Wembley, individual errors from United players handed Chelsea victory; here the arm Harry Maguire hooked around César Azpilicueta’s neck should at the very least have handed them a penalty. Personnel, of course, helps. Thiago Silva was a calm and authoritative figure at the heart of the back three, while Édouard Mendy made three very good saves. He looked lively, sharp and, crucially, didn’t radiate the sort of panic Kepa Arrizabalaga has recently. But having failed to keep an away clean sheet since December, this was at heart a tactical victory for Lampard. The next stage, as he acknowledged, is to add goals to successive clean sheets; given the quality Chelsea have in the front half of the team, that should come, even if it takes time to forge the sort of coordinated attacking patterns that characterise the very best sides. To which there is one very obvious caveat: Solskjær’s United habitually struggle to break down teams who sit deep against them. It’ll be a long time before a goalless draw at Old Trafford ceases to be a decent result, and in context it has a specific value for Lampard, but it is not the prize it once was. Solskjær’s results fit a pattern. United have won their last 10 away games in all competitions but none of their last five at home. This is why he has beaten Paris Saint-Germain twice at the Parc des Princes, why he has three wins against Pep Guardiola, why United were the only team to take league points off Liverpool last season until the end of February. He can organise the rearguard and United have the speed and talent up front to expose teams who operate high up the pitch. But against teams who drop off, United are far less adept. That’s why home defeats to Crystal Palace feel just as emblematic of Solskjær’s reign as away wins against PSG. It’s why the defeat to Sevilla in the Europa League semi-final was so crushing: it wasn’t just that United had missed out on a European final, it was that they had done so in such a characteristic way, flailing hopelessly like Scrappy Doo meeting a longer-armed opponent able to keep him at bay with a calm hand on the front of his head – and that despite taking the lead. The biggest tactical criticism of José Mourinho at Real Madrid from his own players was the way he left them to improvise in the final third: his refusal to do what Guardiola and Jürgen Klopp do and work relentlessly on attacking cohesion. Over the past decade, the ability to create cohesive attacking patterns has probably been the single biggest factor that distinguishes the very best coaches from the tier below. United have consistently failed to achieve that fluency. In the opening quarter of the game, in particular, there were constant diagonals from Maguire, Fred and Scott McTominay aimed at the space in front of Daniel James. Except there was no space, because Chelsea had a deep-lying back five. Reece James advanced only rarely and when he did, Azpilicueta, as a regular right-back, was perfectly equipped to cover behind him. The barrage did eventually stop, but it was replaced by safety-first sideways passing. Solskjær, never shy of appealing to romantic myth, spoke of how a full Stretford End might have sucked in Marcus Rashford’s late effort; more likely they would have been groaning in frustration at the witlessness of much of what had gone before. United created four meaningful chances: snapshots from Rashford and Juan Mata, a break by Rashford after a Jorginho error and Edinson Cavani’s improvised flick into the side-netting after some sharp movement. None of them were the result of coordinated play. Against diligent opponents, that can happen, but it is happening to United every time they meet a team that sits deep. In that sense, this was a logical fifth step in the sequence. Solskjær had won his first three meetings against Lampard, who in the past two has found a way of correcting what had been going wrong before. Given Chelsea’s continuing defensive problems and the fact United had let in nine in their previous two home games, the caution was understandable. The outcome was a game that felt oddly out of time, like a top-six clash from 15 years ago. But given the wildness that has characterised the start to this season, the obvious risks of operating a high line with a lack of time properly to organise the press, it may be that more sides adopt a more traditional approach. There were specific reasons for the conservatism of both sides but, in a highly unusual environment, it could be a glimpse of a broader immediate future.
17||Police investigating Grenfell Tower fire make first arrestPolice investigating the Grenfell Tower disaster have arrested a man on suspicion of perverting the course of justice. The unnamed 38-year-old was arrested on Saturday in Sussex and taken to a local police station, Scotland Yard said. Detectives released him the same day under investigation. The arrest is the first by police investigating the June 2017 fire that claimed 72 lives. It follows fury among bereaved and survivors at revelations emerging from the public inquiry about the handling of potential evidence. Scotland Yard said in a statement on Saturday the arrest in Sussex did not relate to events heard at the Grenfell Tower inquiry this week. They did not name the arrested man. The inquiry is not scheduled to finish hearing evidence until December 2021 at the earliest, after which the inquiry panel is likely to need several months to produce a report.
23||Joe Trivelli’s recipes for lamb chops, panada, bagna càuda and apples cakeThese are dishes with which to warm up. Hearty, simple, warming food that I like to share. It’s time to stoke the fire, or the bonfire, and treat yourself well. Arrivals from the south of Italy have asked me why there isn’t a friggitoria (fry shop) in London. I pointed them to the chippies, to demonstrate there wasn’t the gap in the market they thought. The fried vegetables and lamb here is something that I am adding to the menu at my fantasy friggitoria. Something to eat with your fingers and worth the bother of disposing of the oil the following day. Panada is also something of a fantasy dish. Pure comfort food, a savoury bread pudding with a Renaissance touch of grapes. It’s a great way to use up some of the extra bread you’ve been baking. It’s also a good one to prepare ahead and then pop in the oven after a march around, if not the countryside, the block. Lucky me, I often find myself in Piedmont for a few days at this time of year. I know of no other place that excels at winter food as much. Bagna càuda is a regional highlight and this recipe is the traditional one. Once you’ve spent a good hour making it, you could be forgiven for thinking that dunking vegetables in this mostly oil sauce has lost its appeal, but the flavour is like nothing else and the experience not half as heavy as you expect. It is the best dipping dish in the world, the variety of the raw and boiled vegetables spicing up each bite. Fried vegetables and lamb chops Frying at home is to be undertaken when you have no distractions. You may like to feed these to your guests “à la minute”, frying in batches, or keep everything warm until all is ready. This recipe makes a lot and takes patience to fry. Serves 6 plain flour 150g olive oil celeriac ½ sprouting broccoli 300g sage a bunch caperberries 40g lamb cutlets 12 thyme a few sprigs eggs 2 semola flour 200g egg whites 2 sunflower oil for frying salt, pepper chilli flakes lemons 2 To make the batter, sieve the flour into a bowl. Add 3 tbsp of olive oil and whisk in 230ml of water until smooth. Cover and set aside for at least 30 minutes. Peel the celeriac and cut into irregular pieces, a few centimetres thick. Blanch these in boiling water for 4 minutes and then the broccoli for 2 minutes. Set aside. Pick the sage leaves. Soak the caperberries in water. Trim the fat from the lamb cutlets and bash them with a rolling pin until they are 1cm thin. Make a couple of incisions into each and insert some thyme leaves and sprinkle with a little salt. Whisk the eggs and, holding by the bone, dip each cutlet into this wash, then dredge in the semola, then back to the egg and once again the semola to make sure it’s well coated. Set aside on a plate ready for frying. Whisk the egg whites until stiff and fold into the batter. Drain the caperberries and dry with kitchen towel. Now you are ready to heat the sunflower oil. Do so in a pan that is at least double the height of the oil – a large, stable wok is ideal. Use a thermometer or a dollop of batter to check the temperature; 180-190C is ideal. In batches, put the lamb straight in and then fry the vegetables and sage leaves dipped first into the batter. Place carefully into the oil so that they don’t splash. Use tongs or a slotted spoon to turn everything over. Please don’t try to cook everything at once, but do so in batches, ending with the caperberries. Drain on a serving plate lined with kitchen paper. Season with salt and pepper and dust all with a sprinkle of dried chilli – I like to pound it very well in a mortar and pestle until it’s like powder – and serve with lemon wedges. Eat with your fingers. Panada with grapes and Gruyère I think that’s what you call this. I’d eat it with a bitter winter green salad for supper in front of the fire. Serves 6 savoy cabbage ½ (about 250g) onion 1 salt fennel seeds 1 tsp Muscat grapes 250g olive oil pepper bread wholegrain, 3 doorstep slices Gruyère, fontina or similar 100g parmesan 1 tbsp grated Shred, wash and blanch the cabbage in salted water for 4 minutes. Don’t throw the water away. Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Slice the onion and fry over a medium heat with a pinch of salt in a pan you can move to the oven. Add the fennel seeds, and add dashes of water if you think the onion may catch. Once the bottom of the pan is browned but not burned, add the grapes. Stir for 2 minutes, scraping the bottom of the pan as you do so, allowing the grapes to burst but not squishing them. Turn off the heat, add the cabbage and combine with another couple of tbsp of oil, and a liberal amount of roughly cracked black pepper. Use several ladles of the cabbage water as stock to loosen. You could use meat stock instead if you prefer. Cut the bread into thick doorstep slices, 3 will probably do. Tear these over the top of the pot and sink into the cabbage and grapes. Make sure some of the grapes and cabbage show through. Cut the cheese into slivers and dot around, following with the parmesan and a drizzle of oil. Bake for 25 minutes until golden. Bagna càuda The way to serve this is to give everyone a small amount of sauce in their own hot bowl and serve the vegetables separately: raw and boiled. Use the vegetables to stir the sauce. Serves 6 garlic 1 head extra virgin olive oil 200ml salted anchovies 125g unsalted butter 80g, softened potatoes 3 large carrots 6 celery 1 head red chicory 3 white chicory 3 fennel bulbs 2 Peel the garlic. Cut it in 2 and remove the central new green growth. In your smallest saucepan, over the lowest heat, add half the oil and the garlic. (On a gas cooker, adding a heat diffuser might be your best bet.) The garlic needs to cook without frying or browning until completely soft – 30 minutes at least. Should the garlic start to fry, take the pan off the heat for a moment. While this is happening, wash and dry the anchovies. If they are under oil, just drain the fillets, but do make sure you have enough actual fish, as they will include the oil as part of the total weight on the tin. Add the anchovies to the oil and continue stirring with your wooden spoon, encouraging them and the garlic to “melt” into the oil. Then add the rest of the oil and continue stirring until a thick sauce is achieved. There is no need to adjust the temperature. Then add the butter and mix in. The sauce needs to be kept warm until served. Boil the potatoes, then cook the carrots and celery as much or as little as you like – with a bit of crunch or a whole lot of give. Cut the potatoes into fat fingers. Wash and slice the chicories and fennel. You’re ready to go! Get dipping! Apples, walnuts and ricotta This simple and delicious pudding is the ideal way to finish a meal. Serves 6 shelled walnuts 100g golden caster sugar 40g, plus extra for sprinkling sea salt olive oil apples 6, medium-eating, not too soft, (about 600g) ricotta 500g, fresh cinnamon ⅛ of a stick brown sugar 2 tbsp Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Blitz the walnuts with the sugar and a good pinch of salt until they are fine crumbs, but not so much that they are paste. Scrunch up a large sheet of baking paper and flatten it out again. Barely oil the centre and then sprinkle with extra sugar. Use it to line a small 20cm loaf tin. Peel the apples and bob in a bowl of cold water so they don’t discolour. Slice the apple into ultra-thin 3mm slices, turning through 90° to avoid the cores. (You can use a Japanese mandolin if you have one and are good at that sort of thing.) Make a layer in the bottom of the tin with some of the apples and sprinkle over some of the walnuts. Add another layer of apples and walnuts and so on, building it up like a lasagna. It takes me 4 layers to come out even – it’s nice if the last layer is apple, but with some walnuts peeping through. Bake for 25 minutes. Remove from the oven, turn the heat down to 160C/gas mark 3. Sprinkle with a little more sugar and return to the oven for an hour. Allow to cool before serving. Reheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Without ceremony, turn the ricotta out on to a nonstick baking sheet. Grind the cinnamon in a mortar and pestle and sprinkle it on to the ricotta with brown sugar and a tiny pinch of salt. Bake for 20 minutes. Slice while still warm and serve with the cold apple flan. Joe Trivelli is co-head chef at the River Café
5||Republicans want to open pristine Alaska wilderness to logging. It's a tragedyForests are the lungs of the Earth. Around the world, every minute of every day, trees perform magic. They inhale vast amounts of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, and exhale oxygen, the stuff of life. They keep things in balance. And no single forest does this better – contains more living plant life per area, or stores more carbon – than the 17m-acre Tongass national forest in coastal Alaska. Take a deep breath. The oxygen you just pulled into your lungs that entered your bloodstream and nourished your mind was once in a tree. The Amazon of North America, the Tongass is mostly a roadless, wilderness kingdom of mosses, lichens, salmon, deer, bald eagles and bears – all beneath ice-capped mountains, ribboned with blue glaciers, blanketed with green, shaggy stands of Sitka spruce, western red cedar and western hemlock. Trees up to 10 feet in diameter, 200 feet tall, and 800 years old. But while the Amazon is a tropical rainforest, the Tongass, found at the mid-latitudes, is a temperate rainforest, one of the rarest biomes on Earth (found only in coastal Alaska and British Columbia, the Pacific north-west, the southern coast of Chile, and the South Island of New Zealand). A true old-growth forest, the Tongass represents a council of ancients. Indigenous Tlingit elders say it is rich with answers – even wisdom – if we ask the right questions and show proper restraint. And what does the Trump administration intend to do with it? Open it up for business. Their plan, more than two years in the making and spearheaded by the Alaska senator Lisa Murkowski, secretary of agriculture, Sonny Perdue, and Alaska governor, Mike Dunleavy – all Republicans bereft of a science education and an ecological conscience – is simple and wrongheaded: put the Tongass back to work as a so-called “healthy” forest, according to Mr Perdue. How? By re-introducing large-scale clearcut logging and extensive road building on 9.3m acres. To do this, they must exempt Alaska from the 2001 US Forest Service “Roadless Rule”, an enlightened conservation initiative that applies to 39 states. In short, the Tongass would no longer be protected. A final decision is likely to be released later this month. Never mind that 96% of thousands of recent public comments say the Tongass should remain roadless to protect clean water, salmon streams, wildlife habitat and old-growth trees. Never mind as well that logging the Tongass would create few jobs while adding to an already bloated federal deficit. Logging in Alaska is heavily subsidized. Back in the 1970s, 80s and 90s, taxpaying Americans anted up an average of $30m a year. One deficit sale offered every 1,000 board feet of timber for less money than the cost of a cheeseburger. All while many of the trees were shipped “in the round” (as whole logs) to Asia to become rayon, cellophane and other throwaway consumer goods. Another sale generated only 2.5 cents on every dollar the Forest Service spent building roads and preparing paperwork. And today? To build roads in the Tongass would cost taxpayers up to $500,000 a mile. Anthropologist and former Alaska writer laureate Richard Nelson, who lived in Sitka, on the edge of the Tongass, once said he wasn’t bothered when he found a stump in the forest. What broke his heart was when he came upon a “forest of stumps”. Entire mountainsides, valleys and islands shorn of trees. Yes, parts of the Tongass can be responsibly cut, and are. Many local Alaska economies use second-growth stands to harvest good building materials. And yes, a ravaged forest will return, but not for a long time. The Alaska department of fish and game estimates that large, industrial-scale Tongass clearcuts need more than 200 years to “acquire the uneven-aged tree structure and understory characteristic of old growth”. That is, to be truly healthy and robust again. This according to scientists, not politicians. The wholesale destruction of our imperiled planet’s most life-sustaining forests has to stop. How? A good first step: vote for politicians who make decisions based on solid science. Between 2001 and 2017, 800m acres of tree cover (an area nearly 50 times larger than the Tongass) disappeared worldwide, all while global temperatures climbed, wild birds and mammals perished by the billions, and fires, hurricanes, tornadoes and droughts intensified. And since 2017? Witness Australia and California. What few large, primal forests remain intact today, such the Tongass, become increasingly valuable for their ability to mitigate climate change. Scientists call this “pro-forestation”: the practice of leaving mature forests intact to reach their full ecological potential. The Tongass alone sequesters 3m tons of C02 annually, the equivalent of removing 650,000 gas-burning cars off the roads of the US every year. The better we understand science and indigenous wisdom, the better we’ll recognize the living Earth as a great teacher that’s fast becoming our ailing dependent. We each get three minutes without oxygen, and we’re not the only ones. It’s a matter of having a deep and abiding regard for all life. Call it respect. “What makes a place special is the way it buries itself inside the heart,” Nelson wrote in his memoir, The Island Within. “[N]ot whether it’s flat or rugged, rich or austere, wet or arid, gentle or harsh, warm or cold, wild or tame. Every place, like every person, is elevated by the love and respect shown toward it, and by the way in which its bounty is received.” Kim Heacox is the author of books including The Only Kayak, a memoir, and Jimmy Bluefeather, the only novel to ever win the National Outdoor Book Award. He lives in Alaska, on the edge of the Tongass
14||The lynx effect: Iberian cat claws its way back from brink of extinctionSpotty of coat, tufty of ear, and teetering on the verge of extinction less than two decades ago, the Iberian lynx is continuing to claw its way back across Spain and Portugal. According to the latest survey, the lynx population on the peninsula has increased ninefold over 18 years, rising from 94 in 2002 to 855 this year. Experts say that if the current conservation and reintroduction efforts can maintain their momentum, the species could be out of danger by 2040. The 2019 census, carried out using camera-traps and large reserves of patience, revealed that more than 80% of the lynx population is in Spain, that 311 kittens were born on the peninsula last year and that there were 188 females of reproductive age. There are populations in the Sierra Morena and Donaña national park. At the end of the last century, however, things looked decidedly bleak for the bearded cats – and for rabbits, which make up 90% of their diet. Government efforts to get rid of creatures considered to be vermin, which lasted until the mid-1970s, took a terrible toll, as did a catastrophic drop in rabbit numbers following the arrival of myxomatosis in the 1950s and then rabbit hemorrhagic disease in the 1980s. Both those factors were compounded by the destruction and isolation of habitats that came with motorway building and a greater human presence. Miguel Ángel Simón, a biologist who spent 22 years conserving and building up lynx numbers before retiring last year, remembers the daunting scale of the task he and his colleagues faced.“When we started back in 2000, we didn’t even know how many lynxes were left,” he says. “We found out from the first census that there were 94 and we thought that they were going to disappear. We just didn’t know if there was any way to save them – they were right on the edge and in critical danger of extinction. Back then, they were the most endangered felines in the world. Our first aim was just to stop them becoming extinct.” Their strategy of seeking money and engagement from politicians, and cooperation from landowners and the public, gradually paid off. A series of projects, coordinated by the Andalucían government in conjunction with other Spanish regions, the Portuguese authorities and conservation NGOs, has arrested the decline, expanded populations and seen lynxes reintroduced to other areas. “Today, the situation is pretty good and I think we can be optimistic and fairly calm because we haven’t just recovered the population in Andalucía, we’ve also built populations in Portugal – where the lynx was extinct – and in Extremadura and Castilla-La Mancha,” says Simón. The latest phase of the programme, the five-year Life Lynxconnect project, has a budget of €18.8m, 60% of which comes from the EU. Javier Salcedo, the project’s new leader, said the main aim was to join up existing populations and increase their genetic diversity. “We need to see an exchange of animals that will give us an exchange of genes,” he says. Ramón Pérez de Ayala, the large carnivores coordinator for WWF Spain – one of 21 partners in the latest project – warns that lynx populations are in danger of developing genetic problems if they remain isolated. “We’re going to do some genetic tracking so we can monitor the situation and see if we need to move individuals artificially.” Pérez de Ayala is also upbeat about the future of the lynx and hopes to see it move from the endangered category of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of threatened species into the vulnerable category. He estimates it will take another 20 years of hard work before Spain and Portugal can claim to have saved the lynx. “If we carry on, if we can maintain the population growth momentum, and if luck stays on our side, we’ll have at least 750 females of reproductive age – which means more than 3,000 lynxes in total – by 2040,” he says. Between now and then, existing populations will have to be blended and increased, and new ones established in rabbit-rich habitats. Equally important will be the mapping and marking of blackspots: in 2019, 34 lynxes died after being run over. For Pérez de Ayala and many others, protecting the lynx is a moral and ecological imperative. “Every species has an intrinsic value that can’t be lost – it would be like demolishing a cathedral,” he says. “And you’re talking about an animal that does a really good job of balancing out the food chain of the Mediterranean ecosystem.” In the absence of lynxes, medium-sized predators that eat rabbits – such as foxes and Egyptian mongooses – put prey species under a lot of pressure. When a lynx comes along, explains Pérez de Ayala, the density of foxes and mongooses goes down and rabbit populations increase. But, he adds, environmental harmony is only one of the many reasons why the peninsula’s unique wild cat must remain well spotted. “On a more emotional level, the lynx is a jewel and a thing of beauty to behold.”
17||Windrush man wrongly classified as illegal immigrant left destitute for a yearAn electrician who was wrongly classified as being an illegal immigrant, despite living in London for more than 45 years, was destitute as he waited a year for the Windrush taskforce to decide on his application to stay in the UK, the parliamentary ombudsman has ruled. Applications to the taskforce were meant to be processed within two weeks. The year-long wait was described as “shocking” by the ombudsman in a detailed report published this week – the latest of a series of highly critical reviews into the performance of the Home Office over the Windrush scandal. The parliamentary ombudsman has ruled that the Home Office should apologise and pay Mr R £5,000 in compensation for “maladministration and delay” in processing his case. Officials wrongly told him that he would be able to claim benefits while he waited for a decision, but he found himself unable to claim any support. “He could not work, had no money and could not buy food,” the report stated. “He said he was destitute and felt ‘worthless, broken, with no hope or prospects’. “He told us everyone slept in the same room at the homeless shelter and he had no privacy. He was not allowed to stay in the building during the day; he spent his time walking the streets or going to the library. All he wanted to do was get his status confirmed so he could work again and begin to rebuild his life.” Mr R arrived in the UK in 1970 from Nigeria aged eight, but had no way of proving that he had arrived at that time. He lost his home and job as a result of being wrongly classified as an illegal immigrant by the Home Office in 2014. When the government apologised in April 2018 for wrongly categorising thousands of legal residents as immigration offenders, he applied for his right to remain in the UK to be formally recognised. His case was complicated because, like many applicants to the scheme, he struggled to find documents proving that he had been in the UK since the early 1970s; staff told him it could take six weeks to come to a decision. Although a decision was made internally on his case after about two months, officials waited 10 months to communicate the decision to him, the report found. Mr R was not granted status under the scheme because of ongoing difficulties finding documents proving his arrival but was eventually advised about how to make a different application to remain on the grounds of long-term residence. The ombudsman’s report found that UK Visas and Immigration was “well aware” of Mr R’s “desperate situation yet it repeatedly refused requests to expedite its decision”, and that “UKVI gave responses on the delay that were not in line with our principles of being ‘open, accountable and truthful’”. The report concludes: “The Windrush scheme was set up to rectify past wrongs and do so with urgency and purpose. It has fallen well short of that in this case.” Emily Thornberry, the Labour MP for Islington South and Mr R’s MP, said: “It is appalling that this man, who was particularly vulnerable, remained homeless for more than a year due to disgraceful delays on the part of the Home Office. The hostile environment has caused enormous hardship, and the Windrush scheme has let so many people down – the Home Office should be ashamed of themselves.” The parliamentary and health service ombudsman provides an independent and impartial complaint handling service for complaints that have not been resolved by the NHS in England and UK government departments. Rob Behrens, the ombudsman, said he was handling a number of other Windrush complaints. “We encourage anyone who has complained about their treatment under the Windrush scheme to come to us via their local MP if they are not happy with the response they have received.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Mr R’s application under the Windrush scheme was refused and the decision has been upheld following independent review. UKVI apologises for the delay in issuing a decision.”
19||Swing out, sisters: the nuns singing through lockdownSocial distancing and lockdown come naturally to the Poor Clares of Arundel in West Sussex: after all, they’ve been doing it for 800 years. “In our day-to-day life the pandemic has hardly affected us at all,” says Sister Gabriel, who joined the order of enclosed nuns in 1994, aged 23. “The biggest sadness for us is that we’ve not been able to have visitors – we’ve hardly seen any outsiders for months.” Now, though, the outside world is hearing from the Poor Clares, because on the eve of lockdown, back in March, the nuns were in the final stages of recording their debut album. The sisters hope it will bring some of the simple, balanced principles of cloister life to those struggling with the fallout from Covid. “It’s been a time of great anxiety and stress, and people really need to zone out and find a place of peace,” says Sister Gabriel. The Poor Clares – who wear long brown habits, beige-coloured veils and sandals – practise a kind of ancient mindfulness: they focus on the present, and other than visits to the doctor or dentist, they stay within the confines of their monastery. At the height of lockdown, says Sister Leo, who’s in her 60s and entered the community in 1976, people would contact her to ask for advice on how to cope with having to stay in the same place, day after day. “I always said the same thing: pay attention to regularity in your life, and do things by a timetable. That’s how it works for us. And I think it’s helped others when I’ve said, ‘We live like this the whole time, and we have done for many years.’” All the same, the sisters acknowledge there’s a world of difference between choosing to live separately from others and having it forced on you. “We’re very conscious that for many people the last few months have been truly hellish,” says Sister Aelred, who’s in her 70s and entered the community in 1961 aged 18. “I’ve got friends in their 80s who are self-isolating, and I know how lonely and difficult it’s been for them.” We’re talking around a big table in the nuns’ parlour, which, due to Covid restrictions, is the only part of the convent I’m allowed to enter. And though they’re a largely silent order, with speaking restricted during the day other than at recreation, and strictly adhered to from nightfall to dawn, the sisters certainly know how to chat. Assuming them to be meek and mild and reticent is one of the many mistakes people make, says Sister Gabriel. “People expect us to be sombre, whereas there’s a lot of fun and laughter in our lives. They think we’re not in touch with politics – they think we’re not ordinary women, when in fact we very much are.” “People would be surprised to hear we fall out,” says Sister Aelred. “And they would also be surprised that we enjoy a glass of beer or wine, from time to time.” What’s different about life in the community isn’t that nuns are a different species, they explain, but that they’ve bought into a simpler life. In a complex, upside-down world, could it be that their daily routine has wisdom to impart to the rest of us? The sisters rise at 5.30am (5am in summer) to embark on a day that follows more or less the same structure Poor Clares and other monastic orders have followed for hundreds of years. After breakfast and an hour’s meditation (“to centre ourselves”, says Sister Gabriel), the nuns gather in their chapel for prayers and, two days a week, for mass. “Then we have a period for work, which might be anything from cooking to working in the vegetable garden, to doing our paid work, which is spiritual direction – we’ve switched that to Zoom,” she says. Lunch, the main meal of the day, is eaten in silence while one sister reads aloud from a spiritual text; the same happens at supper, but the text is what Gabriel describes as “a lighter book – it might be a biography, for example”. After lunch comes a rest period and more work, before (on three days of the week) “recreation”, where the sisters are free to chat and catch up with one another’s news. “The thing about structure is, it helps you to use your time more wisely,” says Sister Gabriel. “We often waste time: if you’ve got an eight-hour window for work, you dissipate and end up on the phone or computer. But if you’ve only got two hours, it forces you to use the time wisely. Structure creates space, to achieve what you want, and to simply be.” Music is at the heart of the nuns’ worship – but the idea of recording an album, explains Sister Aelred, came about initially as a bit of a joke. Music producer James Morgan got in touch to ask whether he could come to vespers – one of the offices of the day – to hear the sisters sing. “We thought once he’d heard us that would be it, and we’d never hear from him again.” “We were sure we wouldn’t be good enough,” adds Sister Gabriel. “But then he got back in touch and said he wasn’t bothered about the mistakes we’d made – we could be trained not to do that. What he liked was the tone of our singing.” For many singers, the idea of a contract from a record company is a dream come true, but the Poor Clares had a different take on it – as they would on many elements of becoming recording artists. “We said we don’t want auditions. You have to include everyone who wants to be included,” says Sister Gabriel. “The people who hear it will have to accept the ability of all of us – we’re not going to tell any of our sisters, ‘You can’t sing, so you’re not in.’” Of the 23-strong community, all but two sisters eventually took part. “We have sisters who sing tunefully and beautifully, and we have others who sound tone-deaf,” says Sister Leo. “And we’re all on the album.” For their part, the sisters hope the album will allow them to share what matters to them with the outside world. “We certainly didn’t do it to become famous,” says Sister Gabriel. “We want people to know the essence of our lives, what we believe in and what brings us joy.” The music on the album – which includes a traditional Ave Maria, Psalm 27 (O Lord, Hear My Voice) and In Paradisum, sung by the nuns at their funeral liturgies – also features the words set to music of St Francis and St Clare, the order’s founders. “They lived eight centuries ago”, says Sister Gabriel. “But they knew many things we still struggle with today, including how important it is to understand our relationship with the environment. So we live as sustainably as possible. We grow what we can – not everything, but certainly lots of our own vegetables. We’re very careful about waste – anything not eaten at lunch one day will be supper the next.” “And we share with others – we support the local food bank,” says Sister Aelred. “We’ve not felt called to be on Twitter,” says Sister Leo. “We’ve taken a vow of poverty and we don’t own anything. And we believe that’s what needs to happen with the world. We all need to use less, so people with less can have more.” Each sister wears a Tau cross, based on the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet and worn by St Francis. “Of course, we know many people don’t believe in God, but many of them recognise some kind of higher power. I think being connected to something bigger than ourselves stops us being narcissistic.” Do they, I ask, worry about the future? Like most religious communities in the west, numbers of enclosed nuns are falling, and their own convent is top-heavy, with the youngest nun aged 47 and the oldest in her 90s. Surprisingly, Sister Gabriel says she’s not bothered what happens next. “I think we have something to share and something to speak out about, but things happen in waves and if this has reached full circle, that’s OK. We’ve still got our lives to live, and this isn’t just about numbers. The truth is, it’s a wonderful way to live.” Light for the World by the Poor Clares of Arundel is out now on the Decca record label (£12.75 for the CD)
5||Since we’re talking fantasy Brexit deals…In 1981, tarnished by a legacy of nuclear embarrassments, the leaky Cumbrian atomic power plant Windscale was rebranded as Sellafield and the problems of public perception simply melted away, like hot uranium seeping into a water table. Likewise, we are no longer about to embrace a similarly contaminated no-deal Brexit. We are instead welcoming a nice, new Australia-style deal. But Australia doesn’t have a deal with the EU (even though it wants one). We are embracing a no-deal Brexit in all but name. It is, as the secretary of state Alok Sharma admitted to an unusually uncooperative Nick Ferrari on Monday, “just a question of semantics”. Ah yes. The Conservatives’ old enemies! Words! And their actual meanings! On Monday evening, I opened my Anglo-Asian tandoori lamb vindaloo delivery and found a request to contribute to one of Dominics Cumming’s blue-sky, out-of-the-box think-boxes inside it, written on my poppadum in mango chutney. Cumming’s omniscient net-lords knew my every move. As usual, Cumming was looking for hot-ass cyber-freaks and batshit Ballardian head-jobs who could furnish him with shamanic sci-fi solutions. Apparently I was such a person because I had both written a comic book about a ghost and sung in 10th-century Anglo-Saxon on a dance record. Cumming needed a way to avoid identifying the incoming no-deal Brexit, which no one had wanted or expected, as the no-deal Brexit it clearly was. Sharma’s public admission that the Australia-style deal rebrand was linguistic smoke and mirrors had proved potentially problematic and threatened to unravel a number of other flimsy, fictional Conservative constructs, the implausible public persona of Boris Johnson having been deemed the most vulnerable to a moment’s scrutiny. Normally I wouldn’t sell my skills to a Tory brainstorming session, but I am principally a live comedian and I haven’t worked since March. Under lockdown, my principles, like my trousers, inexplicably became elasticated and I was to be offered the usual £25,000-a-day consultancy fee, as long as I worked through a company run by an old schoolfriend of any current cabinet member. I was picked up and taken to the agreed secret location – a boarded-up, underground, art deco gentleman’s convenience on Shepherd’s Bush Green – where I joined four other futurist-warlocks round a socially distanced, circular marble table. One had blue-lensed granny specs and a green parrot on her shoulder; another was dressed as a kind of disco Rudolf Hess; a third wore tracksuit bottoms, espadrilles and a plain brown Primark T-shirt, but his bangle was festooned with runes. All were inscrutable, carried satchels and had produced incendiary content for opaquely funded libertarian blogs. They regarded Laurence Fox as a Trojan horse, Michael Gove as a stink bomb and Boris Johnson as an unpleasant but useful clump of sausage meat that could be animated to mouth whatever words were necessary, within its limited capacity. In the centre of the table, Cumming’s head appeared inside an illuminated glass crystal ball full of pink gas. Initially, I assumed it was a three-dimensional holographic projection, like Laurence Olivier’s head in Dave Clark’s Time musical, Cumming broadcasting his image from elsewhere. He had previous form in being in two places at once, such as Islington and Barnard Castle, for example. But every now and again, Cumming’s face would groan and the head would shift uneasily and I realised the eyesight-anxious political fixer was actually crouching uncomfortably beneath the table with his skull through a hole, gas pumping into the simple goldfish bowl that encased it so it looked mysterious, like a shit Wizard of Oz. If any of my fellow situationist-idea-terraformers realised his ruse, they didn’t let on, fearful of dismissal. “Sharma’s careless breakfast lips have exposed the semantic hollowness of the ‘Australia-style deal’ language virus, immunising some sections of the electorate against its charm,” Cumming’s head began, his voice condensed behind the glass, like someone speaking into a plastic cup to do an impression of Melvyn Bragg. “We must use our sock puppets in the internet, the press and the BBC to obscure it, flood the info-sphere with synonymous ideas, fabricating post-Brexit deals with nonexistent places and creating plausible backstories to stiff any grots that would verify them. Be about it!” And with that Cumming popped down beneath the table again to conceal himself. By Wednesday lunchtime, the airwaves were abuzz with our distractions, expendable loyalist MPs swamping Sharma’s indiscretion with expedient lies. On 5 Live, Banbury MP Victoria Prentis said she was looking forward to an Eternia ™ ® style deal with the planet Eternia, He-Man ™ ® having already promised timber from the Skytree ™ ®; on Talk Radio, Torbay’s Kevin Foster spoke enthusiastically of our Equestria ™ ® style deal and of the untapped financial value of the manure of his magic Little Ponies ™ ®, especially the thick dung of Pinkie Pie ™ ®; and on Sky News, West Suffolk’s Matt Handcock nervously commended a Gor ™ ® style deal to Adam Boulton, while explaining it wasn’t his place to criticise the fantasy kingdom’s human rights violations, most notably the compulsory sexual captivity of all women, when it offered such valuable access to the slave markets of the Insectoids ™ ®. By midnight, I had helped publicise fictional deals with the nonexistent realms of Atlantis, Plutonia, Pellucidar ™ ®, Lemuria ™ ®, Skartaris ™ ®, Etheria ™ ®, Lyonesse and Wakanda ™ ®, whose coveted metal, Vibranium ™ ®, did not exist either. And by the time Cumming spat me out into the Shepherd’s Bush night, I was so disoriented I almost believed it all myself. I drank a few cans of strong cider alone on the darkening green. All-but-empty night buses circled me, masked passengers staring out. “Everything will be OK,” I thought, “we have a Fantasy Island-style trade deal. The Plane! The Plane!” Stewart Lee contributes 10th-century Anglo-Saxon poetry to a track on the new album by Asian Dub Foundation, Access Denied, out now
14||'It feels like a nightmare': Sussex villagers aghast at road plan“It’s like they are torturing us. Each step, it just gets worse.” Gilly McCadden is in tears. She has just learned that the route chosen for the £250m dual carriageway around Arundel in West Sussex will bring four lanes of 70mph traffic within metres of her house and garden. The new route of the A27, bypassing a bypass built in the 1960s, has been planned – and resisted – since the 1980s. Now Highways England has unexpectedly chosen the “grey route” – a longer, more expensive plan that slices through three villages but avoids the South Downs national park. For locals in the village of Binsted who fought previous iterations of the plan for destroying ancient woodlands, it means the proposed road will crash through their gardens and peaceful meadows. “We are glad the wildlife is getting saved,” said McCadden, a garden designer. “But you learn a lot about how these roads are constructed. You learn that the one element that doesn’t matter is people.” The new road has been portrayed as a deeply polarising issue, with support in Arundel and opposition from residents of three affected villages – Binsted, Tortington and Walberton. But in Highways England’s latest public consultation, just 7% of the 5,000 respondents chose the grey route, while 64% of people called for no road to be built or for “online” improvements only, closely following the existing route of the 1960s single-carriageway bypass. “That’s an absolutely astonishing result,” said Emma Tristram, a Binsted resident. “Highways England tried to stack the dice in their favour and they failed. They’ve shown the consultation is democratic rubbish.” Mike and Diane Evans bought their dream home – with orchards, paddocks and a small ancient woodland – two years ago after careers in the armed forces. It had been anticipated that the road would pass relatively harmlessly behind their wood, but the grey route cuts across their front garden. They will have to sell up. “I’ve served pretty much everywhere – Northern Ireland, the Falklands, Iran, Afghanistan. I’ve been in some pretty nasty places,” said Mike Evans. “This [house] has been just total heaven. I don’t know what we’ve done to deserve this. It feels like a punishment of some description.” For McCadden, the “punishment” of the new route was compounded when she was informed that Highways England would not purchase her home, which she designed and built 21 years ago, nor consider it blighted. She must now prove she needs to sell for a reason other than escaping the bypass outside her front door, and try to sell the house herself for up to 20% beneath her asking price before the government’s roadbuilding company will consider buying it from her. “It feels like we’re living in a dystopian nightmare now,” she said. “They keep adding layers of horror.” The proposed route avoids the national park but now crosses the edge of an estate in Walberton and close to the village primary school while bypassing a mile and a half of existing dual carriageway. Despite the reprieve for the national park and ancient woodland, environmental groups including the Woodland Trust, the Campaign to Protect Rural England and the Wildlife Trusts continue to oppose the new road, arguing that it will fragment habitat for dormice, endanger bat populations and ruin rare flushed fen habitat. In Binsted, villagers say it will destroy the tight-knit community of 38 homes and pass within metres of Binsted’s 850-year-old church – built on a 2,000-year-old iron age embankment – and the scenic village pub. Mike Tristram said: “This is a place where people can step into a life that was sustainable before industrialisation brought us into the climate and ecological emergency that we’re in.” Maggie Moore Alexander said her ill husband, Christopher, 84, a renowned architect and theorist of human-centred design, chose their Grade II-listed house after observing the peace of its garden, and now faced having the highway cross their land. She said the anti-bypass campaigners had barely heard a familiar charge. “Somebody mentioned ‘nimby’ the other day and I thought: that’s interesting, I haven’t heard that in a while,” she said. “We’ve done a terrible job of protecting the world we live in and the natural systems around us that keep us afloat. One of the Highways England people said they didn’t consider Covid because it was just a blip. But there’s more and more evidence that this bypass is a stupid thing to do. The economic situation says it’s a stupid thing to do. There’s less and less traffic here.” Tony Hunt, the mayor of Arundel, said the town council welcomed Highways England’s plan. “For over 40 years the A27 has run straight through the town, dividing our community into two halves,” he said. “With the growth of traffic, Arundel has become a bottleneck, with 21,000 journeys made each day on the single-lane section of the A27 that bisects the town.” Andrew Griffith, who was one of Boris Johnson’s first appointments as chief business adviser before he became Arundel’s MP in 2019, said he had worked with the government to “secure the necessary support for Highways England to proceed” with the new road. “It will reduce congestion, enhance air quality, improve road safety and support much-needed employment and economic growth,” he said. “Some question whether we need to improve our roads at all. Whilst I support a rapid switch to cleaner and quieter vehicles – and the UK is a leader in this respect – they will still need roads to drive upon and there is nothing environmentally friendly about pollution caused by congestion.”
1||Can California’s top wine region survive the era of megafire?The Silverado Trail, a two-lane road that weaves through the bucolic hillsides in the heart of California’s wine country, is the quintessential vision of Napa Valley. Home to dozens of wineries, it is a destination within a destination – one that welcomes both vacationing imbibers and oenophiles from around the world. But recently the amber hillsides have been laced with the ashen aftermath of wildfires that have torn through the region, leaving behind charred rubble that is fast becoming as much a part of the landscape as the neatly trussed rows of vines. It is a sign of an increasingly uncertain future for the crown jewel of California’s $43bn wine industry – one in which vintners must adapt to a changing climate and increasingly unpredictable fire seasons in order to survive. Devastating wildfires have pummeled Napa and Sonoma over the last five years, most recently this summer’s Glass fire, which torched close to 67,500 acres and destroyed 1,555 structures, including damage to numerous wineries. Annual evacuations, smoke-filled skies and the existential threat posed by higher and drier temperatures have taken a toll. This year Covid-19 has compounded the impact on tourism, restaurants and labor, with losses from the crisis expected to total close to half a billion dollars. Yet even with the risks, California’s wine industry is growing, with the market rising roughly 42% in retail value over the last decade. Napa has attracted a steady flow of newcomers who may not be willing to withstand the obstacles ahead. But many winemakers and growers, some with generational ties to the region and its industry, are counting on research, innovation and sheer determination in a race against the changing climate. “We are resilient,” says Nicole Bacigalupi who runs Bacigalupi Vineyards with her twin sister, Katey. Bacigalupi, the third generation in her family to farm the land, is finding ways to mitigate the threat of fires. Speaking under a giant oak tree, the sound of cow calls ring out from an adjacent pasture. The animals are there to help keep the vegetation down. The vineyard is also building its own fire truck, she says, adding that a friend helped protect them when the Walbridge fire, which morphed into the sprawling LNU Lightning Complex fire, got close last month. Bacigalupi admits that three terrifying fire seasons in a row have prompted tough questions about the future. “You get to a point where you are so overwhelmed that you are not sure if it’s worth fighting for,” she says. Winemaking in the era of wildfires Since 2015, California Alcohol Beverage Control has received roughly 170 new wineries registries a year – up from roughly seven registered annually in the 1990s. Some critics have called for crackdowns on the continuing expansion, and have concerns about how crowding affects safe and sustainable land use practices, especially in the face of faster-moving flames. “It has gotten to the point of absurdity now, there are so many wineries in that little valley,” says James Conaway, the author of Napa: The Story of an American Eden. “Global warming is here and the changes are not going to turn around in anybody’s lifetime,” he adds. “Napa is going to have to alter what it is doing.” He champions the idea that newcomers might move out, and make room for those most dedicated to sustainable winemaking. “Some of the people who have been there a long time are doing it – there are some really nice wines still being made in Napa,” he says. “But, it is not the nice sociable agrarian dream that it was back in the 80s.” Kirk Venge, a third-generation veteran of the wine industry who was born and raised in Napa Valley, is optimistic, and says he’s not going anywhere. “We just have to be patient and not give up,” he says with a smile during a bustling day on his namesake vineyard, Venge, housed on the Silverado Trail. He has faced the dangers of Napa Valley’s new normal up close. On this sunny afternoon in October, it would be hard to tell just how close the Glass fire came to his property, were it not for the surrounding scorched hillsides. Venge describes watching embers rain down from the sky and treetops and explode on the horizon, feeling certain he’d say goodbye to his winery that morning. “The whole valley was starting to go up,” he says, pointing at the blackened landscape. But his vineyard was spared and within hours, Venge and a small crew got back to work. “We have to keep making the wine,” he says. “People depend on us for their livelihood and we can’t just stop, we can’t run away.” Now, he’s better preparing the property by increasing its “defensible space” – areas without debris or vegetation that can serve as a natural fire break. “No more bark around the building!” he laughs. Venge is also dealing with another major challenge – the effects of persistent wildfire smoke, which is dangerous for workers to breathe and can also be absorbed by the grapes, altering the feel and flavor of the wine produced from them. A 2015 study by the Australian Wine Research Institute found that just a half-hour of smoke exposure was enough to have an impact. This year, some areas were cloaked in the grey haze for weeks on end. “Smoke taint” has affected harvests in Napa already after bad fire seasons, and this year’s was no different. Venge says he lost more than two dozen tons of grapes as a result. “We didn’t pick any pinot this year at all,” he says. “Anything picked after the Glass fire is going to have smoke taint.” To make up for the loss, Venge and his team are getting creative, replacing the unusable year with new products from the 2018 and 2019 stock, and hoping they are spared in 2021. Searching for solutions California’s wine country has always been disaster-prone, the land primed for floods, fires and earthquakes. Now, with winemakers around the world facing similar climate-related issues, the region is looking elsewhere for answers. California has already benefited from lessons learned in fire-prone areas such as Australia and Chile. Resources are being shared up and down the west coast – Oregon and Washington are dealing with the same threats – and the winegrowing associations are collaborating on a taskforce to study smoke taint. There are also robust research centers based locally, including UC Davis, where viticulturalists are working to develop more resilient vines, and Sonoma State University, where there are studies into strategies for better sustainability and risk mitigation. “The one thing we know about California farmers and ranchers – and I view the wine sector as a real leader in this – is they are all trying to look around that curve and trying to get ahead of that curve,” says Karen Ross, the secretary of the California department of food and agriculture, who also spent more than a decade serving as the president of the California Association of Winegrape Growers, and helped usher in a sustainable winegrowing program. Ross admits that the effects of the climate crisis have descended on the region sooner than anticipated. “We have always talked about these kinds of impacts as the future – but the future is now,” she says, adding that Golden State growers are relying on research and science to navigate new obstacles. “It may look different but I think it will still be an important and leading part of what California agriculture is all about.” Still, there is a long road ahead, and adjustments will have to be made quickly. Already, winemakers are predicting warming weather will mean the end for some wines in the region in the future, including favorites like pinot and chardonnay. Even cabernet, the valley’s most prized varietal, is under threat from the changing climate. Because vines can take years to cultivate, the wine business is by nature future-facing, but Dr Judith Ford, a sustainability and resilience fellow at Sonoma State University hopes the latest fire season spurs a sense of urgency. “There is a saying to never let a good crisis go to waste,” says Ford, who evaluated the wine industry’s preparedness following 2017 North Bay Fires, which hammered the region, and found that those who were directly affected were more likely to make changes. “Right after 2017 there was a real drive to do some things and then it got back to business as usual,” she says. Speaking at a wine industry conference at the beginning of this year, she was dismayed to see that only a dozen people showed up for a panel on disaster preparedness. “Our region feels like it has been hit with crisis after crisis after crisis – and that can really freeze you,” she says. “But this is escalating and it is important to keep moving forward.” Despite the obstacles, many longtime residents like Bacigalupi are determined to stick it out. She says she could see how less-dedicated hobbyists might be driven away from the crisis-stricken area, “but we will stay”, she says, resolutely. Her 95-year-old grandmother is still alive to see the legacy she built continue to grow. Bacigalupi says that is a big part of what keeps her going. “I feel strongly that you are given a gift in a generational family,” she says. “You are supposed to take the land, make it better, revive it if you need to and continue to make it healthier to pass down to the next generation.”
24||The dementia that can be curedWhen John Abraham began to lose his mind in late 2019, his family immediately feared the worst. Abraham had enjoyed robust health throughout retirement, but now at 80 he suddenly found himself struggling to finish sentences. “I would be talking to people, and all of a sudden the final word wouldn’t come to mind,” he remembers. “I assumed this was simply a feature of ageing, and I was finding ways of getting around it.” But within weeks, further erratic behaviours started to develop. Abraham’s family recall him often falling asleep mid-conversation, he would sometimes shout out bizarre comments in public, and during the night he would wake up every 15 minutes, sometimes hallucinating. To his son Steve, the diagnosis seemed inevitable, one which all families dread. “I was convinced my dad had dementia,” he says. “What I couldn’t believe was the speed at which it was all happening. It was like dementia on steroids.” Dementia is not just one disease – it has more than 200 different subtypes. Over the past decade neurologists have become increasingly interested in one particular subtype, known as autoimmune dementia. In this condition, the symptoms of memory loss and confusion are the result of brain inflammation caused by rogue antibodies – known as autoantibodies – binding to the neuronal tissue, rather than an underlying neurodegenerative disease. Crucially this means that unlike almost all other forms of dementia, in some cases it can be cured, andspecialist neurologists have become increasingly adept at both spotting and treating it. At the John Radcliffe hospital, University of Oxford, neurologist Sarosh Irani is one of the world’s leading experts in treating neurological conditions caused by a malfunctioning immune system. When Abraham was admitted under his care in early January 2020 following a seizure, Irani soon realised that the source of his problems was an autoantibody which targeted a protein in the brain named LGI1. The main telltale clue was the speed of onset, one of the key distinguishing features of autoimmune dementia. “The symptoms usually come on very quickly,” Irani says. “Over a few weeks or months, patients develop memory problems, and change their behaviour and personality. Patients with neurodegenerative forms of dementia can develop movement disorders or seizures, but this typically happens later in the illness once degeneration has set in. In autoimmune dementia, these are early problems.” Abraham underwent a treatment called plasma exchange, which aims to wash the blood of the disease-causing antibodies. The impact was almost instant. “For me it caused a complete transformation, in one or two days,” he says. “My family came in to see me in the hospital, and they just looked at each other in amazement.” Such dramatic improvements are often reported as soon as treatment – which can also include steroids and other immunotherapies – begins. “Patients can go from being in a nursing home, unable to communicate, to returning to work, being able to drive again,” says Eoin Flanagan, a neurologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, one of a handful of centres in the world along with Irani’s research group, that is actively studying autoimmune dementia. This is one reason why the condition, though rare – Mayo Clinic neurologist Sean Pittock estimates that it makes up less than 5% of all dementia cases – is so important to identify. The data available suggests that it is often missed. Among autoimmune dementia patients who were successfully treated at the Mayo Clinic between 2002 and 2009, 35% had been initially misdiagnosed with either Alzheimer’s or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. “A lot of patients over 60 are misdiagnosed,” says Flanagan. “That’s a concern because if you miss these cases, you’re committing them to a presumed neurodegenerative course when they could respond to immunotherapy, and their symptoms resolve.” But autoimmune dementia is also an illustration of a broader trend. Over the past 15 years, treatable diseases have been identified across an entire spectrum of neurological illnesses from epilepsy to multiple sclerosis and psychiatry, all caused by autoantibodies binding to different parts of the brain and central nervous system. “It’s become one of the most exciting areas of neurology,” says Irani. “There are subgroups within all these illness groups that have very treatable diseases. If you’re a dementia doctor, a small percentage of your patients will have this condition, the same if you’re a psychiatrist or a multiple sclerosis doctor. And with these patients you can actually directly treat the underlying cause by suppressing the immune system.” The rise of treatable neurology In October 2019, another patient was admitted to the John Radcliffe hospital.Pippa Carter, aged 19, had just begun an English literature degree at the University of Leeds when she noticed that her vision seemed to be strangely distorted. “I would be in lectures and I was really struggling to focus with my eyesight and with concentration in general,” she says. “I was trying to audition for a university play, and I had to stop because I couldn’t really read at all. Initially, I thought it was just nerves because I was starting a new chapter in life.” Within weeks, she found herself unable to get her words out properly, before she was taken to hospital after suffering a large seizure. Just like Abraham, it was the speed of her decline which alerted doctors to a potential autoimmune cause. “Within a week she was hallucinating, shouting things,” remembers Irani. “In her hospital room, which she was in for several weeks, she drew these bizarre childlike pictures on the wall, like the sorts of things a four-year-old would draw. It was like something was causing her to regress in her behaviour.” Carter was suffering from a neuropsychiatric syndrome caused by an autoantibody binding to the brain’s NMDA receptors, proteins which play a key role in learning and memory formation. Soon after she began treatment, first with steroids, and then an immunotherapy called rituximab, she began to improve. Now more than a year on, she is hoping to resume her university studies soon. Since 2004, scientists have been steadily discovering the autoantibodies behind these various neurological conditions, making it possible for clinics to test for them. Irani says that so far they have discovered approximately 25, with one or two new autoantibodies detected every year. “There are probably many more out there still,” he says. “We’re not at the tip of the iceberg, but I think we’re probably nowhere near the base either.” Precisely what stimulates the body to produce these autoantibodies remains unclear, but it is thought that there can be a variety of environmental triggers ranging from viral infections to tumours, along with an underlying genetic susceptibility. Due to the number of patients who can be successfully treated, specialists are looking to raise awareness of the importance of keeping an eye out for them. “It’s really a not-to-miss set of conditions,” says Irani. “Our clinic runs a diagnostics lab where we receive UK-wide samples for many of these diseases. One in 100 are positive, and these patients clearly get better with steroids and similar medications.” There are signs that the interest is growing. In November 2019, data was published from the first clinical trial looking at the effectiveness of different treatments for patients with a type of epilepsy caused by LGI1 autoantibodies. Two more trials are under way looking at new experimental therapies aimed at trying to stop the body from producing these damaging antibodies. Irani is hoping that this will yield many benefits in years to come. “There’s definitely an under-recognition of these conditions,” he says. “But as the field continues to expand, there will be more and more of these patients who get picked up. I’m sure that if you look hard enough in acute psychiatry wards, and in nursing homes, there are patients out there with treatable conditions who are being missed.”
20||Why China's dramatic economic recovery might not add upBeijing prompted envy, admiration and not a little resentment when it released data last week confirming that it was the first major economy to start growing again after the devastation caused by Covid-19 in the first half of the year. China appeared to have achieved the V-shaped recovery being chased by finance ministers around the world, after pioneering mass lockdowns to contain the virus that had taken hold in Wuhan, then shutting its borders to stop it filtering back in from abroad. With the country largely virus-free, people could return to something like normal life in offices, schools, shops and restaurants, and the government encouraged a splurge in investment across infrastructure and new manufacturing. Government data showed growth of 4.9% between July and September, slightly lower than economists had expected, but still an astonishing achievement. Analysts have warned, however, that apparent data manipulation, and the details of how China returned to growth – relying more on investment than consumption – raise questions about the strength and durability of the economic revival. Nick Marro, lead analyst on global trade at the Economist Intelligence Unit, said the figures appeared to show a shuffling of some data to boost the overall GDP growth rate for the third quarter, although he cautioned there was no direct evidence of any data fabrication. “The Chinese statistical agency is opaque about their methodology, and unless we get more details about their adjustments, we’ll never know the full story. But there does seem to be evidence of a targeted adjustment to help lift that headline figure,” he said. “The September figures were smoothed by quietly altering the historic basis of comparison; basically, some of the numbers from September 2019 were re-apportioned into October of that year, in order to lower the comparison base. That led to a statistical distortion where the September 2020 growth figures might’ve been artificially inflated.” The difference in growth rate was not huge, Marro said, but the manipulation suggested the economy might not be as strong as Beijing would have liked people to think. “The bigger implication is that the investment landscape might be more fragile than the official numbers suggest heading into the last quarter of 2020. That’s perhaps the bigger risk for companies to be aware of.” Leland Miller, chief executive of the China Beige Book consultancy, which tracks the Chinese economy with data it collects itself in addition to government statistics, flagged up what he considered a far more disturbing alteration in the data. China recorded growth of 0.8% in fixed-asset investment for the first three quarters of the year, compared with 2019, but the absolute figures for the same period showed a drop of several trillion yuan. “This is not toying at the margin. This is making 2.5 trillion yuan in fixed asset investment disappear,” he said. The only explanation given by Chinese authorities for the discrepancy was that the data had been adjusted to reflect “results of the fourth national economic census, statistical law enforcement and regulation of statistical programmes”, so economists have no way to assess how accurate the revisions are or compare them to other data. If fixed-asset investment had actually fallen, as the raw data suggested, while consumption was also down, overall GDP growth could be much lower than the headline figure, Miller said. “There are very big lessons here, because people think that China’s back. They’ve done a pretty good job but ... they’re not anywhere near being back to where they were before.” Meanwhile the pandemic has pushed many western companies to reconsider their dependence on Chinese factories. And while Beijing has for several years called for a “rebalancing” of the economy to boost domestic consumption, it has struggled to make it a reality. Other long-term challenges including debt and an ageing population have been overshadowed by coronavirus temporarily, but remain no less problematic. “Even if growth leaps from a low base next year there are still underlying structural problems,” said George Magnus, former chief economist at UBS, and an associate at the China Centre, Oxford University. “These include growing debt, demographics, poor productivity, a much more hostile external environment for trade, commerce and investment. All of these things are going to weigh on China’s potential for expansion and development.”
3||Dread of history repeating itself grows in Italian town as infections rise againThe well-tended graves are neatly lined up one after the other, each with a photo of the dead. The youngest was in his mid-30s, the rest from their 40s to their 90s. What distinguishes the plot from others in Bergamo’s Monumental cemetery is that they all died between March and May. “The dead arrived in force – 50 or 60 a day – they didn’t stop coming for two months,” a cemetery manager, who asked not to be named, told the Observer. “It was horrendous. And now infections are rising again. Young people are infecting older people, and so soon the dead will start arriving again.” When the pandemic struck Bergamo, mortuaries and cemeteries quickly filled up. Haunting images of army trucks carrying coffins away from the same cemetery to be buried or cremated elsewhere in March, when the northern Italian province was at the centre of the unfolding pandemic and funeral services struggled to cope, gave a hint to the rest of the world of what was to come. Now, after Italy took a dramatic turn for the worse following months of relative calm, nowhere is the fear of history repeating itself more palpable than in Bergamo. Covid-19 is estimated to have killed more than 7,000 across the province during the first wave. Speak to Bergamo residents, and everybody knows somebody who either died or was infected. This wasn’t so much the case beyond the surrounding Lombardy region, which accounts for the lion’s share of Italy’s almost 37,000 coronavirus deaths, because the tough two-month national lockdown shielded the south from the ravages of the first wave. “I don’t think people really understood what happened here,” said Luca Remondini, the owner of i-Lounge bar. “My aunt died – she was in her late 60s but otherwise healthy – and my mum, who is recovering from cancer, was infected but survived. Many of my customers became infected or lost loved ones.” Nationally cases rose by 19,644 on Saturday, of which 4,956 were in Lombardy, followed by Veneto, Campania and Lazio. The economic hub of Milan, about 30 miles from Bergamo, is Lombardy’s new epicentre, with caseloads tripling over the past week. Bergamo and other provinces in Lombardy that were hit early on in the pandemic, including Lodi, where Italy’s first locally transmitted case was detected in February, are recording among the lowest daily rates in the region. But knowing how quickly the tide can change, people in Bergamo are absorbing news from Milan with a chilling sense of deja vu – overstretched hospitals, health workers getting sick, outbreaks in care homes. And deaths creeping up. “We’re afraid the nightmare will return,” added Remondini. “Things are calm right now, but we are so close to Milan, and the nearby regions of Piedmont and Liguria are not in great shape either.” Lombardy was the first of Italy’s 20 regions to impose an 11pm to 5am curfew, beginning on 22 October, after scientists warned that without the measure, intensive care admissions would increase sixfold by the end of the month and general hospital admissions would quadruple. Temporary hospitals set up in conference centres during the first wave have reopened in Milan and Bergamo, initially providing Lombardy with an additional 201 intensive care beds. Campania, in the south, and Lazio, the region surrounding Rome, imposed a similar curfew from Friday night amid rapidly increasing infections and hospital admissions. Other regions have introduced a variety of targeted restrictions while the government is mulling tighter national measures. “The second wave is different from the first,” said Giorgio Gori, the mayor of Bergamo. “In March it was concentrated in the north, now it’s everywhere. For some people it’s the first real experience of the pandemic, so they might live the same experience we lived.” A big concern is the ability of hospitals in poorer southern regions, where healthcare cuts have been deep in recent years, to cope. “Lombardy hospitals are superior to those in other regions, so if the same phenomenon happens in Campania, Puglia or Calabria, it would be much worse,” said Gori. However, despite Lombardy’s wealth and expertise, medics say nothing has been done to better prepare hospitals for the expected autumn resurgence. In a recent letter to regional authorities signed by more than 600 health workers, they claimed the same mistakes were being made as in March. “For example, we should have had a plan right from the beginning that separated Covid patients from non-Covid,” said Pietro Brambillasca, an anaesthetist at Bergamo’s Papa Giovanni XXII hospital. “That’s what they did in China, they built Covid hospitals. We should have done the same, and be ready by now to treat all Covid patients outside of main structures to be able to control the contagion within them while being able to treat other illnesses.” One explanation for the relative calm in Bergamo province is that a significant proportion of the population may have built up immunity. “Thirty per cent have been exposed to the virus, either they were symptomatic or asymptomatic,” said Gori. “Together with our heightened awareness, maybe this is why we are better protected than others right now.” Gori and other leaders across Italy have renewed their appeals to people to stick to basic safety rules – wear a mask, maintain distance and frequently wash hands – while encouraging them to stay home as much as possible. “In a few days the government will probably introduce new restrictions,” he said. “But we can’t wait for things to happen, we need to plan ahead.” The sound of ambulance sirens still torments residents of Bergamo province and other badly affected areas. “You would hear 10 ambulances an hour,” said Diego Federici, who is from the town of Martinengo and lost his parents to Covid-19 within days of each other. “You don’t hear as many any more, but the sound is returning, it’s horrible.” Federici is sceptical of Italy’s capacity to face a second wave. “I worry it will end in another massacre, mostly because of ignorance,” he said. Only a few days ago, a man from Milan told him “the virus doesn’t exist”. “I told him I watched my mum struggling to breathe. Only then did he seem to change his mind,” he added. “There are so many virus deniers, only getting their information from social media. I implore them to not be stupid – I wouldn’t wish what happened to us on anyone.”
23||How a canny Kilmarnock grocer took whisky from the glens to the worldJohnnie Walker has come a long way. Two centuries ago bottles of the blended whisky were confined to the shelves of John Walker’s modest grocery store in the little town of Kilmarnock in west Scotland. Today it is the planet’s best selling scotch and is sold in bottles by the billions. It is an extraordinary success story – and it was achieved by a small family firm whose members were notable because they were “stubborn, thrawn and as hard as nails”, according to a newly published study of the Johnnie Walker blend. Written by Nick Morgan, A Long Stride, published by Canongate, reveals the extraordinary pains the Walker family went to in order to ensure bottles of their brand, above all other whiskies, was the one that sold in the greatest numbers. As family diaries and papers reveal, it was a relentless effort to promote and advertise their product and to make technological improvements to its distillation to ensure previous, wildly inconsistent levels of taste and quality were subdued. In this way, the Walker family dragged Scotch “kicking and screaming from illicit bothies in sequestered glens onto the world stage”, says Morgan. Crucially the story reveals how scotch whisky become Scotland’s gift to the world. “And it is a gift that keeps on giving to a remarkable degree today,” adds Morgan, a former historian and head of outreach for Diageo, the current owners of Johnnie Walker. The Walkers took a cottage industry, made massive improvements in its manufacture, launched national promotions and laid the foundations for an industry that today has a massive impact on the Scottish economy. In 2018, the nation’s whisky industry sold the equivalent of more than a billion bottles of scotch – vastly more spirit than is exported by any other nation on Earth. And while Johnnie Walker sells the most, many other leading blends also sell vast quantities abroad. These include Ballantine’s, Chivas Regal, Grant’s, Dewar’s and several other hugely popular whiskies that are drunk in bars from Hong Kong to Manhattan and from Rome to Buenos Aires. This output is now worth £4.7bn a year, representing 70% of Scotland’s food and drink exports and 21% of the United Kingdom’s. (Scotland’s second largest food and drink export is seafood – in particular salmon – and earns about £950 million a year.) Yet the beginnings of the Johnnie Walker enterprise were modest and can be traced to John Walker’s decision to sell the family farm after the death of his father and to set up a shop in Kilmarnock in 1820 to sell tea, sugar, soap and, of course, whisky which he would have blended himself from casks of malt and grain whisky. Most grocery businesses went bust within a couple of years in those days, says Morgan, so Walker – who appears to have led a life of studied reticence – did well merely to thrive as a shopkeeper. One myth even suggests he was a teetotaller. Morgan is unimpressed. “I have found absolutely no evidence for this, and given he ran a thriving grocery business which specialised in blended whisky and other wines and spirits, I am pretty sure he would have taken a dram himself.” Walker died in 1857 and left it to his eldest son Alexander to promote the family business which he did with remarkable, focused energy. “He was driven by an urge to make constant improvements, to make his blends better and better. He also realised he could only do so much in west Scotland to sell whisky. By contrast, London was a shop window for the world. Fashions were made here, he realised.” In London, Alexander Walker launched advertising campaigns and promoted his whisky at international trade fairs, while constantly driving for improvements to his distilleries. And by the 1880s and 1890s, Walker had succeeded in making whisky the most fashionable drink of the day, with the Johnnie Walker blend in the vanguard. In some ways, he was lucky. Brandy had until then had been a hugely popular drink but in the wake of the grapevine pest phylloxera’s arrival in France in the late 19th century, the country’s vineyards were devastated, triggering a collapse in the production of quality French brandy. Scotch filled the void very neatly. On the other hand, there were hard times which the Scotch market managed to survive, from the Boer war to the first world war to the Great Depression. “Johnnie Walker went up and down every time but it always came back stronger. It has been a remarkably resilient brand, if nothing else,” says Morgan. Yet the whisky we drink today is not quite the one that the Walkers would have perfected, he reveals. “Today’s whiskies, and not just the Johnnie Walker blends, are slightly lighter, fresher, and fruitier than they would have been in the 19th century. “We don’t have a bottle of 19th-century whisky to study to prove this point but we know scotch was drunk differently then. It was usually combined with lemon and sugar to make toddies and would have had to have been heavier and oilier for its taste to survive the mixing.” Habits changed, however, and in late Victorian and Edwardian times, soda became popular and whiskies became lighter in responses to being mixed with it. “It was a little thing but the soda syphon had a big impact on whisky,” says Morgan.
3||Tier 2 lockdown rules in England: latest Covid restrictions explainedThe government has announced that in England, areas deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. Places in tier 2 include London, parts of Essex, Elmbridge in Surrey, Barrow-in-Furness, York, North East Derbyshire, Erewash in Derbyshire, Chesterfield, Cheshire West and Chester, Cheshire East, and Warrington. Leicester, Nottingham, the West Midlands and Tees Valley are also in tier 2. The restrictions also cover West Yorkshire including Leeds, Bradford, Kirklees, Calderdale and Wakefield, and the north-east including Newcastle, North and South Tyneside, Gateshead, Sunderland, Durham and Northumberland. Coventry, Stoke and Slough moved into tier 2 restrictions on Saturday 24 October. These local restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart (or 1 metre with a face covering or other precautions). For areas in tier 2, the additional Covid restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody outside their household or support bubble in any indoor setting. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply for socialising outdoors, for instance in a garden or public space like a park or beach. Businesses and venues can continue to operate, but pubs and restaurants must ensure that customers consume food and drink only while seated, and close between 10pm and 5am. Takeaway food can continue to be sold after 10pm if ordered online or by phone. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open, but people may not mingle in groups of more than six. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the numbers attending (15 and 30 respectively). Exercise classes and organised sport can continue to take place outdoors but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with those they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travel is permitted to amenities that are open, for work or to access education, but people are advised to reduce the number of journeys where possible. If you are living in an area that is in tier 2, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in “Local Covid alert – high”. You can also check your area’s alert level by using the government’s postcode-checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
16||The moment that Daddy became ‘Sheemiss’It started last week, amid gales of laughter. ‘Sheemiss!’ my son cried from the stairs. I drew nearer to find my son pointing at me as he said one more time; ‘Sheeeeeemisssss’. He was calling me by my first name, in an adorably sincere little act of rebellion that reduced him to dribbling, full-bellied hysterics. I laughed along, struck by the effect that this, the smallest possible act of defiance, was having on the 3ft-tall comic in front of me. The idea that the man he calls ‘Daddy’ might also be Séamas had broken him so entirely that it broke me, too. At the very least ‘Sheemiss’ is a pretty good attempt at the name by my son, who may know me very well, but is also an English person. I’ve had Same Ass, See-Ya-Mass and Seems. After six years, a guy I played football with admitted he’d been calling me ‘Shameless’ all that time. Worst – or best – of all, however, was the driving instructor who spent the entire six months of our acquaintance referring to me as Semen. But I digress. The root of my son’s joke is that it’s somehow ridiculous for a child to call a parent their own name. I say ‘somehow ridiculous’ when it is, in fact, plainly ridiculous. No matter how you rationalise it, any other way of thinking is just bizarre. Think of someone who addresses their parents by their first name and tell me you wouldn’t go to great lengths to avoid them at a wedding. It started me thinking what I’d actually like to be called, since my wife chose this moment to tell me that she expects ‘Daddy’ will be retired eventually. She’s from Dublin and has called her parents Mum and Dad since she was about seven. I, on the other hand, am from Derry, where we obey different rules, which she claims are confusing. It’s simple really. For as long as you live, your parents are Daddy and Mammy when spoken to directly, or referred to in conversation with your family. They’re ‘me ma’ and ‘me da’ when speaking to Irish people and then ‘mum and dad’ when speaking to those further afield. Moreover, I can comfortably refer to my dad as ‘my dad’ in these columns, because that’s his job title, but his name is Daddy, and addressing him in person as Dad would not just be unusual, but a near psychotic breach of family protocol and basic human decency. I mean, what’s so hard to understand? I suppose the issue is that, in England, ‘Daddy’ is only used by a) small children b) the very posh, or c) those deploying its numerous kinky uses that I won’t be exploring here. I may call my father Daddy and exhibit an unflappable air of faultless cool, but my son is from London and the idea of a grown Londoner calling his father Daddy brings to mind an adult baby, complete with silk bonnet and giant lollipop. It’s one rule for me and quite another for him. Given the choice, maybe Sheemisss would be best, after all. Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeats
17||Asylum seekers sue UK over unlawful detentionA group of asylum seekers, including victims of torture, who were illegally detained in the UK are suing the Home Office. More than 20 people have launched a claim for compensation, which lawyers believe could be owed to thousands held unlawfully between January 2014 and March 2017, a time when concerns about the government’s “hostile environment” policy towards migrants were paramount. The claimants were arrested and detained by the UK Border Force under Home Office guidance and the Dublin III regulation, which states that refugees must claim asylum in the first EU country in which they arrive. The regulation permitted the detention of asylum seekers before they were returned to the country of their arrival in Europe – but only if there was a significant risk of them absconding and if it was proportionate. In November 2019 the supreme court found that the Home Office policy was unlawful and ruled that the claimants were entitled to substantial damages. Among the claimants is a Sudanese national arrested and tortured in Sudan on suspicion of being loyal to an opposition political party. Another is an Iranian national arrested and tortured in an Iranian prison for his political activities. “Many of our clients are vulnerable individuals who were forced to flee their countries not out of choice, but due to the most horrific experiences which most of us in the UK will fortunately never witness, let alone experience,” said Waleed Sheikh, a solicitor at the law firm Leigh Day, who is representing the claimants. “Having made the brave and perilous journey from across the world, in the hope of finding safety and a secure future in a free country, they were instead put into detention centres.” He said it was likely that thousands of other asylum seekers in Britain are also entitled to make a claim. Sheikh added: “But it is difficult to trace them. Some are now abroad and many do not speak English. And there is no obligation for the Home Office to contact those who were held illegally.” It is estimated that the department may have to pay £8,000-£10,000 for each month a claimant was held. Other factors, such as the detention’s contribution to any health problems, could increase the payouts. A Home Office spokeswoman said: “The individuals in question were only detained to facilitate removal to a safe European country. We took immediate corrective action in March 2017 to ensure that we remain able to detain those in a similar position, who we determine are at risk of absconding.” The spokeswoman stressed that the department was committed to fixing a “broken asylum system, to make it firm and fair”. But Sheikh questioned this commitment. “The hostile environment has not just been tolerated but nurtured and championed by successive home secretaries. That it should then foster a culture within the Home Office of dehumanising asylum seekers, of detaining almost by default and without proper checks, should surprise no one.”
22||The week in TV: Roadkill; DNA; The Same Sky; Out of Her Mind and moreRoadkill (BBC One) | iPlayer DNA (BBC Four) | iPlayer The Same Sky (More4) | All 4 Out of Her Mind (BBC Two) | iPlayer Count Basie: Through His Own Eyes (BBC Four) | iPlayer At least Roadkill isn’t as bad as Collateral, David Hare’s last big-budget BBC outing. It doesn’t water-cannon us with message – asylum seekers good, security services bad – or strain so hard to avoid cliched cops that it creates an unbelievable one. And it’s blessed with Hugh Laurie and Helen McCrory, who almost redeem it from itself. And it doesn’t, for once, wear its Tory-hating credentials on its ragged academic sleeve; indeed, Hare has said that he tried, for once, to get to grips with the mindset of a “good” or at least maverick Tory. And Laurie plays Peter Laurence MP with a superb credibility: a corrupt Tory MP, yes, with secret plans to carve up the NHS to benefit American privatisation, but a charmer of a man, too, with the common touch and a genuine zeal to make a difference for the better, particularly in prisons, against the stultifying hand of the civil service. Because of this, the promise of a crusading reformist PM in the making, with a secret (and secretly charming) daughter in one of his own prisons, I could forgive the tick-boxing – the spiky journo, the corrupt prison private-security firm, the haughty plotting between Tory chairman and arms-dealer cartoon villain. But I can’t forgive the many plot impossibilities. Laurence’s own defence lawyer, having won a famous case, getting an anonymous call saying “look into him” and somehow agreeing. The driver to the justice secretary, presumably having signed something or other, being asked who his mistress was and just blurting it out. Laurence himself saying with wicked glee, early on after a prison riot: “Let’s hope there are injuries. Better still, fatalities”, which, after you’ve watched the whole, sits entirely against his character. Collateral was, oddly enough, Hare’s first-ever TV serial after a life of rightly garlanded plays and screenplays. And I’m sadly reminded of little so much as the time Dorothy Parker and pal Robert Benchley decamped from New York to California, to write B-movie plots under that golden sun and make some easy money: surely such talents, such wits, could outwrite formulaic by-numbers stuff? After a slew of rejections and flops, they fled back to the rain and Parker ruefully concluded: “Seems shit has its own integrity.” DNA, in Danish, French and Polish with subtitles, is, I’m convinced, our new The Bridge for double-bill Saturday-night autumn binges. It’s not as if we’ve anywhere else to go, but, quite apart from that, it’s every bit as enthralling as the Saga Norén chiller – indeed, this eight-parter is from the imaginarium of the co-creator of The Killing, Torleif Hoppe. A happy Copenhagen cop gets a ferry, in a rancid storm, to Poland, with his infant daughter, to chase a child abductor. Leaves the pram on deck to be, briefly, seasick. Guess what? Cut five years forward: a once-happy Copenhagen cop chances on a crucial flaw in the Danish DNA database of offenders and curdled hope flutters into life. Four episodes in, I too am truly, appallingly, gripped by hope, and it’s also got Charlotte Rampling as the incroyably chic older French investigator. Barely less captivating is The Same Sky, a Paula Milne creation for German TV, which rather disappeared into the maw of Netflix three years ago. Happily resurrected by C4’s sainted Walter Presents strand, it’s a genuinely exciting 1974 true tale, of a young East German “Romeo agent” sent west to honeytrap and pillow-talk an ageing single mother working for a western listening post atop Teufelsberg (Devil’s Mountain) in Berlin. Talking of Saga, this also has Sofia Helin as you’ve never seen her before: dowdy, lonely, old before her time, vulnerable. It’s hooksomely, toothsomely watchable: how swiftly recent history can become moral anthropology within a generation or so. I was mystified by the new Sara Pascoe thing, Out of Her Mind, and can only conclude that I am of the wrong gender or cultural sensibility to review it. Relentlessly, scattily modernist, with tricks such as meta-references to its own sitcom-ness, the breaking of the fourth wall, the “real” Sara Pascoe commenting on the “fictional” Sara’s disaster of a life, it also felt very dated, just not in a good way. Fictional Sara, who couldn’t seem to decide whether she was bitterly life-cynical about being dumped 15 years ago or childishly, naively, irritatingly self-obsessed and rude, had to cope with the twin outrages of her sister becoming engaged and her best friend being pregnant, apparently events on some manner of end-of-days scale. Cue some stock catty rudeness about rings, dresses, weight, pinkness. The real Sara, meanwhile, got on with making some decent points, albeit while rollerskating in a pink leotard, about, say, how advertising makes women feel inferior in order to sell them stuff or how fairytales offer girls false stereotypes, yet both points agreed on, surely, in the last decades of the last century? The show is almost saved by Juliet Stevenson as the mother, utterly lacking in self-awareness: indeed, the entire supporting cast are strong, though I could have done with more Cash Holland. Yet such things have been done better, in the last couple of years alone, by This Way Up, Catastrophe, I May Destroy You, even Motherland… hence my mystification, because so often Pascoe, a wise author in her own right, is the wittiest thing going on any panel show. Some rather marvellous insights into the life of Billy James “Count” Basie snuck unheralded on to our screens, courtesy of a remarkable little film, Through His Own Eyes, from Jeremy Marre. It told the story of the boy from Red Bank, New Jersey, who went on to become one of the famous people on the planet, yet who managed to keep his private life remarkably unrevealed. With grand access to interviewees and forgotten footage, it related seamlessly how the lad who stood in at 14 for an absent cinema pianist would achieve greatness. Aided only by a quasi-magical gift of understanding every wrinkle and flounce and offbeat and sway of what “swing” is – and it must help, too, when you have Lester “Prez” Young on tenor sax and Quincy Jones as your band arranger – he went on to become the first musician on the moon (Buzz Aldrin took the Basie/Sinatra/Jones ’64 recording of Fly Me to the Moon with him on tape). Unshowy and even-handed, this also related how much he loved his daughter, Diane, born with cerebral palsy; yet she, hardly able to walk, able to speak, would become something of a muse to him. He wrote endless loving letters to her, talking about music, places, weather, blues – and 50 years on the road, on a hired Greyhound bus with the band, 48 weeks a year, that’s a shedload of letters. We heard how deeply he loved his wife, Catherine, yet how he was in the doghouse for much of his early life thanks to on-the-road, um, affiliations. Above all, we got a measure of the man, a bugger for gambling and the ladies yet unfailingly unpompous, controlling the band with a whip hand, yet a subtle and steady one, immensely popular with all his musicians to the end. I could have watched eight hours of this.
3||Tier 3 lockdown rules in England: latest coronavirus restrictions explainedThe government has announced that areas in England deemed to require additional precautionary measures against the spread of coronavirus will be placed in one of three tiers of restrictions. These go from tier 1, where the risk of coronavirus spread is described as medium, to tier 3, where the risk is described as very high. South Yorkshire, Greater Manchester, Lancashire and Liverpool City Region including Knowsley, Wirral and St Helens are all at the highest level of restrictions. These local lockdown restrictions are on top of the general advice and guidance given in England on how to protect yourself against contracting the virus – frequent washing of hands, the use of face coverings on public transport and within enclosed spaces, and social distancing by staying at least 2 metres apart. For areas in tier 3, the additional restrictions mean: People are prohibited from socialising with anybody they do not live with, or have not formed a support bubble with, in any indoor setting, private garden or at most outdoor hospitality venues and ticketed events. Tradespeople can continue to go into a household for work. The rule of six continues to apply to outdoor public spaces, such as parks, beaches, public gardens or sports venues. Pubs and bars are only permitted to remain open to operate as restaurants, in which case alcohol can only be served as part of a substantial meal. Schools and universities remain open. Places of worship remain open but household mixing is not permitted. Weddings and funerals can go ahead with restrictions on the number of people attending (15 and 30 respectively), but wedding receptions are not allowed. The rules for exercise classes and organised sport are the same as in tier 2. They can continue to take place outdoors, but will only be permitted indoors if it is possible for people to avoid mixing with others they do not live with (or share a support bubble with), or for youth or disability sport. Travelling outside, or entering, a tier 3 area should be avoided unless for work, education or youth services, to meet caring responsibilities, or if travelling through the area as part of a longer journey. Residents of a tier 3 area should avoid staying overnight in another part of the UK, while people who live in a tier 1 or tier 2 area should avoid staying overnight in a tier 3 area. If you are living in an area that is in tier 3, the NHS Covid-19 app will say that you are in Local Covid Alert – Very High. You can also check which level your area is rated at using the government’s own postcode checking service. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.
15||Sacha Baron Cohen: After Borat, what’s left for the savage satirist?Thirteen years ago Sacha Baron Cohen announced that he was retiring the character of Borat Sagdiyev, the Kazakh journalist in the ill-fitting grey suit and Saddam moustache. It was a logical step in what is, as Baron Cohen has called it, a “self-defeating” line of work. Borat’s satirical power was dependent on being unknown. But the global success of the 2006 mockumentary feature film Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan, for which Baron Cohen won a Golden Globe, rather blew the fake Kazakh’s cover. Hence his discontinuation. Unlike most celebrity retirements, this one appeared to be permanent. And aside from a brief appearance a couple of years back on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Borat was as good as buried. Now, however, he’s back in Borat Subsequent Moviefilm: Delivery of Prodigious Bribe to American Regime for Make Benefit Once Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan. Borat, his fans will be relieved to know, hasn’t changed much, but the world has. In 2006, when the first film came out, George W Bush was president, Iraq was in flames and North Korea claimed to have conducted its first nuclear test. No garden party but, looking back, it seems almost a golden era of sanity. The thought that Donald Trump would become president would have seemed only slightly less ridiculous than Borat ending up in the White House. Like Shakespeare’s proverbial coward, satire has died many times, but seldom has reality made it look quite so redundant as over the past four years. Baron Cohen is keenly aware of the shift in the political culture. “In 2005,” he recently said, “you needed a character like Borat, who was misogynist, racist, antisemitic to get people to reveal their inner prejudices. Now those inner prejudices are overt. Racists are proud of being racists.” They have been empowered, he explained, by a president who is “an overt racist, and overt fascist”. That president, who walked away from a TV interview with Baron Cohen’s Ali G character after less than a minute in 2003, is no fan. “I don’t find him funny,” Trump said last week. “To me, he’s a creep.” Trump’s America, as it appears in the film, is a familiar one from the Louis Theroux genre of documentary-making, richly peopled with faultlessly polite freaks and likeable rednecks with unpalatable opinions. If making fun of conspiracy theorists and antisemites doesn’t break any new ground, it’s not going to upset anyone, except for conspiracy theorists and antisemites. The watching world, however, has become much more ready to take offence and Baron Cohen’s brand of humour is not ideally suited to modern woke sensibilities. He is from the generation of comedians, including Steve Coogan and Ricky Gervais, who invented winningly grotesque characters to ventriloquise the unsayable. By this method, a shocking racist comment could be transformed into a stinging comment on racism. Some critics saw it as a dishonest transgression, arguing that Ali G, the wannabe black character who brought Baron Cohen’s initial fame, was little more than a postmodern version of The Black and White Minstrel Show. That seems a rather crude reading, but it’s hard to imagine that in an era of righteous cancellation, in which cultural appropriation is a cardinal sin, Baron Cohen would “get away with it” today. That Borat is from Kazakhstan, a country with a tiny expat community in the UK and about which censorious Generation Z’ers know very little, has afforded Baron Cohen some protection from the Twitter mobs. But cracks about the Kazakhs’ backwardness, sexism, homophobia and antisemitism hark back to a more robust understanding of irony. Younger audiences may not bother with any layered interpretations and just decide that it’s racist. There is no doubt that the Kazakhstan government was not amused. It threatened him with legal action in 2005 and removed his Kazakhstan-registered website. In the character of Borat, Baron Cohen replied: “I’d like to state that I have no connection with Mr Cohen and fully support my government decision to sue this Jew.” In any case, this is almost certainly Borat’s last outing. Baron Cohen has plenty of other projects to keep him occupied. The signs are that he is expanding into drama, after sporadic ventures in the past, including Tim Burton’s Sweeney Todd and Tom Hooper’s Les Misérables. While Borat Subsequent Moviefilm is released on Amazon Prime, over on Netflix the big hit of the moment is Aaron Sorkin’s The Trial of the Chicago 7. It’s about the court case involving leading figures of the counterculture arrested after protests at the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago. Baron Cohen is quite brilliant as Abbie Hoffman, an early advocate of flower power. Aware that Hoffman’s provocative style was heavily influenced by Lenny Bruce, Baron Cohen portrays him as a kind of natural standup comedian. Having played the surrealist prankster and buffoon throughout the trial, Hoffman is called on to make a rousing speech on the witness stand. Baron Cohen has to prove his acting chops in this big climactic scene. Sorkin has said that the sense of anticipation around the set before the Londoner filmed the scene reminded him of when Jack Nicholson performed his famous courtroom scene in A Few Good Men. “Everyone wanted to watch. One hundred and twenty extras didn’t care that the camera wasn’t on them, they stayed to watch.” And, despite wrestling with a tricky Boston accent, Baron Cohen nails it. Nor is it the only speech that has brought him attention in recent times. Upset by the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017, he offered his services to the Anti-Defamation League, whose director, Jonathan Greenblatt, asked him to give the keynote speech at last year’s ADL summit. Though wary of celebrities who use their fame to promote their political views, Baron Cohen delivered what he has said was his first “major speech in my own voice”. One of his main targets was Facebook. Had the social media platform been around in the 1930s, he said, “it would have allowed Hitler to post 30-second ads on his ‘solution’ to the ‘Jewish problem’”. The speech led to the Stop Hate for Profit campaign that caused hundreds of companies to temporarily remove their advertising from Facebook. It was a high-profile stance for a star who, when not in character, likes to stay out of the public spotlight. The reticence is a mixture of natural shyness and professional pragmatism – the more he’s seen as himself, the less, he thinks, he’ll be believed as someone else. This reservation has left a slight air of mystery around Baron Cohen. His biography has a credible spine but is lacking in animating flesh. Brought up in Hampstead Garden Suburb by Jewish parents, a dance teacher mother and a journalist father who went into menswear, he attended the Haberdashers’ Aske’s boys’ public school. At Cambridge, where he studied history, he joined the Footlights and appeared in Fiddler on the Roof. Legend has it that on leaving Christ’s College he gave himself five years to make it as a comedian. After a brief stint as a male catalogue model, he began performing at a comedy club in Hampstead, and worked for a couple of small satellite channels. At one of them he created a spoof character based on the hip-hop DJ Tim Westwood, the bishop’s son who speaks like he’s down wiv ver kidz. From there Ali G was born and, as the five-year deadline was closing in, he grasped his opportunity on Channel 4’s The 11 O’Clock Show in 1998. The rest is hysterics. Now ensconced in Los Angeles, Baron Cohen forms half of that most rare of Hollywood entities – a long-lasting joint-celebrity marriage – with the Australian actress Isla Fisher. They have three children. Baron Cohen has been mining excruciating moments of comedy gold for over 20 years. There is another collector’s item in the latest film featuring Rudy Giuliani and Borat dressed as a woman, offering the Trump adviser and former New York mayor anal sex. There are only so many times that he can be the subject of a sentence like the last one. Next year he turns 50. Enjoy him while you can.
11||Legal loophole allows children to get free vape samplesHealth campaigners have expressed alarm after it emerged that a loophole in the law means it is legal for marketing companies to hand out vapes to children for free. British American Tobacco (BAT) is investigating after a 17-year-old was offered a free sample of the company’s Vype brand. The minor was not told that the product contained nicotine and was not asked for proof of age. Vape companies regularly distribute free samples to adults using paid, third-party promotional companies operating in city centres and at festivals and transport hubs. The promotional teams are young, personable and sport the livery of the vape brand they represent. Some use additional free offers – such as soft drinks – to engage with passersby. Action on Smoking and Health (Ash) said teams working for Vype had been recently promoting the brand in Brighton, Bristol and Bath, where a 17-year-old girl working on a market stall was approached and offered a free sample, in return for her email address and with no attempt to establish her age. “The hypocrisy of BAT is staggering,” said Deborah Arnott, chief executive of Ash. “The company’s website piously states: ‘It’s essential that any tobacco or nicotine products are not marketed to youth. Given the nature of our products, we take seriously our commitment to market them responsibly and only to adults.’ “How can they say that doling freebies out like sweets to children counts as responsible marketing?” When it was alerted to claims that minors were being offered free vapes, Ash approached National Trading Standards and was shocked to learn that a loophole in the law means it is not illegal to hand out free e-cigarettes to children. This is because e-cigarettes are not covered by the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act “prohibition of free distribution” rules as they are not considered a tobacco product. And Ash said that the wording of the relevant sections of the Tobacco and Related Products regulations pertaining to e-cigarettes was too vague when it came to prohibiting the distribution of free products to minors. Pushing e-cigarettes on young people is a concern for health experts, who fear that the UK will go the way of the US, where vaping’s popularity among teenagers has reached epidemic proportions. In 2019, a quarter of high-school students in the US reported using electronic nicotine products within the past 30 days and 11.7% reported daily use. But youth takeup in the UK has been much slower. Regular use among teenagers doubled from 2.4% in 2015 to 4.9% last year. “A review of the regulations is required by law and is expected to be launched imminently,” Arnott said. “We have written to the public health minister to make her aware of this gaping hole in the government’s e-cigarette regulations and to urge her to use the review to plug this legal loophole. This is yet another example of Big Tobacco saying one thing and doing another, living up to the letter of the law but not the spirit.”,” Arnott said. BAT said: “We take our responsibility to prevent underage access to vaping products extremely seriously and are clear that they are intended for adult smokers and nicotine users only. “Our one-to-one consumer engagement activities in the UK market are conducted by a third-party supplier who has been extensively trained to ensure that the only people who are engaged are over 18 years old, are an existing smoker, and are informed that the product contains nicotine. We are speaking to our third-party supplier about this alleged incident.”
3||Australia demands answers after women taken from Qatar Airways flight and strip-searchedThe Australian government has registered “serious concerns” with Qatari authorities after women on a flight from Doha to Sydney were ordered to disembark the plane and subjected to a strip search and a medical examination. Flight QR908 to Sydney was due to leave Hamad International airport at Doha at 8.30 on Friday 2 October, but was delayed for four hours, apparently after a newborn infant was found dead in the airport. Among the 34 passengers on board was Dr Wolfgang Babeck, who was returning to Australia after spending a month in Germany with his ailing father. Babeck told Guardian Australia that, after about three hours of waiting on board the plane, the airline requested that all the women on board disembark. They returned some time later, and “most of them were very upset”, he said. “At least one of them was crying, they were discussing what had happened and saying that it was unacceptable and disgusting.” The plane was then allowed to take off. Babeck said he then spoke to some of the female passengers, who said they had been taken off the plane and led into a non-public area of the airport and subject to a medical examination. “They were taken by security personnel into the cellar, not knowing what was going on,” he said. “And then they were presented to a female doctor and they were basically strip searched and had to take everything downwards off, all their clothes, even their underwear. “And then the doctor would try to feel in the uterus and stomach area or lower abdomen to see whether they may have given birth recently. “Someone had been told that a baby had been found in the toilet and they were trying to find out who the mother was.” Channel Seven, which first reported the story on Sunday, said the inspections involved 13 Australian women, and took place in an ambulance on the runway. A spokesperson for the Australian department of foreign affairs and trade told Guardian Australia earlier the department was “aware of concerning reports regarding the treatment, in Qatar, of passengers on a Qatar Airways flight to Sydney”. “DFAT is seeking further information from the Qatari authorities and Qatar Airways.” On Sunday night an updated statement from the department said the Australian government had “formally registered our serious concerns regarding the incident with Qatari authorities and have been assured that detailed and transparent information on the event will be provided soon”. Qatar Airways told Guardian Australia it had not been contacted by any of the passengers on the flight and said it could not comment. “We appreciate the concerns and distress expressed to you by the Australian passengers who you have spoken to, and will be investigating these matters with the relevant authorities and officials,” a spokesperson said.
25||Would you trust your teenager with an online bank account?Cash is far from king for teenagers. And as society moves away from paper and coins, banks and tech companies are ramping up the competition to get children aged between 13 and 17 to manage their spending online. Last week saw the launch of an account aimed at teenagers from gohenry, a pre-paid card provider that lets kids manage their money within controls set by parents. The online account tells parents when, where and how much their offspring are spending, and sets tasks to earn pocket money. It’s the latest product in a busy market – and there are other apps offering similar features to gohenry. How to spend it Along with gohenry, other companies such as RoosterMoney, nimbl and Osper operate apps and prepaid cards. They all work in a similar way: money is loaded on the cards and both parents and the child can monitor how much they spend via the app. Money can be divided into various “pots” to allow for saving; limits on spending can be applied, and blocks put on places, such as where there is alcohol or cigarettes on sale, or on gambling sites. Parents can restrict spending and ATM use, and limit exactly where the cards can be used – online, on the high street and at cash machines, for example. There’s a monthly fee, up to about £3 per child. Gohenry says 720,000 children use its existing app – which is aimed at six- to 18-year-olds – mostly in the UK, with some in the US. The new account, specifically for teenagers, offers the same features as the existing account but lets employers pay wages on to the card. The banks have their own range of current accounts for children, although they typically start later than the apps at age 11. Some, such as Barclays Young Person’s Account, start at 16. Usually parents will have to open the account for those under that age and there are no overdraft facilities, so they cannot go into the red. But if the card is used aboard, they may be liable for withdrawal fees. A review of the accounts on the market by consumer group Which? named Nationwide, Metro Bank and the Co-Operative Bank the best performers of the high street banks. When is too young? Many parents may be concerned that the new-found independence of a teenager having their own bank card, even one with limits, could lead to the child burning through their money quickly on online games or impulse spending. Greg Davies, head of behavioural science at consultancy Oxford Risk, says contactless cards can result in teenagers spending without realising how much is leaving their account. “We never see or psychologically feel the money leave us, and this can easily lead to uncontrolled spending on short-term whims,” he says. “This is a problem for all of us, but likely to be exacerbated in teenagers, for whom impulsivity is often higher, and focus on long-term habits lower.” However, the various limits and monitoring that the apps can offer can teach children how to spend, adds Davies. “If there is sufficient functionality over and above what you’d get from a bank account with regard to education, spending management tools, nudges and prompts on overspending, etc, then there is certainly a case to be made for them,” he says. Educating without paying MoneySavingExpert’s Martin Lewis has said that financial education has a huge impact on the future wellbeing of young people. In 2018, he donated £325,000 so that all 3,400 state-funded secondary schools could get 100 free copies each of a financial equation textbook. A survey from the Money &amp; Pensions Service showed that children from low-income families were much less likely to receive education on their finances at home. But providing a financial education does not necessarily mean parents have to spend almost £3 a month per child on an app. The Money Advice Service suggests one way to start children’s education on budgeting is to use three containers – one for immediate expenses, one for savings and one for a fund for rainy days. As the child gets older, this idea can be transferred to the bank, where they can have a few accounts for the same needs. As children start to use cards for their spending, they should be keenly aware of limits. From April of this year, the spending limit for contactless went from £30 to £45. Monzo and Starling Bank have contactless debit cards for 16- and 17-year olds. “It’s vital that when kids tap their cards they realise that the money they’re spending can drop quicker than they realise. Also, if a card is pinched, or leant to a mate, it can be maxed out very quickly by people spending just under the limit on contactless,” says Martyn James of complaints website Resolver. A key part of a financial education for a teenager is to allow them to develop maturely with money, says Davies. “The key is a safe environment – limits on the available amounts to spend, the size of individual purchases and the spend within given time frames,” he advises. “And making sure there are trade-offs and that these are visible and that they need to choose between things: If you buy this now, you can’t also buy that other thing; or if you buy this smaller thing now, you won’t be able to save for the larger, more important thing you will otherwise be able to get later.”
23||Chocolate meets liquorice in a Danish treatWhen I was growing up, Sainsbury’s bonbons were coveted. We rarely had sweets, except when we went back to Italy where every aunt south of Rome had a crystal bowlful of boiled choking hazards. So bonbons were special. Though I loved them, two was the limit, because pure sugar, unless it’s mixed with fat – yum – has never really done much for me. But it was the shape of them that appealed: the imperfect sphere, the self-containment, the dusting of icing sugar. This is what attracted me to chocolate-coated liquorice balls by Lakrids by Bülow (£8/125g, lakridsbybulow.co.uk). Lakrids means liquorice in Danish, whence these babies come. As I’ve said before, I don’t mind liquorice in small quantities, but I don’t go mad for it like some. I’m sure many of us have read the terrible news about a man dying due to excessive liquorice consumption – and you should be careful not to eat too much of it – but that’s hard to do with these. Not because they aren’t delicious, but because they are incredibly satisfying and also not cheap. They come in core flavours: the original is just a liquorice piece at its heart, liquorice powder and coated in 35% cocoa milk chocolate. But there’s also salt-caramel, some fruit flavours and coffee. Specials appear seasonally, in limited edition, such as the newly arrived cinnamon-sugar coated Christmas cookie. For those who really love liquorice there’s the Christmas Advent calendar (£36), which counts you down to Christmas Eve in liquorice treats. Just as the baby Jesus would have wanted.
26||Arctic: Culture and Climate review – visions of a vanishing worldThere is a vision, in this magnificent show, of the strange hinterland where Arctic ice melts into the snow-covered ocean. There is no obvious distinction, indeed the water’s edge is all but invisible. What you see is a series of dark boats drawn on sledges across a white plane dotted with walruses and long-legged birds. All the images are inky black, exquisitely carved into the tusk of one such walrus, caught on exactly this kind of boat. Its ivory is beautifully used to stand in for the all-encompassing Arctic whiteout. Carved around 1900 by a celebrated Iñupiat artist known as Happy Jack, this is not just a graceful engraving-cum-sculpture. It shows life as it was lived on Alaska’s freezing Seward Peninsula, long lines of huskies pulling kayaks, tents and vessels across the gliding ice. Children learned from these images, elders discussed them and now here we are in the future looking back at this body of knowledge carved into the tusk of a long-dead walrus that once swam in those dark seas. Man and beast, life and art: all are fused in this object. The British Museum’s new exhibition plunges deep into the mysterious icescapes of the Arctic, where 4 million people still live in a culture shaped by the climate. There are fragments of ancient bone jewellery, discovered in newly thawed ice; sculpted figures of reindeer and caribou so sinuously streamlined as to be almost abstract. There are needles made of walrus bone and monuments of balanced stones, a kind of ancestral land art that abides for centuries, marking memories or indicating reindeer paths through the wilds. The monument in this show, made by Piita Irniq in 2019, is titled Silent Messenger. Enthralling period films show summer festivals, where thousands of Inuit gather in immense circles that revolve like wheels in the continuous daylight. Contemporary video celebrates the stupendous skill of an artist who scrapes seal skins into ultra-fine fabric for the pleating of shoes. Watercolours imagine seals beneath the ice-bores, prints depict human beings inside walruses, like Jonah in the whale. A pair of 19th-century Russian snow goggles takes the form of an eerie face, described in glass and uranium beads. The people of the Arctic live in the circumpolar regions of Greenland, Canada, Alaska, Russia and parts of Scandinavia. There are more than 40 ethnic groups. This is made marvellously apparent in the opening gallery, which is nothing less than a catwalk of spectacular costumes from the different groups, including a navy and scarlet Sami coat with a four-cornered hat (representing the four winds that blow across the ice) and an Alaskan child’s parka of brilliant blue, embroidered in red, its hood lined with soft wolverine that never freezes outside. A team of huskies appears to be drawing you onwards into the snowbound landscape, the dogs’ fierce beauty a marvel projected into infinite white space. This illusion is orchestrated by the brilliant Opera Amsterdam, who have designed something akin to the experience of Arctic light in the old London museum. Walk out of one gallery and you are confronted by a lone figure rising against a pink-tinged twilight: the only surviving sealskin suit for hunting whales, waterproof, inflatable and made centuries ago, standing stark and upright as the hunter. Everything is used and in every way. Seal skins, worked upon with fine blades for many months and stitched together with seal gut, become sails so strong yet diaphanous that it is easy to imagine moonlight shining through them as mariners crossed dark waters. And sure enough, there is a drawing of just such a scene, made by a Victorian explorer. The seal’s meat is made into a hundred different dishes. Its bone becomes the embodiment of itself: finely carved into captivating silkies. The art has a characteristic combination of delicacy and strength that seems to reflect the whole society. It runs all the way from 17th-century engravings of fur-clad drivers merrily bowling across the snow in reindeer-drawn sleds to the terrific photographs of the Alaskan artist Brian Adams, large as life and presented on lightboxes. Who could not love the powerful portrait of an Inuit woman surrounded by what might almost be fallen leaves, in glowing colours, but are in fact chunks of whale meat: a worker shown in her professional element? Knowledge of snow is lightly scattered throughout. Here is an ancient Sami sled, shaped like a boat so that it can float, almost, through the deep powdery snows of Scandinavia. Here are snowshoes made from wood to distribute the wearer’s weight so that they do not sink into the grainy snowdrifts of western Alaska. Boots fitted with walrus-ivory crampons give vital stability on snow that has thawed and then frozen again into a luminous but frightening slipperiness. The reindeer-fur soles of Sami boots were sewn with the fur ends pointing towards the toe to create a friction that stops the wearer from slithering. A breathtaking film of a woman making such boots shows her powerful hands forcing a needle through two layers of reindeer pelt as if it were thin as silk. Her white boots, embroidered with stars, are wondrous to behold. The soundtrack stealing through the galleries takes you straight to the Arctic – the cracking of ice, wind blowing across water, the barking of huskies and, occasionally, the singing of historical roundelays. And there are stories everywhere you look. A wooden visor, made around 1778 to block out the sun’s blinding glare, doubled as a seal’s head, acting as an ingenious decoy. A strange soapstone sculpture condenses a whole narrative in one semi-abstract medallion, telling of a family who became stranded on pack ice. They hunted seals for food and then used the skins to build the kayak on which they eventually paddled to safety. You might think of the Arctic as a barren, white expanse. But summer brings sea algae and plants spring into life, spreading their greenness. A wonderful wall hanging is embroidered all over with the multicoloured leaves that bud forth in the tundra. Sami men appear in a silent movie, leaping and wrestling in a meadow like some gleeful Arctic Olympics. But there will come a time when the ice no longer forms. The Arctic is heating more rapidly than anywhere else. A devastating projection of the north pole and its great white landmass is shown vanishing fast on the floor beneath your feet. Arctic peoples are literally on the shoreline of the climate crisis. Nothing could give a greater sense of the threat to their society than this exhibition, so revelatory of their art and their lives. And the show ends at the very edge of that ice, fading away on film, as dark figures moving about in the dusk try to haul in a fish from the rising waters. You watch with your heart in your mouth, as they stand upon this curious line – water lapping away at the ice, something solid returning to its liquid self. Arctic: Culture and Climate is at the British Museum, London, until 21 February
19||Gorillaz: Song Machine Season One: Strange Timez review – playful and potent collaborationThe Now Now (2018) was one of those Gorillaz albums that dispensed with the hip hop-led collaborations that have often defined this band of ink and flesh. Guests are in full effect, though, on its follow-up: what’s billed as Season One of the band’s Song Machine concept, compiling the tracks Gorillaz have released monthly via their YouTube channel since January, plus extra helpings. Everything that has ever been engaging about Gorillaz is present in spades here. Playfulness and conceptual ambition are all anchored by Damon Albarn’s melodic melancholy and his side-eye at the suboptimal state of things. His Bowie fixation waxes hard on unreleased tracks – such as The Lost Chord – as well those already in the public domain (Aries). Lifers might miss the very old school flows of the band’s earlier hook-ups, but the dizzying array of present voices – from 6lack to Octavian via US producer Mike Will Made It – renews Gorillaz’ relevance as beat merchants, while the assured application of other talents (from Robert Smith to Fatoumata Diawara, Peter Hook to St Vincent) ensures textural breadth. A strangely cogent album for wildly unstable times.
12||That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry review – wild, witty storiesKevin Barry’s darkly glimmering third collection of short stories arrives prefaced with a quote from the film-maker Jane Campion, all about the romantic impulse. “It’s a heroic path and it generally ends dangerously,” she cautions. That isn’t always the case for the protagonists of these 11 tales. One character, himself a writer, steps back just in time. Another’s lot turns out to be happiness – the single outcome he professes himself unable to handle. But by and large, passion proves hazardous for the loners and oddballs who drift through Barry’s forceful landscape. This is the west of Ireland, its wild emptiness teeming with lore and legend. As a publican says of his 10-streetlight town: “the winter bleeds us out here”. Come fairer weather, there’s the billowing whitethorn blossom to worry about, laden with doomy superstition. And what of the romance of the place? That gets short shrift, too. “The silly, silly moonlight,” sighs one man, rueing the calamity that comes from its enchantment. He is Sergeant Brown, whose forebears all “drank themselves into the clay of the place”. He appears in Ox Mountain Death Song, a story whose steady momentum carries it to an unexpected climax as he pursues a felon named Canavan, himself one of long line of ferret-grinned good-for-nothings. As Brown notes of the Canavans: “they had for decades and centuries brought to the Ox elements that were by turn very complicated and very simple: occult nous and racy semen”. And there it is, that canny laughter – vital, knockabout and unpredictable, it grounds in earthy reality the folksongs and fables that flit through the gloom here. Elsewhere, it adds a soulful complexity, enabling truths to disguise themselves as throwaway lines. Here’s the heroine of the title story, for instance, 17 years old and pregnant by her mother’s shiftless lover, gazing at herself in a car mirror: “She had a face on her like a scorched budgie. She detested herself.” Written over the course of eight years, these stories aren’t quite of equal strength, but throughout, their language is exhilarating, its verve evoking the very best of Barry’s compatriots while further carving out a territory that’s all his own. • That Old Country Music by Kevin Barry is published by Canongate (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
5||Mayors are a force for good. And it's time Johnson recognised thatLike so many around the world, the people of Greater Manchester and London have suffered terribly as a result of Covid-19. Thousands have died and years of hard-won economic progress has been undone in a matter of months – with businesses closed, jobs lost and unemployment predicted by some to hit 1980s levels. We must be honest that things are likely to get worse before they get better. The nations and regions of the UK should have been the government’s biggest ally in the battle to control the spread of this virus and to protect jobs and livelihoods. We are uniquely well placed to help. As mayors, our focus is exclusively on the city regions we run. But the Westminster Punch and Judy show struggles to relate to this more grown-up and pragmatic “place before party” approach. Proof of this is the cross-party coalition that stood up for Greater Manchester over recent days; the joint decision by the mayor and council leaders from all parties in London to go into tier 2; and the genuine collaboration and support shown by metro mayors, whatever their political colour, throughout the crisis. Mayors work hand in glove with local NHS leaders and regional public health experts. We have a deep understanding of the complexity and diversity of our communities. We have strong links with local business leaders and understand the strengths of our local economies. Crucially, we have shown ourselves capable of reacting to events more quickly and devising more innovative solutions than national government. However, instead of treating us as part of the solution to the pandemic, the government has at times treated us as the enemy. Westminster has sadly shown it is not mature enough to deal with devolution. The government may have all the money and power, but ministers simply cannot cope with differences, disagreements or compromise. Rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation. The prime minister has taken decisions with huge consequences for our regions. Offers of help on everything from the still-failing test and trace system to supporting vulnerable residents have been ignored. Increasingly desperate appeals for the funding we need have been rebuffed – and not just from us, but from Conservative mayors too. Now in London, meanwhile, the government must urgently come up with a deal that keeps TfL services running and doesn’t punish Londoners. While the government acted too late in March to save thousands of lives in London, it began lifting the national lockdown in the summer too early for the people of Greater Manchester – while the virus was still spreading too quickly. The region was then left languishing in restrictions similar to tier 2 from late July – with catastrophic consequences for local businesses, but no additional support for employers and workers facing those restrictions. Having underfunded places to deal with tier 2, they are now doing the same with tier 3. Though Greater Manchester succeeded in getting backdated support from the government, it won’t be enough to deal with the consequences of a crude tier 3 formula that penalises cities. The chancellor takes no account of the number of businesses in an area and the fact that busy city centres like ours have more hospitality enterprises. But there is a class issue here too: the businesses being forced to close are concentrated in the poorest communities. They will be hurt most by tier 3. This isn’t about wanting preferential treatment. It’s about basic fairness. It’s about treating cities fairly – wherever they are – given they are hit harder by lockdowns. The problem with money and power being concentrated in Westminster is that Whitehall doesn’t see the direct impact of policies in Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield or even parts of London. Ministers want us to bite our tongues. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London. It doesn’t have to be like this. Other countries have shown that with strong co-operation between regional and national authorities, it’s possible to get the virus under control and protect the economy. As we approach a difficult winter, we invite the prime minister, as a former mayor himself, to sit down with us to chart a better way forward. Levelling up will fail if it’s dictated top-down. So let’s now draw a line over the arguments of recent days, work together to control the virus and lay plans for a recovery led by the regions. Mayors are here to stay. It’s time for Westminster to grow up and work with us, not against us.
3||Coronavirus symptoms: how to tell if you have a common cold, flu or CovidWith winter approaching, the UK is entering the traditional seasons for colds and flu, with the additional complication this year that symptoms of those two illnesses can be broadly similar to those experienced by people who have caught the coronavirus and may be at risk of spreading it. The NHS in England has produced online Covid-19 advice and a guide to differentiate between the three types of illnesses, which health experts hope will make it clearer to people whether they have an illness they would have most likely brushed aside last year, but which this year might lead them to think they need to self-isolate or seek to have a coronavirus test. • If you are in any doubt and are concerned about your wellbeing or the health of someone you are caring for, you should seek medical assistance in the UK by dialling 111 or by following the Covid-19 advice on the NHS website. The NHS says that if you have any of the main symptoms of Covid-19 you should obtain a test as soon as possible and self-isolate. Coronavirus or Covid-19 The most common symptoms of coronavirus or Covid-19 are a fever – a temperature of 37.8C (100F) – a new persistent cough (usually dry), and a loss of their sense of taste and/or smell. Patients may also sometimes suffer from fatigue, aches and pains, sore throat, headaches and shortness of breath. Diarrhoea and a runny or stuffy nose are rare. The NHS says symptoms can range from mild to severe. Colds The most common symptoms of a cold are sneezing, aches and pains, a runny or stuffy nose and sore throat. A mild cough can be experienced. There is sometimes fatigue, and it is rare to experience a fever or headaches. Colds do not cause diarrhoea. The NHS states that with a cold there is usually a gradual onset of symptoms. Flu Flu most commonly consists of a fever, fatigue, a dry cough, aches and pains and headaches. Patients will sometimes experience a runny or stuffy nose or a sore throat. Diarrhoea can sometimes occur in children. There is usually no sneezing with flu, but a severe shortness of breath can develop, and the NHS notes there is usually a rapid onset of symptoms. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy. • This article was amended on 19 September 2020 to include a loss of taste and/or smell as a common symptom of people with coronavirus.
3||Covid world map: which countries have the most coronavirus cases and deaths?Since first being recorded late last year in China, the Covid-19 coronavirus has spread around the world, and been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. However, differences in testing mean that the number of cases may be understated for some countries. Obviously, larger countries tend to have higher numbers both of cases and of deaths. But there are many other factors in play, such as the demographic profiles of the countries; countries with ageing populations may be hit harder because the disease is more dangerous to older people. The number of deaths is a more dependable indicator. The disease has hit certain countries, including the US, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK with particular cruelty. Johns Hopkins University publishes cases and deaths data for most countries in the world (a notable exception being North Korea, which claims to have had none). But JHU concedes that it collects data from many sources, some of which disagree with each other. Even where the collection is less contentious there are significant differences in the ways countries test, and in the way they report cases and deaths. Belgium, for instance, attributes deaths to Covid-19 if the disease is a suspected cause, even if no test has been carried out. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
3||Fighting tyranny with milk tea: the young rebels joining forces in AsiaThe language, the demands and the backdrop were different, but the protests across central Bangkok last week would have looked familiar to anyone who followed the mass demonstrations that roiled Hong Kong for a year from June 2019. Crowds of young protesters, dressed in black and wearing hard hats, poured through the streets to locations announced at the last minute on social media. As the police closed in and the protesters prepared for confrontation, hand gestures and human chains ensured supplies including protective masks and water reached the front lines. Tactics adopted from Hong Kong demonstrations have helped the movement survive both the jailing of most of its leaders and direct attempts by the prime minister Prayuth Chan-ocha to ban the demonstrations. But Hong Kong has not only provided inspiration in Bangkok. In recent months an unexpected solidarity has developed between young protesters and activists across Thailand, Taiwan and Hong Kong, at first online but increasingly now in protests on the streets, in law courts and in the corridors of power. Their fights are serious ones, against governments with a ruthless track record of crushing dissent. But the symbol of east Asia’s informal coalition is playful, a simple beverage enjoyed in all three places, leading protesters to dub their unlikely cross-border support the “Milk Tea Alliance”. Milk tea is drunk differently in each place, just as their individual battles vary. Cold with tapioca bubbles in Taiwan, hot and strong in Hong Kong, iced and sweetened with condensed milk in Thailand. But the basic ingredients are the same, just as the protesters’ basic aim – democracy – is shared. “When you have to go against a big power you have to be creative,” said Netiwit Chotiphatphaisal, a prominent student activist in Bangkok. “The name is very cute – it’s appealing and people [see] it’s not aggressive.” Protest art posted online shows three teas raised together in a toast. Other images depict the drinks as sweet cartoon figures holding hands in solidarity, with love hearts floating above. Alliance supporters are keen not to overstate what the different members can do for each other, or minimise the differences between their struggles. Thai students are battling a powerful monarchy, demanding greater democracy and accountability. In Hong Kong, protesters are fighting the Beijing-backed government for rights and freedoms they were promised during the handover from British colonial rule. They were abruptly curtailed this year by a draconian national security law imposed from the mainland. And in Taiwan politicians and activists are engaged in an existential struggle with China, which considers the self-ruled island part of its territory and has not ruled out using force to bring it under Beijing’s control. But supporters of the unlikely coalition say protesters and politicians across the disparate milk-tea territories share practical challenges, ideological values, and increasing concern about the power of China – a key ally of Bangkok’s military-backed government. Thai protesters inspired by the Hong Kong movement see direct parallels between their own political experiences and that of activists opposing China’s authoritarianism, said Janjira Sombatpoonsiri, assistant professor of political science at Thammasat University. “When you look at Hong Kong as a Thai citizen, what you see is a repetition of another autocratic rule – repression, doublespeak, lies and propaganda, disinformation and abuse of power,” said Janjira. More than 80 protesters in Thailand have now been arrested after taking part in protests, and key leaders remain in detention. Three were charged under an obscure law banning “violence against the queen” after her motorcade was heckled, and could face a death sentence if her life is thought to have been in danger. Some Thai protesters see not only a shared goal of democracy but a shared enemy in Beijing, including Thachaporn Supparatanapinyo, a Thai student activist living in Taiwan, who describes the alliance as a “perfect example” of a regional movement. “For the CCP [Chinese Communist party], there will always be the next and the next,” she said. “If not territorial expansion then they will seek to commodify our sovereignty by buying off (Thai) leaders like they have already done in Cambodia and Laos.” Jerry Liu, director of international affairs for Taiwan’s New Power party, which grew out of the student-led Sunflower protest movement of 2014, admits that for many in Taiwan the Milk Tea Alliance is just a “vague and fancy slogan”. But the island’s own relatively recent history of democratisation and its perpetual fight to preserve self-rule should make pro-democracy activists elsewhere natural allies, he says. “If we think about this issue from the perspective of human rights, liberty and democracy, then we should find many things in common,” he said at a press conference organised by the Taiwan Alliance for Thai Democracy – a practical incarnation of the alliance. The origin of this modern alliance of young pro-democracy activists is almost as unlikely as its symbol. It began in the spring after a Thai celebrity and his girlfriend shared pictures on their social media accounts that – apparently unintentionally – could be read as backing independence for Hong Kong and Taiwan. China’s army of hyper-vigilant nationalist trolls responded by attacking Thailand, trying to dent nationalist pride with slurs on the monarchy and economy, but they misjudged their target. Thai Twitter users are known for their outspoken criticism of their country’s establishment, and the attacks came after months of anti-government protests. Rather than being offended, many embraced the attacks, and deflected them back with sarcasm and dark humour in an escalating online battle that gradually drew in peers in Hong Kong and Taiwan. A volley of memes ricocheted around the internet, but an “alliance” that began as a joke also began to take real form on the ground. A protester facing charges in Hong Kong flashed a Thai protest symbol to a packed courtroom this summer. Thai students looked to the experienced, effective Hong Kong organisers for examples of how to more effectively defy and protest against their government, copying graphics and advice about staying safe at protests and keeping digital data private. “Online users in Asia are realising there is strength in numbers and in the shared experiences of resisting and fighting back against authoritarian governments,” said Tracy Beattie, a researcher at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, who has closely followed online political activism in Thailand. In Taiwan, the milk tea hashtag even popped up on the vice-president’s Twitter feed on National Day, 10 October, although a government spokesman had previously claimed Taipei took “no position” on the alliance. Over the past six months, online activists aligned with the group helped drive a boycott of Disney’s live-action remake of Mulan, drawing attention to human rights abuses by Chinese authorities in Xinjiang, where some filming took place, and to the lead actor’s controversial support for police in Hong Kong. It has also been used to share anything from reports of China’s exploitation of the Mekong, a river relied upon by tens of millions of people, to petitions calling for states to stand up to China over its persecution of Uighur Muslims. Sitthiphon Kruarattikan, director of the Institute of East Asian Studies, at Thammasat University, said that although there is no expectation of the alliance driving political change, it reflects and amplifies growing concern about Beijing’s political agenda and its regional projection of power. “China is still unsuccessful in cultivating soft power or winning hearts and minds of their ‘Taiwanese compatriots’ and people in neighbouring countries,” he added.
3||Covid cases and deaths today: coronavirus UK mapPlease note: 3 and 4 October totals include cases from previous days published late owing to a technical fault on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Cases from between 24 September and 1 October have been added to the totals for 3 and 4 October. Please note: these are government figures on numbers of confirmed cases – some people who report symptoms are not being tested, and are not included in these counts. Coronavirus has hit the UK hard, with the country recording hundreds of thousands of cases and over 40,000 deaths linked to the disease. England faced Europe’s highest excess death levels during the first wave of the pandemic. Where are the UK’s current coronavirus hotspots? At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact. Since then, however, the centre of the virus has shifted northwards and to areas in Northern Ireland. England now operates a three-tier system, with different areas facing different restrictions. Details of the English lockdowns are listed here, Scottish lockdowns here, Welsh here and Northern Irish here. How is the disease progressing in the UK? Cases in the UK first peaked in early April, before beginning to fall from May to early July. Since August, however, daily cases have once again and the UK is now in the grips of a second wave. Numbers passed the earlier peak in September and have continued to rise in October – although some of this can be attributed to increased testing and targeted testing in coronavirus outbreak areas. The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March, peaking in April. That figure has now been rising again in September and October. Deaths were at their highest during the first peak of cases, with over 1,000 daily deaths seen on some days in April. They started to once again increase in October, following the earlier rise in cases. How much of the second wave is due to more testing? Some of the sharp rise in cases in September and October can be attributed to increased testing. Many more tests were done in autumn than during the first wave in the spring. In March and April, there were relatively few tests available and these were given to people with severe symptoms – mainly in hospitals. Most people with milder symptoms were not tested, so these cases were not recorded, meaning the actual number is likely to have been much higher. Sir Patrick Vallance has said the daily case number may have been over 100,000 on some days in the first wave. During the start of the second wave in September, more tests were available and the majority of people took tests in the community. This means that people with milder symptoms were being tested and recorded in the official figures. The real number of cases will still be higher than the recorded count, but the testing will be picking up a greater proportion of the total. However, given Covid-19’s potential for exponential growth, the shape of the cases curve is critically important, and the effect of increased cases can be seen in the hospitalisation and mortality curves above. Find coronavirus cases near you The chart below shows the areas that have had the highest daily peaks of new Covid-19 cases. Many parts of the UK now have a number of cases that surpasses the first peak of the pandemic. Other areas have had less dramatic peaks of infection. Find the cases curve in your own area by typing into the search bar below. In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic. About this data This data comes from a variety of sources: the headline figures come from Public Health England, working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Local authority data for England and Wales also comes from Public Health England. Historic data for Scottish regions is only available by health board and comes from Public Health Scotland. We exclude 15 June for Scottish data owing to the fact that new historic data was added on that day. The most recent Northern Irish data used in the maps and table comes from the NI Department of Health, but for the line charts above it comes from Public Health England, which has historic data for Northern Ireland. There are differences in the data collection practices and publishing schedules of the sources that may lead to temporary inconsistencies. About Covid-19 Since first being identified as a new coronavirus strain in Wuhan, China, late last year, Covid-19 has spread around the globe. The virus can cause pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. You can find out more about the symptoms here. There are things you can do, such as wearing a face mask, to protect yourself and slow the spread of the virus. Chief among them are regularly washing your hands for at least 20 seconds with soap and water, and catching coughs and sneezes in tissues. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
17||Priti Patel kept up anti-lawyer rhetoric after Met warning on terrorThe UK home secretary, Priti Patel, is under fresh pressure after it emerged that she appeared to have dismissed intelligence briefings from counter- terrorism police to the Home Office over an alleged far-right terror attack. Officers from S015, the Metropolitan police counter terrorism command (CTC), notified the Home Office in mid-September that it was suspected that a far-right extremist had attempted to carry out a terror attack at a solicitors’ firm in London. Weeks later, on 4 October at the Conservative party conference, the home secretary intensified her criticism of “do gooders” and “lefty lawyers.” On Saturday night, Nick Thomas-Symonds MP, the shadow home secretary, said: “The home secretary has fallen short of the high standards that the role demands. The use of such reprehensible and inflammatory language undermines the most important part of her job, which is to keep people safe.” Officers from SO15 were drafted in to investigate the attack on law firm Duncan Lewis, which occurred on 7 September after it became evident that extremism might be involved. Accounts from the firm, including eyewitness statements, formed part of the investigation. On Friday, alleged far-right extremist Cavan Medlock, 28, from Harrow in north-west London, was charged with attempting to launch a terror attack at the law firm last month. The Old Bailey heard that Medlock arrived at Duncan Lewis’s offices armed with a knife, handcuffs, a Nazi flag and a US Confederate flag with prosecutors saying he appeared to target the firm because of its involvement with immigration cases. Previously, the Observer has revealed that Patel ignored warnings from senior colleagues including the lord chancellor and attorney general as well as officials from the Bar Council and Law Society to stop targeting immigration lawyers following the incident. Sources say the Met notified MI5 and the Home Office last month of the incident and its far-right links. Separately, senior Home Office officials involved in its counter-extremism portfolio have said they were made aware of a suspected far-right attack before Patel resumed her attacks on immigration lawyers at the Tory party conference. A spokesperson for the Met confirmed that it was protocol to share intelligence and details following a suspected terrorist incident with the Home Office: “Counter terrorism policing works closely with colleagues from MI5 and the Home Office in the course of our investigative activity. This includes sharing, as and where appropriate, certain information and intelligence relating to our work with these partners.”They added: “There are well established protocols in place to brief government on the police response following major incidents, including terrorist attacks.” The chronology of events raises questions as to why Patel chose to keep attacking the legal profession. According to government documents, her remit is being “responsible for making sure our communities, in all [police] force areas, are kept safe and secure”. An online Home Office fact sheet on rightwing terrorism pledges that the department is committed to tackling far-right attacks, stating: “The threat from rightwing terrorism has evolved in recent years and is growing. That is why this government is taking urgent action to tackle it.” In addition, Patel has oversight of the security service MI5, which last year was given responsibility to take the lead in tackling rightwing terrorism, officially designated as a major threat to national security. This month, the new head of MI5 warned of its growing threat. Out of 27 terrorist plots disrupted in the past four years, eight have involved rightwing extremists. In addition, Patel’s department presides over the government’s counter extremism strategy, Prevent, which aims to help vulnerable individuals people from being radicalised to supporting terrorism. “With any case of domestic terrorism you need to look at the reasons behind it, its inspiration. This is why this is so serious,” said a source with knowledge of the case. They added: “If you had a dubious politician abroad inciting hatred and then a UK terror incident was traced back to what this politician had said then you can only imagine the measures that would be taken.”
3||How CBBC's 'Dr Xand' learned surviving Covid isn't child's playBest known as half of the twin-presenter duo of CBBC’s Operation Ouch!, Dr Xand van Tulleken’s impeccable credentials – a medical degree and qualifications in public health and tropical medicine – have also seen him front documentaries on everything from male suicide to the science of dating. But earlier this year he found the tables turned when he caught Covid while he and his brother Chris were making a programme on the pandemic. Being a doctor didn’t stop him panicking. “I was properly anxious, and frightened at the prospect of spending two weeks completely on my own when I was ill,” he told me. “I was quite tearful speaking to my twin about it all.” By the end of week one, he thought he was out of the woods. Then, on day 12, he woke with his heart racing: a condition called “atrial fibrillation”. He went into hospital, where doctors stopped and started his heart to regularise its rhythm. He has had this done three times since, once while cameras were rolling as his brother looked on during filming for their BBC documentary Surviving the Virus. How did it feel to go so publicly from presenter to patient? “I had all the anxieties you’d expect – I didn’t want to look frail or vulnerable on the telly,” he admits. But he’s glad he did it, and not just because it might reduce the stigma around illness: “My favourite thing was seeing people replying to things on social media about Covid being made up with ‘why don’t you ask Dr Xand?’ Because even as someone quite young, I had a relatively severe experience of it.” The producer sent over a rough cut, warning it was tough viewing. “We didn’t believe him, we thought we’re both doctors, we’ve seen this stuff before, so we had Mum and Dad over and put it on, and everyone was in tears. I found it hard to watch, mainly because I didn’t like seeing Chris upset.” It also can’t have been easy doing lockdown while living alone and recovering from Covid, with a tough work schedule thrown into the mix: he filmed a whole series of Operation Ouch from his kitchen, and co-presented BBC1’s Health Check Live. He survived it by getting to know his neighbours better – including the squirrels in his garden, whose appearance during our interview prompts him to jump up and feed them (“I can’t have a cat or a dog, so they’re my pets!”). But the hardest thing was not seeing his 11-year-old son, Julian, who lives in Canada, as much as usual. “At this point we’d normally be talking about Christmas but it’s possible this year I won’t get to spend it with him.” His own experience of Covid has reminded him how vulnerable adults can be to new viruses. Children’s immune systems are designed to respond vigorously to viruses, but by the time we reach adulthood most of us have been exposed to the common ones so there’s less need for an all-out response; it’s why adults get chickenpox so much worse. “Some long-Covid symptoms will be specific to coronavirus but it is possible that some of what we’re talking about is the effect of new virus exposure in adults, something we’ve been aware of for a long time but which has been neglected by medicine,” he explains. He stresses the need for greater investment in rehab services where people might spend weeks recovering after leaving intensive care. What aspects of the pandemic response does he think have gone well? “The British public have done an extraordinary job in doing their best to slow the spread of the virus,” he says. Less so the government. “My work in overseas aid taught me that so much of public health is good information, but the government has got it so wrong,” he says. Blaming the public for rising infection rates after encouraging everyone to go into the office “felt like gaslighting”, and he says the hypocrisy of government adviser Dominic Cummings in failing to apologise when caught breaking the rules undermined the sense we were all in it together. He rails against the government’s dogmatic approach to science, for example the early insistence that hand-shaking was safe. When he was on Question Time in early March, he was taken aback when fellow panellist Matt Hancock reached out his hand. “I said ‘I’m not really shaking hands at the moment.’” He says Hancock was adamant it didn’t spread through handshakes. “I know how these sorts of viruses spread, but I don’t like social awkwardness so ended up shaking his hand!” He finds ministers’ claims they are “following the science” deeply problematic: “No scientist in the world can tell you whether it’s worth closing down parts of the entertainment industry; that’s an inherently political decision.” He is also scathing about the three scientists who penned the “Great Barrington declaration”, which argued we should shield the vulnerable but that life for everyone else should go back to normal. “I’m genuinely interested in the question of at what point we’ve gone too far with social restrictions; whether it’s isolation or poverty, there are terrible trade-offs. But I felt so frustrated that those scientists turned the most important question of a generation – how we respond to respiratory virus pandemics – into the most poorly thought through, unkind document, launched by a thinktank funded by the Koch brothers.” If a Covid vaccine comes, it will be important to encourage uptake; how can scientists address fake news from anti-vaxxers? Xand says that after he and Dr Chris noticed one or two people occasionally getting up and leaving the Operation Ouch! live show during their segment about vaccines, they changed their approach. “The thing society normally does is say ‘you’re so stupid’ to parents who believe the conspiracy theories. But, actually, large pharmaceutical companies, western governments and the medical profession have all given some communities in particular reasons not to trust them over the years.” He believes medics need to communicate better with sceptical parents. “If you are in the situation where the only way of saving children was compulsory vaccination, then I guess I’d be in favour of it. But to get to that point, you’ve screwed up so badly.” There’ll be no shortage of opportunities for Xand to talk directly to the public: he’s the resident doctor on BBC1’s new show Morning Live, which starts tomorrow. “I want the medical bits to feel reassuring and optimistic rather than gloomy,” he says. A tough ask during a pandemic perhaps, but having just spent an hour in Xand’s bubbly company, I reckon we’re in safe hands.
18||His House review – palpable terrorBritish writer-director Remi Weekes’s arresting first feature smartly utilises the horror genre to explore the hostile environment experienced by Sudanese refugees Bol (Sope Dirisu) and Rial (Wunmi Mosaku). Case worker Mark (Matt Smith) places the married couple in a grotty house with peeling wallpaper (“a palace”), urging them to “get along”, “fit in” and “make it easy for people”. Outside, an unfriendly neighbour observes Bol from her window, while three schoolboys taunt a disoriented Rial, telling her to “go back to Africa”. At home, Bol is haunted by voices in his head and noises from within the walls, echoes of grief, guilt and shame that assume bodily forms. Genuine jump scares are bolstered by the film’s spooky sound design, as well as terrific performances from Dirisu and Mosaku, whose terror is palpable.
13||Instagram row over plus-size model forces change to nudity policyAs campaigning victories go, forcing Mark Zuckerberg’s social media empire to admit a discriminatory flaw in its policy is no small feat. But following a campaign launched in this paper, the Observer can exclusively reveal that Instagram and its parent company Facebook will be updating its policy on nudity in order to help end discrimination of plus-size black women on its platforms and ensure all body types are treated fairly. In August, Instagram was accused of censoring and silencing the plus-size model Nyome Nicholas-Williams. A wave of content creators then confirmed the platform was repeatedly discriminating against black people, plus-size users and other marginalised communities, by deleting their photos or failing to promote them in the same way it did for its white users. Speaking to the Observer over the summer, Nicholas-Williams and photographer Alexandra Cameron told of how photos from their “confidence shoot” were repeatedly deleted and taken down, with warnings that their accounts – which have more than 115,000 followers between them – could be closed down. The controversy caused fans to protest and post pictures of the model en masse under the hashtag #IWantToSeeNyome. The photo-sharing app owned by Facebook was accused of hypocrisy and racism in allowing an abundance of photos of semi-naked skinny white women on its feeds but deleting those posted by black women in similar poses. Nicholas-Williams said she was shocked that “a fat black woman celebrating her body is banned … I want to promote self-love and inclusivity because that’s how I feel and how I want other women like me to feel”. The photos in question showed Nicholas-Williams with her eyes closed and wrapping an arm around her breasts. While the pose is a common trope across social media, in this instance it was deemed to violate Instagram’s guidance on pornography. As well as sophisticated artificial intelligence, Facebook and Instagram employ 15,000 content reviewers across the world. These workers individually sift through thousands of photos that are reported as offensive by users to the app everyday. Human bias – unconscious or otherwise – might be expected to occur in content deletion and account bans but Facebook and Instagram have exhaustive rules that must be applied to allow either to happen. The company denied Nicholas-Williams had been racially discriminated against, but confirmed that its former policy on “boob squeezing” had caused her photos to be removed. Campaigner Gina Martin, who had also lobbied Instagram and who previously got the law changed to criminalise “upskirting” in 2018,said: “This policy change is an example of what happens when you recognise an issue, get organised, form a relationship with big platforms and make yourself difficult to ignore.” Nicholas-Williams said she was delighted with the outcome. “This is a huge step and I am glad a dialogue has now been opened,” she said. “I want to ensure that I am respected and allowed to use spaces like Instagram, as many other creators do, without the worry of being censored and silenced.” Instagram’s influence on trends and popular culture cannot be underestimated. The social media site has over a billion users worldwide and millions of pictures are uploaded online everyday by individuals, small businesses, major brands and politicians keen to be part of the conversation. A spokesperson from Instagram confirmed that pictures of Nicholas-Williams were originally taken down as “we do not allow breast squeezing because it can be most commonly associated with pornography”. Cameron, the photographer, said: “There is more flesh to hold or place your arm around if you have bigger boobs. There was no suggestion of pornographic squeezing – my photos are explicitly about the female gaze and about empowering women.” Instagram acknowledged that the shoot showed the model “holding her breasts … [in] images intended to demonstrate self-love and body acceptance.” A spokesperson for Instagram said: “As we looked into this more closely, we realised it was an instance where our policy on breast squeezing wasn’t being correctly applied. Hearing Nyome’s feedback helped us understand where this policy was falling short, and how we could refine it.” The new policy on nudity will apply across Instagram and Facebook and come into effect this week.
16||Don’t worry about Latin names or Victorian rulesTo the uninitiated, the world of horticulture can seem like a daunting place, full of unpronounceable Latin names, unfathomably complex pruning rules and the constant fear of killing everything in your care if you deviate even slightly from them. These doubts can serve as a really effective barrier to would-be newbies from experiencing one of the most rewarding, uplifting and therapeutic of arts. But trust me as a botanist when I tell you it simply doesn’t have to be this way. First things first – what about all those strict Victorian rules? Well, here’s a simple truth. When actually tested scientifically, many of the most long-held gardening “rules” are either based on limited evidence that is not applicable to modern, domestic gardens or, frankly, may even give you worse results. For example, religiously adding a layer of crocks to the bottom of pots actually impedes drainage. Laboriously “double digging” your flower beds each autumn has been shown to degrade soil structure, and following meticulous Victorian rose-pruning rules gives you fewer flowers the next year than simply whacking new growth back with electric hedge clippers. Now, I am absolutely not saying that all gardening advice should be disregarded – far from it. But it should be reframed as “tips and tricks”, which could potentially give you better results, not hard and fast “rules” that must be followed to the letter or risk catastrophe. Secondly: Latin is a dead language. There are no ancient Romans around to correct you and, even if there were, the empire was so enormous, encompassing such a vast diversity of cultures, the chances are that however you pronounce them, there would have been a Roman who would have said them just like you. I mean, frankly, botanical Latin isn’t even really “true” Latin, but a random hodgepodge of ancient Greek and Latin, plus a hefty dose of a myriad of other languages from Russian and German to Chinese and Indonesian. So I promise you there is categorically no “correct” way to pronounce these “Latin” names. However, using the accurate scientific name, however you say it, is often the only way to get the correct ID on the plant you are looking for, so giving it a go can save you a lot of time, money and confusion. Nursery growers will thank you. Finally, and this is probably the most important one: do not be afraid of killing plants! Over millions of years plants have evolved all sorts of ingenious strategies to overcome even the harshest environmental conditions, with zero help from horticulturists. In most cases, given light and water levels even very roughly similar to their native habitat, they will be perfectly happy to get on with it. If they do die, then just try something else. I’d go further, in fact. I’d say killing plants is the only way you’ll really learn what works and what doesn’t. I’ve killed hundreds, perhaps thousands in my time. The only secret of a green thumb is to dust yourself off and try again. In gardening there are no mistakes, only experiments. So go out there and start experimenting. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek
17||PM on the ropes as London Tories rail against extension of congestion chargeBoris Johnson is facing mounting pressure from Tory MPs in London to comprehensively rule out a massive extension of the congestion charge in the capital, amid emergency talks over a new bailout for its struggling transport system. Conservative figures warned there would be “blood on the walls” if the government allowed the extension of the charge, which would hit a series of so-called “London doughnut” Tory seats on the outskirts of the city. They are also demanding there must be no threat to subsidised travel for the young or older people, also proposed as an option by the government as a condition of a further bailout. The idea of extending the congestion charge was among a series of measures suggested in a leaked letter from the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, earlier this month. It would apparently see the £15 charge extend to the North and South Circular roads by October 2021 – an 18-fold increase in the size of the area covered. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, is demanding £4.9bn for the next 18 months to rescue Transport for London (TfL), which has been severely hit by the Covid-19 crisis. However, even raising the idea has outraged Tory MPs. London Tories have held two emergency meetings with Shapps in the last fortnight, warning him an extension of the charge will “not be tolerated”. Shapps has attempted to calm concerns but Tories remain uneasy after Johnson failed to rule out a congestion charge extension when confronted with the issue at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. “Extending the congestion charge, taking away concessionary fares to the elderly and young, are completely unacceptable to us – we were not going to accept it,” said one figure involved. “If this was even suggested then there’d be real complaints and blood on the walls.” There is deep frustration among Tories in the capital, who believe the government has allowed itself to be outflanked by Khan. They warn that ministers have allowed him to blame them for imposing cuts without having to draw any up himself. Another Conservative MP said: “Khan has now been allowed to basically hide problems of his own making behind Covid. We’re letting him get away with blaming everything on the government. There’s a real frustration that [Johnson] hasn’t been as adept as he might have been with how to deal with this man.” The latest row comes as Khan and Greater Manchester mayor Andy Burnham accuse the government of treating local leaders “as the enemy” during the pandemic. Writing jointly in the Observer, they state that “rather than partnership we have both been subjected to party politics, personal attacks and deliberate disinformation from ministers”. Ministers want us to bite our tongues and bend the knee. When we don’t, they threaten to withhold support for the low-paid in Greater Manchester or remove free travel for kids in London.” They are now calling for a meeting with the prime minister to improve relations. The dispute is the latest to highlight the growing question of No 10’s influence over London and claims that Khan’s powers have been diminished across the board. There is now just a week to go until the deadline by which the government must agree a financial support package for TfL. Khan’s team has made clear it cannot accept a deal that would force through higher fares, higher council tax, a hugely increased congestion charge zone and concessions for children and over-60s being scrapped in return for the financial support. Khan’s team has warned the government of the potentially “catastrophic” effect of forcing TfL into issuing a “section 114” notice if it cannot balance its books. In theory, that could see the winding down of all services apart from the Woolwich ferry and some school bus services – the only services TfL is legally obliged to provide. On Friday, Khan wrote to Shapps demanding a meeting to sort out the deal. A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “We have agreed an extension to the support period and to roll over unspent funding from the TfL extraordinary funding agreement, allowing further time for negotiations for a new settlement. These discussions will ensure London has a safe, reliable network. It would be inappropriate to disclose further details at this stage.”
5||A Joe Biden White House will have little time and less love for ‘Britain’s Trump’When the long race for the White House ends, another begins: the sprint to be the first European leader to be granted an audience by the new US president. In 2016, Theresa May was distraught to have got a wooden spoon in the competition to put in an early congratulatory telephone call to Trump Tower. That made her even more neuralgic about beating a path to Washington ahead of her European rivals. Mrs May had to throw in the promise of a Trump state visit to the UK – I rather rudely called it “pimping out the Queen” – to ensure that she got to the White House first. This desperation can make British prime ministers look pathetically needy, but there is a reason why they set so much store by displays of proximity with the Oval Office. How important a prime minister is to the United States, the planet’s largest economy and most potent military force, sends a message about how much influence the UK wields in the world. So it is telling that Number 10 is resigned to the prospect that Boris Johnson will not be the first name on Joe Biden’s call sheet if he becomes the 46th president. Nor is there any expectation that Mr Johnson will be first in line when they hand out invitations to the White House. He has already quit a race UK prime ministers are usually pretty good at winning. “There is an intrinsic problem for Boris,” observes Sir Christopher Meyer, the UK’s ambassador in Washington during the presidencies of Bill Clinton and George W Bush. “The Democrats think Boris is a pea from the same pod as Trump.” Being “Britain’s Trump” goes down almost as poisonously as being Trump himself among many in Team Biden. They are bracketed together in the minds of Democrats not just because both are rule-breaking populists who have polarised their countries and trashed historic alliances. Likely members of a Biden administration remember examples of the Tory leader’s insultingly Trumpian behaviour. Ben Rhodes, who was deputy national security adviser when Mr Biden was vice-president to Barack Obama, has remarked: “I’m old enough to remember when Boris Johnson said Obama opposed Brexit because he was Kenyan.” A more recent inflammatory episode exposed a complete absence of thought in Number 10 about the man whom the polls suggest will be the next US president. One of the most essential things to know about Mr Biden – it would be on the first page if anyone wrote a book called Biden for Beginners – is that he is a Catholic who is extremely proud of his Irish ancestry. Mr Johnson was either blithe or ignorant about that when he declared that he was ready to break international law by dishonouring clauses concerning Ireland in the withdrawal agreement with the EU. Mr Biden was one of the voices in the chorus of American condemnation that the Johnson government was jeopardising the Good Friday agreement. “That was profoundly clumsy and stupid,” says Sir Chris. “It immediately ignited the Irish-American lobby in Washington, which is second in power only to the pro-Israeli lobby.” Mr Johnson can be quite adept at shape-shifting when he thinks it suits his interests. He was a liberal mayor of London before he became the face of the anti-immigrant Brexit campaign. Confronted with a Democrat in the White House, he may try to slough off his Trumpian skin and offer himself as a useful partner for an internationalist president. For his part, Mr Biden will say that America’s ties with the UK are important to him, if only because that is what all American presidents say. It is nevertheless set to start out as one of the frostiest relationships between Number 10 and the White House since Harold Wilson and Lyndon Johnson in the 1960s. Though Mr Biden has been a large figure in US politics for decades, one well-placed observer says that Number 10 is “absolutely clueless” about him and his key people. In the past, it has been usual for the Washington embassy to attach a diplomat to the campaigns of presidential candidates, the better to get to know their teams and likely priorities in office. Wary of any suggestion of outside interference in the US election, the Biden team banned meetings with foreign diplomats. Downing Street has found it hard to find other ways to establish connections. Previous Tory governments had good lines of communication to both parties in the US. This Brexiter-dominated cabinet has cultivated ties solely with Republicans. It was only very recently and very belatedly that Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, managed to get some time with Biden allies on Capitol Hill. If they were smarter, the Johnson government would also have paid a lot of attention to Mr Biden’s running mate, Kamala Harris, because she will be a 77-year-old’s heartbeat away from the presidency. Even if a Biden administration decides to let bygones be bygones, the Johnson government will still struggle to make itself relevant in Washington. After a Trump presidency that has massively strained America’s historic alliances while often fawning to authoritarians, a Biden presidency will try to reassert US leadership of the world’s democracies. A critical feature of that will be detraumatising the transatlantic relationship. At a recent Ditchley conference of foreign policy experts from America, Britain and elsewhere, one question that preoccupied the gathering was who would become Mr Biden’s “special friend” in Europe. Emmanuel Macron is very eager to secure that status, though others familiar with thinking among the Biden team believe that their highest priority will be re-establishing strong relations with Germany. Almost no one expects the UK to have preferred partnership status. After the huge distress to European leaders of enduring a US president who willed the breakup of the European Union, a Biden administration will revert to something much closer to America’s traditional post-1945 policy. Namely that US interests are best served by Europe being stable and cohesive. Having severed its central bond with its neighbours, the UK can no longer hope to offer itself to Washington as America’s bridge across the Atlantic. Searching for areas where the relationship could still be close, some emphasise “the hard security issues” – military co-operation, counter-terrorism and intelligence – where there are mutual interests that have historically transcended the personalities of leaders. “When the Americans are looking for military help, they ask who are our allies and what have they got?” says one senior Tory who thinks this still matters. But Johnson government officials sound rather desperate when they try to talk up the importance of the UK’s much-reduced military heft. Mr Biden is not planning any wars and, even if he were, the United States can act without the help of Britain. The biggest foreign policy challenge of the Biden presidency will be managing his country’s tense strategic competition with China while avoiding a deterioration into armed confrontation. Britain’s ability to be of use to Washington in that sphere is limited because our capacity to apply meaningful pressure on China is not high. The UK government has protested in vain about China’s treatment of Hong Kong. Downing Street also sounds as if it is clutching at very feeble straws when it suggests that there will be an opportunity to win favour next year when Britain hosts the UN climate change conference. Mr Biden is not exactly a summit novice and his team have clocked that Britain was mealymouthed when Mr Trump ripped up American commitments to tackling the climate crisis. There are compelling reasons why a change at the White House ought to unnerve Mr Johnson. The Trump presidency emboldens populist nationalists around the world by encouraging them to believe that they are part of an irresistibly triumphant global trend. Defeat for him will give his one term in office more the character of a freakish spasm and leave imitators looking like purveyors of an ideological style that is going out of fashion. During the Trump period, Mr Johnson has tried to lever influence with other leaders by presenting himself as the man who has the ear of, and can help to interpret, the White House wild man. “Boris Johnson sold himself as the Trump whisperer,” says Jonathan Powell, a diplomat in Washington before he became Tony Blair’s chief of staff. “Without Trump, what is the point of Johnson?” More existentially, the British may ask themselves where his policies have left this country other than looking alone in a dangerous world. Brexit has fractured the relationship with Europe, one pillar of the postwar foreign policy. Now it looks highly likely that the other pillar, a close relationship with the US, will be shuddering. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the Observer
16||What happened when me and Kim Kardashian both turned 40?My bottom is as flat as Norfolk. It’s basically a back, slightly folded. As a seat it’s acceptable, though after 45 minutes I am grateful for a padded chair. In a tight dress in dim light the effect is MC Escher-like – a leering eye is unfortunately drawn down and around a virtual staircase somehow ending up back at the shoulders again without a hint of arousal, which is sad. And yet despite my gluteous failings, Kim Kardashian and I have much in common. Both she and I turn 40 this month, and nobody can believe it of either of us. Forty! I know! A bizarre age to turn when all your parents are still basically 40; a crazy age to be presented with when you’re still not quite sure about historical wars or the spelling of, say, “embarrass”, nor can you confidently work the second TV remote. A mad age to be when, if asked how old you were, quickly and after a bracing swim, would reply, “19” without a quiver. But here it is, in black and white and shades of sparkling bronze; she and I enter the autumn of our youths and, well, also autumn, as middle-aged suburban mums. Yes, her and Kanye’s house is significantly cleaner than mine, and her arse potentially more influential. Sure, I am not yet responsible for the felling of an entire forest’s worth of paper to host debates on whether I am the overlooked face of feminism, and sure, too, she is unlikely to be found in her Twitter DMs debating taste and class consciousness vis-à-vis the return of Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen’s Changing Rooms, but this month Kim and I share an important thing: both of us have been robbed of a party. Instead of her planned celebration, a “Wild, Wild Miss West”-themed ball, for which she’d commissioned Thierry Mugler to make her a “metal cowgirl costume”, she is marking her birthday with the launch of a new makeup palette. I had also looked into launching a new makeup palette for my 40th. Well, less a palette, more a plate with a face painted wetly on to it that one can keep beside the bed and flatten upon themselves every morning to save time, but the red tape was a nightmare so, instead, I spent the day eating well and complaining loudly. Never have I needed a party more. The month-long lead-up, the quiet texts from friends asking politely if I’ve invited their exes, the gorgeous anxiety of worrying absolutely nobody will come. And then the day, with its perfunctory hoovering and rearranging of shelves – the walking into an empty room again and again attempting to see it as others might, the ceremonial bowling up of crisps. Evening, the noisy hairdryer over the noisy record player, the lover-like laying of dress on bed. Lamplighting, a candle that threatens to burn down the bunting, and just when doubt kicks in about the very fine threads of friendship you have sewn across years and postcodes, the best music in the world – a doorbell, right on time. It gets dark and someone’s smoking inside. You lose control of the music around the time the hummus runs out, and soon a girl will be shouting in your ear about love or buses. Because age is real, someone will mournfully leave then to pay a babysitter, and their face will disappear ghostlike in an Uber window. At some point there are no more photos taken, and two people are slow dancing in the kitchen to Kermit’s Rainbow Connection, and the hem of your dress is wet so you tuck it into your tights. It’s no surprise who’s still there at dawn, or who is part-dead on the sofa when you’re quietly decanting old drinks in the morning, or who texts for your sister’s number the following day, or who orders a pizza with you when evening rudely returns. Ah, to know again the sweet ignorance of eating cake someone has blown on. The carefree joy of trying a stranger’s cocktail, the casual hello hug of some you barely care for. Never have I needed a party more. It’s comforting to know that right now at least one person is feeling exactly the same. Perhaps, when “all this” is “over”, Kim and I could sort out a joint party. I’m up for it if she is. I could supply the Ikea fairy lights, she could be in charge of going-home bags containing £30,000-worth of spangly iPhones and a voucher for a knee-lift. She could call in a queen-sized chocolate sculpture of our auras, I could make sure everyone knew how to do the tricky lock on the loo. She could ask Disney to create a Frozen-themed sleepover for the children, I could see if my mum could sort out some pasta for them around six. She could get her husband to whip up the dancefloor, I could get my husband to mop it up later. A piñata in the shape of Kim’s body, a truncheon to hit it with in the shape of mine. The more I think about it the more I know it could work. It is becoming clear that the real tragedy of Covid is the fact that Kim and I have been unable to properly celebrate our ascent into middle age. Which means, of course, that all important birthdays must regretfully be postponed. I will not turn 40 until the vaccine is ready, and only then, when I finally receive the kall. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWiseman
15||Simone Lia: Scary films – cartoon
17||Chilling find shows how Henry VIII planned every detail of Boleyn beheadingIt is a Tudor warrant book, one of many in the National Archives, filled with bureaucratic minutiae relating to 16th-century crimes. But this one has an extraordinary passage, overlooked until now, which bears instructions from Henry VIII explaining precisely how he wanted his second wife, Anne Boleyn, to be executed. In this document, the king stipulated that, although his queen had been “adjudged to death… by burning of fire… or decapitation”, he had been “moved by pity” to spare her the more painful death of being “burned by fire”. But he continued: “We, however, command that… the head of the same Anne shall be… cut off.” Tracy Borman, a leading Tudor historian, described the warrant book as an astonishing discovery, reinforcing the image of Henry VIII as a “pathological monster”. She told the Observer: “As a previously unknown document about one of the most famous events in history, it really is golddust, one of the most exciting finds in recent years. What it shows is Henry’s premeditated, calculating manner. He knows exactly how and where he wants it to happen.” The instructions laid out by Henry are for Sir William Kingston, constable of the Tower, detailing how the king would rid himself of the “late queen of England, lately our wife, lately attainted and convicted of high treason”. Boleyn was incarcerated in the Tower of London on 2 May 1536 for adultery. At her trial, she was depicted as unable to control her “carnal lusts”. She refuted the charges but was found guilty of treason and condemned to be burned or beheaded at “the King’s pleasure”. Most historians agree the charges were bogus – her only crime had been her failure to give Henry a son. The most famous king in English history married six times in his relentless quest for a male heir. He divorced his first wife, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Boleyn – the marriage led him to break with the Catholic church and brought about the English Reformation. Boleyn did bear him a daughter, who became Elizabeth I. In recent years, the story of Boleyn’s life and death have reached a new audience thanks to Hilary Mantel’s bestselling saga tracing the life of Thomas Cromwell, a blacksmith’s son who became one of Henry VIII’s most trusted advisers. In the Booker-prize-winning Bring Up the Bodies, she explored the destruction of Boleyn, writing of her execution: “Three years ago when she went to be crowned, she walked on a blue cloth that stretched the length of the abbey… Now she must shift over the rough ground… with her body hollow and light and just as many hands around her, ready to retrieve her from any stumble and deliver her safely to death.” The warrant book reveals that Henry worked out details such as the exact spot for the execution (“upon the Green within our Tower of London”), making clear Kingston should “omit nothing” from his orders. Borman is joint chief curator for Historic Royal Palaces, the charity that manages the Tower of London, among other sites. She will include the discovery in her forthcoming Channel 5 series, The Fall of Anne Boleyn, which begins in December. She had visited the National Archives to study the Anne Boleyn trial papers when archivist Sean Cunningham, a Tudor expert, drew her attention to a passage he had discovered in a warrant book. Most of these warrants are “just the minutiae of Tudor government”, she said. “They’re pretty dull. The Tudors were great bureaucrats, and there are an awful lot of these warrant books and account books within the National Archives… It’s thanks to Sean’s eye for detail that it was uncovered.” Borman argues that, despite the coldness of the instructions, the fact Henry spared Boleyn from being burned – a slow, agonising death – was a real kindness by the standards of the day. A beheading with an axe could also involve several blows, and Henry had specified that Boleyn’s head should be “cut off’, which meant by sword, a more reliable form of execution, but not used in England, which is why he had Cromwell send to Calais for a swordsman. Henry’s instructions were not followed to the letter, though, partly due to a series of blunders, Borman said. “The execution didn’t take place on Tower Green, which is actually where we still mark it at the Tower today. More recent research has proved that… it was moved to opposite what is today the Waterloo Block, home of the crown jewels.” She added: “Because we know the story so well, we forget how deeply shocking it was to execute a queen. They could well have got the collywobbles and thought we’re not going to do this. So this is Henry making really sure of it. For years, his trusty adviser Thomas Cromwell has got the blame. But this shows, actually, it’s Henry pulling the strings.”
18||Summer of 85 review – François Ozon's bittersweet teen romanceThis latest from François Ozon, director of such wildly diverse offerings as Sitcom, Under the Sand, 8 Women and The New Girlfriend is a bittersweet saga of love and death, a coming-of-age tale based on Aidan Chambers’s 1982 novel Dance on My Grave. Shifting the setting from Southend-on-Sea to Le Tréport in 1985, it centres on Alex (Félix Lefebvre), a death-obsessed teen in the throes of doomed first love, whose morbidly romantic story plays out with the sensual artfulness of classic Ozon, combined with the accessible vigour of an 80s American teen pic. We first meet David (Benjamin Voisin) at sea, a beautiful vision riding the waves to rescue the hapless Alex after his little boat capsizes. David takes Alex home to his widowed mum, played with nervy energy by Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, who undresses and bathes the new arrival (“All David’s capsized friends go in the tub!”) and tells Alex that “my David needs a real friend”. Yet with his flick-knife comb and razor-cut smile, David is clearly much more than a friend, taking Alex’s breath away as he weaves through oncoming traffic on his motorbike, chasing an elusive moment of speeding ecstasy that is always just out of reach, like the green light in The Great Gatsby. All this thrilling young love unfolds in flashback, intercut with later scenes in which an apparently traumatised Alex faces questions about a terrible event for which he is being held accountable. Is Alex somehow responsible for the dreadful fate awaiting David? The only person able to reach Alex is Mr Lefèvre (Melvil Poupaud), the caring but slightly creepy teacher who tells him to try to write about what happened, seemingly prompting the self-questioning memoir narrative. Ozon first read Chambers’s novel as a teenager and his adaptation blends the prickly joy of that first encounter with the stylistic confidence of a film-maker revisiting an old flame. Gorgeously shot on super-16 by cinematographer Hichame Alaouie, this has the tangible texture of its retro setting, filtered through a nostalgic lens that seems to supersaturate the image, amplifying emotions. Pop music plays a key role, with the Cure’s In Between Days bookending jukebox selections that trip from the melancholia of Bananarama’s Cruel Summer to the jump-around sounds of Movie Music’s Stars De La Pub. In one key scene, recalling a memorable moment from the 1980 film La boum, Alex finds himself in a nightclub, swaying slowly to the headphone sounds of Rod Stewart’s Sailing while those around him (including David) cavort to more frenetic disco beats. But whereas in La boum, Richard Sanderson’s Reality created a momentary bubble of intimacy for Sophie Marceau and Alexandre Sterling’s characters, here Alex is alone is his reverie, highlighting not only the differing paths that he and David are on, but also the sense that this “friend of my dreams” may be just that – an invention, a projection, reminding us that we do indeed live as we dream, alone. Well-observed background details add weight to the story, from David’s Jewish heritage and suppressed bereavement about his father to the subtly sympathetic figures of Alex’s parents, who seem to understand more than he imagines. There’s also a strong thread of black comedy, not least in a cross-dressing sequence that somehow manages to intertwine agonising anguish with near-slapstick absurdity – just one example of the tonal balancing act that Ozon so deftly maintains.
0||'What we do isn't rocket science': how Midtjylland started football's data revolutionThink of it as the Moneyball derby. Not so long ago, the idea a club could gain a vital edge using mathematical models – let alone employ a theoretical physicist or track key performance indicators (KPI) – would have left real football men choking on their meat pies and Bovril. But when Liverpool host Midtjylland in the Champions League on Tuesday, it will not only be a meeting between the champions of England and Denmark, but one between the twin vanguards of the sport’s analytics revolution. Midtjylland became the movement’s poster child in 2014 when they started using deeper metrics – such as expected goals and pre-assists to an assist – to better evaluate player performances, find undervalued bargains and to shatter myths and easy narratives. Many sneered when the unfashionable club from the centre of the Danish mainland – literally the middle of Jutland – also hired dedicated ball-striking and throw-in coaches and when their chairman, Rasmus Ankersen, promised to exploit inefficiencies in football. Winning three Danish Superliga titles in six years and qualifying for the Champions League for the first time this autumn have proved an effective riposte. More recently, Liverpool have become Midtjylland’s big-budget half-brother. Their highly regarded research department, which includes an analyst with a doctorate in high-energy physics from Harvard, has earned significant credit for its recruitment of a string of top-quality players. The bonds between the teams go further still, however. Two years ago, Jürgen Klopp headhunted Midtjylland’s throwing coach, Thomas Grønnemark. Since then, Liverpool’s statistics for retaining possession from throw-ins under pressure has shot up from 45.4% to 68.4% – taking them from one of the worst in the Premier League to the second-best in Europe. The team ahead of them? Midtjylland. “We also scored a lot of goals on long throws, then he went to Liverpool,” says Ankersen. Midtjylland were thrashed 4-0 at home to Atalanta in their opening Champions League game and the bookies make them huge underdogs against Liverpool. But if they have a chance of making their hosts uncomfortable, it will probably come at set pieces, where they consistently ranked among the most successful teams in Europe. It is the result – the club’s amiable captain, Erik Sviatchenko, explains – of analysts scrutinising thousands of free-kicks and corners and distilling them into an American football-style set-piece playbook of 20-25 routines. “Other clubs do this,” he says. “But when you see the data, 49% of all our goals last season were scored on set pieces. They are something our club and our owner, Matthew Benham, sees as a clear point for winning or changing games.” Benham is the key figure in the Midtjylland story. Since taking a controlling stake in 2014 – two years after he did so in England at Brentford – he has used similar methods and models to those that helped him win millions as a professional gambler. His company, Smartodds, which analyses matches and players in dozens of leagues around the world, is also used by the club. It all amounts, says Ankersen, to a different way of thinking. “A professional gambler seeks an edge over the market. He is not getting it right all the time. He’s looking for value. However, in football there are a lot of emotional mechanics that lead to people not making rational decisions – that sets them back.” Ankersen says data is key because it helps Midtjylland get closer to the truth. “In football the stories we tell ourselves are often wrong,” he says. “Look what happens when a team goes through a bad set of results. The fans and the media search for a narrative to explain it. It’s the same when a team does well. “Last season, for instance, we won the league by 14 points. People were saying we were doing fantastically well. But when you looked at the underlying data, we didn’t actually improve. Our closest competitors got worse. And once you’ve seen regression to the mean, again and again, you build up a big belief that this is the right way of doing things.” The club even have a league table that shows where each team would be in the standings based on its underlying numbers, calculated by Benham’s team at Smartodds. “Even if I were allowed, I couldn’t tell you the precise algorithm involved,” says the head performance analyst, Søren Bjerg. “But expected goals is in there, as well as how opponents have been doing and whether a team has changed its coach and so on. There are a lot of variables.” These days almost every club has an analytics department. So how does a club stay ahead in a world where expected goals is now on Match of the Day and the easiest analytical advantages have already been exploited? Ankersen, understandably, does not want to give every secret away. But he says there are still inefficiencies – if a club knows where to find them. “The Brazilian transfer market is really chaotic, for instance,” he says. “The value of a player can change by a few hundred percent over a couple of months. It’s a highly irrational and emotional market. If you can pick up players when they are on a low, there’s a lot of value.” The signings of Paulinho, “an outstanding left back”, as well as Evander, who “on his day is the best player in the Danish league” after he lost his way at Vasco De Gama, shows Midtjylland practice what they preach. Ankersen also believes that some clubs are still doing “simple things” wrong, like taking too many shots from locations where the probability of scoring is too low - and points to the growth of three-point shooting in basketball as an example of a sport that’s become more efficient. Meanwhile Sviatchenko says another edge comes through using sports psychologist BS Christiansen, a former elite soldier from the Danish Huntsmen Corps, who is “especially good when we need to get together and talk through things”. “I don’t think a lot of what we do is rocket science,” says Ankersen. “But where we may be ahead still is that this is driven from the top. It’s not two interns in the basement working with data. The belief system comes from Matthew, from me and it filters down.” Ankersen says one KPI coaches have been given this season is to increase the team’s Smartodds rating up by 0.5 goals. “So between us we are asking: ‘Where’s that improvement going to come from? Is it going to come from set pieces? Where are the low-hanging fruits defensively and offensively? In which phases of the game?’” A knock-on effect is that Midtjylland keep chasing a second and third goal when they are 1-0 up, says Bjerg. Is that because your experts have worked out it is better not to sit on a lead? “Exactly,” he says. “But it also suits our style of play. Our mindset isn’t to sit back. The whole club DNA is about achieving things rather than protecting the stuff you have already got.” Those watching on Tuesday will see Midtjylland play a 4-2-3-1 formation and like to press – much like Liverpool. “We also have a little bit of X-Factor on our day, especially with Pione Sisto and Evander,” says Ankersen. Four years ago, Sisto was also a scorer when Midtjylland stunned Manchester United in the first leg of a Europa League last-32 tie. Toppling Liverpool, Ankersen says, would be another level again, but he is not entirely ruling it out. “It’s going to be very difficult,” he says. “We will need to play to our best, and have a bit of luck. But bigger miracles have happened in football.”
12||John Gray: 'What can we learn from cats? Don't live in an imagined future'What’s it like to be a cat? John Gray has spent a lifetime half-wondering. The philosopher – to his many fans the intellectual cat’s pyjamas, to his critics the least palatable of furballs – has had feline companions at home since he was a boy in South Shields. In adult life – he now lives in Bath with his wife Mieko, a dealer in Japanese antiquities – this has principally been two pairs of cats: “Two Burmese sisters, Sophie and Sarah, and two Birman brothers, Jamie and Julian.” The last of them, Julian, died earlier this year, aged 23. Gray, currently catless, is by no means a sentimental writer, but his new book, Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life, is written in memory of their shared wisdom. Other philosophers have been enthralled by cats over the years. There was Schrödinger and his box, of course. And Michel de Montaigne, who famously asked: “When I am playing with my cat, how do I know she is not playing with me?” The rationalist René Descartes, Gray notes, once “hurled a cat out of the window in order to demonstrate the absence of conscious awareness in non-human animals; its terrified screams were mechanical reactions, he concluded.” One impulse for this book was a conversation with a fellow philosopher, who assured Gray that he “had taught his cat to be vegan”. (Gray had only one question: “Did the cat ever go out?” It did.) When he informed another philosopher that he was writing about what we can learn from cats, that man replied: “But cats have no history.” “And,” Gray wondered, “is that necessarily a disadvantage?” Elsewhere, Gray has written how Ludwig Wittgenstein once observed “if lions could talk we would not understand”, to which the zookeeper John Aspinall responded: “He hasn’t spent long enough with lions.” If cats could talk, I ask Gray, do you think we would understand? “Well, the book is in some ways an experiment in that respect,” he says. “Of course, it’s not a scientific inquiry. But if you live with a cat very closely for a long time – and it takes a long time, because they’re slow to trust, slow to really enter into communication with you – then you can probably imagine how they might philosophise.” Gray believes that humans turned to philosophy principally out of anxiety, looking for some tranquillity in a chaotic and frightening world, telling themselves stories that might provide the illusion of calm. Cats, he suggests, wouldn’t recognise that need because they naturally revert to equilibrium whenever they’re not hungry or threatened. If cats were to give advice, it would be for their own amusement. Readers of Gray will recognise this book as a postscript or coda to Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Other Animals, the 2002 bestseller in which he elegantly dismantled the history of western philosophy – with its illusory faith in our species living somehow “above” evolving life and outside the constraints of nature. That book aimed its fire particularly at the prevailing belief of our time: that of the inevitably steady forward progress of humankind brought about by liberal democracy. When the book came out, as George W Bush was demanding “regime change” in Iraq, it struck a particular nerve. In the two decades since, its argument that the advance of rational enlightened thought might not offer any kind of lasting protection against baser tribal instincts or environmental destruction or human folly has felt like prophecy. Gray never bought the idea that his book was a handbook for despair. His subject was humility; his target any ideology that believed it possessed anything more than doubtful and piecemeal answers to vast and changing questions. The cat book is written in that spirit. If like me you read with a pencil to hand, you will be underlining constantly with a mix of purring enjoyment and frequent exclamation marks. “Consciousness has been overrated,” Gray will write, coolly. Or “the flaw in rationalism is the belief that human beings can live by applying a theory”. Or “human beings quickly lose their humanity but cats never stop being cats”. He concludes with a 10-point list of how cats might give their anxious, unhappy, self-conscious human companions hints “to live less awkwardly”. These range from “never try to persuade human beings to be reasonable”, to “do not look for meaning in your suffering” to “sleep for the joy of sleeping”. Does he see that 10-point plan, offered half in earnest (“as a cat would offer it”) as an answer to those people who criticised Straw Dogs for offering little in place of what it debunked? “Yes, yes,” Gray says, in his engaged and friendly voice, that still carries a north-east inflection (he chose the theme of When the Boat Comes In as one of his desert island discs). “Many people didn’t like Straw Dogs. The criticism was that I swept the board of philosophy and left nothing standing. I should say that I got some wonderful responses from people who weren’t philosophers. For example, three over the years, from war correspondents who said that adapting to what they’d witnessed, the trauma, had been one of the great struggles of their lives. And somehow my book helped them.” It helped them because it removed the pressure to make terrible and tragic things meaningful? “Exactly. I would say that a lot of torment in our lives comes from that pressure for finding meaning. Unless you adopt a transcendental faith which imagines a wholly other world where meaning is secure from any accident, most of the things that happen to us are pure chance. We struggle with the idea that there is no hidden meaning to find. We can’t become cats in that sense – we probably will need to always have the disposition to tell ourselves stories about our lives – but I would suggest a library of short stories is better than a novel.” In these three-tiered times our original plan for this interview was to meet and sit outside a cafe in Bath – Gray, 72, is wary of inside – but the forecast suggested we’d have got soaked, so we have retreated, catlike, indoors, and to Zoom. In some ways, I suggest, Gray’s is the perfect book for the estranging oddness of the pandemic. How has he coped? “I’ve tried to emulate what I recall of my wonderful cat Julian,” he says. “Which is, not to live in an imagined future. We simply don’t know how this is going to develop. And of course, the political response in most places, and certainly here, has been shambolic. But that inability to come up with a clear response reflects, I think, something deep: that even the most well-developed systems of knowledge always leave an enormous amount of uncertainty.” Alarm bells must have gone off for Gray when Dominic Cummings started promoting the powers of “super-forecasting”, while the government appeared unable to predict what was likely to happen the following day? “Yes, they did. I think “super-forecasting” is possible only in a very few limited fields. Hardly anyone has forecasted the biggest events in my lifetime. And, more importantly, most of the really big events were not considered even to be within the range of reasonable possibilities. I remember back in the early 2000s, asking various economists and bigwigs if there could be a global banking crisis and the idea was universally dismissed. Only one even said: ‘I don’t think so, but you never know.’” If we are hopeless at imagining the future, we are, I suggest, brilliant at recasting the suddenly weird present to make it seem normal? “That has happened, although I think it’s partly on the assumption that many people still have that there will be a ‘normal’ to go back to. I don’t think that’s at all plausible. I think some of the changes that have occurred in the course of this six months might usually take six years or 60 years. Some of these may prove benign in a rich country, which Britain still is, but not so much for the more marginal populations in Brazil or India, say.” Take HS2, Gray suggests. “Always a mistake for cost and environmental reasons, but now it’s surreal, because huge numbers are never going to travel for work again, not in the way that they did. There is kind of a lag built into politics – in which adapting to a radically changed circumstance is easier to do in practice for individuals than for governments.” Cats, he says, returning to our theme, don’t have stories to which they get deeply attached. “Of course, you may say that’s because they haven’t got the intellectual capacity, but I think it’s just as likely they’re not interested.” That lack of interest in holding on to particular stories has led Gray over the years to some curious places politically. He grew up in a strong old Labour house on Tyneside, where his father worked on the docks as a carpenter and his mother kept the home. Witnessing that close community being broken up in the 1960s – Victorian streets bulldozed, and residents moved into brutal “utopian” housing schemes built under the criminal Labour council leader T Dan Smith – gave Gray a lasting distrust of all grandiose projects selling the idea of progress. He has formed the belief since then that “politics is a succession of temporary and partial remedies for permanent and recurring human evil”. His two central intellectual friendships were with the Oxford philosopher Isaiah Berlin, whose family had fled Soviet Russia, and with the novelist JG Ballard, who spent his childhood in a Japanese prison facility. Both helped to convince Gray that any political movement that believed it possessed a monopoly of wisdom, had gulags or concentration camps priced in. (In his most famous provocation, aping Jonathan Swift, Gray wrote a satirical “modest proposal” that called for the urgent reintroduction of torture to protect human rights in western democracies; Abu Ghraib and extraordinary rendition quickly followed.) Gray has consistently voted flexibly, for what he sees as the lesser of two political evils at any political moment. “Had I been around, I would have strongly supported the Attlee government in 1945,” he says, but by the 1970s, he believed that postwar Labour settlement had become unwieldy and corrupt. Setting himself against most of the university academy, he supported Thatcher as a necessary corrective in British political history. “But then it turned into another ‘universal project’, certainly by 1989. And I would say I started jumping off in about 1987.” He was in favour of New Labour for a while, before abandoning the idea of that project for the same reasons. In the last election he voted Conservative, persuaded in part, he says, by that need to get Brexit done, and laughing now at the delusional hypocrisy of “democrats”, who wanted a second referendum “without the option that people had voted for the first time even on the paper!” That was never going to end well, in his eyes – and neither too was the European Union itself, with its grand schemes and projects. “I was interviewed in the early 90s, by a Polish newspaper,” Gray says. “They asked, ‘What do you think will come after the new [Thatcherite] right that had emerged after the fall of communism in eastern Europe?’ And I said, ‘Probably the old right’. The idea of a Europe-wide economic space was from day one a very capitalist project. And given that communism had imploded, where was the backlash against the European Union going to come from? It would have to come from the right – and that is what has happened.” Gray predicted the election victory of Trump in 2016 for something like the same reasons – “the feeling of abandonment, and disrespect in large parts of the working population” had to go somewhere – and suggests that even in the event of a Biden victory next month, those forces will not be silenced. Human beings, particularly in extremis, should never be expected to make rational choices. “As Bertrand Russell pointed out, the first world war, when it started, was welcomed largely as an interruption of boredom.” Cats don’t appear to get bored, because in Gray’s terms it would never occur to them to struggle to be happy. Humans, on the other hand, “are self-divided creatures whose lives are mostly spent on displacement activity”. Much of this displacement activity is a product of that other disabling difference to their feline companions, the certain knowledge of death. Gray is, typically, both irreligious and anti-atheist, reserving genial contempt for the likes of Richard Dawkins, and their censorious belief “that religion can be simply erased”. Gray believes that our innate need to explain mortality and suffering with imagination and myth is far too fundamental. “I don’t have an idea of God or anything but I find the idea that you could wipe the slate clean of that impulse to be ridiculous. I once met in America a Christian fundamentalist, who told me in all seriousness that if young people were brought up in a completely chaste environment, they wouldn’t experience sexual urges until they got married.” He laughs loudly. “That’s exactly what Dawkins thinks about religion. Myth-making has been a part of every single human culture in history, why would we imagine that it is disappearing from our own?” Gray writes with great amusement in this book and elsewhere of the stubborn gap between philosophers’ higher ideals and the more animal instincts of their lives, but he genially resists any autobiographical reading of his own life or thinking. He has a few catch-all defences to more personal questions – “I tend to think my life is not that interesting,” and so on. (To which one’s cynical instinct is to think: “The philosopher does not reflect much on his own life? Yeah, right.”) I ask him at one point if he thinks that being childless has had any bearing on his thinking, but he shuts down that line of inquiry, with his only vaguely curt reply in two hours of wide-ranging cat chat: “I tend not to talk about that aspect of my life.” I wonder if he chose to live in Bath for the same reasons he suggests Schopenhauer chose to live in Frankfurt for the last decades of his life: “no floods, better cafes and good dentists”? He laughs. “Well the dentists seem pretty good.” He came to Bath after leaving academic life – having been a professor of politics at Oxford, he was for a decade professor of European thought at the London School of Economics – to become “a freelance writer”. “I was looking for a walking city,” he says. “And I like the fact here that if you look up you can see trees.” The liberation from academia has given him more liberty, he suggests, to write exactly as he pleases, cat-like. “If you’re an academic, before you say anything at all, you have to give about 20 caveats,” he says. “And when I was a professional academic, I used to do that. But now I take a different view. I just say I’m just putting this out for you to consider. Don’t throw it away – or if you do at least give it to Oxfam.” He loves the lightness of those writers who construct fabulous thought-experiments, Montaigne, Borges. “The English-speaking world associates aphorism with arrogance,” he says. “But I’m not sure other ways of writing are more likely to change minds. I don’t want followers. I don’t even expect many people to understand what I say. The whole point of the voice I have in the books is to trigger a process of thought in some readers whose outcome is uncertain.” And what does he say to those critics who argue that his writing dwells on the reductive, brutish side of humanity, as opposed to its great collective achievements? “If you think, as I do, that civilised life is like a spider’s web, easy to destroy, but hard to construct, then what I write is perhaps a caution, a warning. I’m anti-hubris.” In the last sentence of Straw Dogs, Gray asked a question, almost plaintively: “Can we not think of the aim of life as being simply to see?” Has writing the current book helped him to understand what such a life of experience might look like? “Cats live for the sensation of life, not for something they might achieve or not achieve,” he says. “If we attach ourselves too heavily to some overarching purpose we’re losing the joy of life. Leave all those ideologies and religions to one side and what’s left? What’s left is a sensation of life – which is a wonderful thing.” Feline Philosophy: Cats and the Meaning of Life is published by Allen Lane on 29 October (£20). To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
1||Whether Trump or Biden wins, US-China relations look set to worsenTies between China and the US have reached their lowest point in decades ahead of the election in November, signalling what experts in both countries believe is the clear direction for one of the most important bilateral relationships in the world. Under the Trump administration, the US has put sanctions on Chinese officials over human rights issues in Xinjiang and Hong Kong while also increasing engagement with Taiwan, including arms sales. A trade deal to end a protracted tariff war has stalled and the US has placed more restrictions on Chinese state media. Biden, who in a presidential debate referred to the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, as one of several “thugs” Trump has cosied up to, has also promised to take a strong stance against China. “The China-US relationship will not go back to where it was before,” said Cheng Xiaohe, an associate professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing. “The relationship is so bad.” It is a view shared in the US. “Regardless of who wins the US presidential election, we should expect to see increasing US-China tensions across a broad range of economic, political, geo-strategic, human rights and people-to people issues for the years to come,” said Wendy Cutler, former acting deputy at the Office of the US Trade Representative, focusing on Asia. Hong Kong and Taiwan are particular flash points. In response to Beijing imposing a controversial national security law in Hong Kong, the Trump administration placed sanctions on officials connected to the crackdown, downgraded the city’s special customs status and warned financial institutions against conducting “significant” transactions with anyone deemed to have undermined Hong Kong’s autonomy. In Taiwan the US has sent high-level government visitors, drawing recrimination from Beijing, increased military exercises in the region and launched a new economic dialogue with Taipei. There have been calls for the US to end its policy of “strategic ambiguity”, a way of discouraging both Beijing and Taipei from making a military move by refusing to say if the US would come to Taiwan’s aid. “The mutual distrust has never been higher,” said Bonnie Glaser, director of the China Power Project at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies. “I think many in China think the US has basically abandoned its one-China policy,” she said, referring to Beijing’s view that Taiwan is part of China. While tensions will persist under a Biden administration, the key difference, observers expect, will be in approach. Biden has pledged to work with allies to pressure China through the multilateral organisations that Trump has eschewed. Analysts expect the Democratic candidate, if elected, to work with China on issues such as climate change and response to the pandemic. “We need to be having the rest of our friends with us, saying to China: ‘We play by the rules. You play by them or you are going to pay the price for not playing by them, economically’,” Biden said in Thursday’s debate against Trump. In contrast, Trump is expected to continue a more confrontational, unilateral strategy that is likely to raise tensions. While Trump’s approach is likely to place more immediate pressure on China, Biden’s is seen by others as more predictable and comprehensive. A second term for Trump heralds unpredictability in a number of ways. During the initial years of his presidency, Trump spoke admiringly of Xi and was seen by experts in China as “a businessman ready to make deals and not focused on human rights,” according to Jacques deLisle, director of the Center for the Study of Contemporary China at the University of Pennsylvania. A trade deal, previously seen as his top priority in relation to China, could take precedent over human rights. Last year Trump described pro-democracy protests as “riots”. According to his former national security adviser John Bolton, Trump told Xi to “go ahead building the camps” in Xinjiang, describing the mass internment campaign as “exactly the right thing to do”. Some optimists in China believe another four years of Trump would give both countries time to negotiate a trade deal. Still, others believe there is potential for ties to dramatically worsen. “The current situation couldn’t be any worse. If it does get worse, military conflict is near,” said Cheng. Beijing has so far responded to the Trump administration’s various moves with reciprocal measures that limit escalating tensions. Four more years of Trump coinciding with an increasingly aggressive Chinese leadership could end that restraint. “It is possible that China has been gritting its teeth and not reacting to Trump provocations during what may be the final months of the administration. With a reelection, all bets would be off on that front,” said deLisle. For hawks in China another term for Trump is ideal. In China, state media have portrayed the pandemic in the US, Black Lives Matter protests and the chaos of the first presidential debate as yet more examples of the failing American democratic experiment. “While China is worried about Trump’s aggressiveness over the short-term, it also believes that over the long-term he is accelerating American decline,” said Rush Doshi, director of the Brookings China Strategy Initiative. Few in China however saw much difference between the two candidates as they met for their final debate. Under a clip posted on Weibo, one commentator observed: “These two should be enjoying their twilight years, not exposing their flaws in public.” Another wrote: “US comedians have taken the stage.” As that debate got underway, Xi gave a lengthy speech to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the war to “resist US aggression and aid Korea” between 1950 and 1953. Speaking in the Great Hall of the People, Xi said Chinese people had learned to “speak to invaders in a language they understand.” He declared: “The Chinese people will not create trouble but nor are we afraid of them, and no matter the difficulties or challenges we face, our legs will not shake and our backs will not bend.” Additional reporting by Helen Davidson and Lillian Yang.
3||Who in Europe is getting it right on Covid?A second coronavirus wave is sweeping continental Europe, with new infection records broken daily in many countries. There are wide variations, but almost no country has been left untouched – even those that fared well in the first wave. Across the 31 countries from which the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control collects national data, the average 14-day case incidence rate per 100,000 inhabitants has multiplied from just 13 in mid-July to almost 250 last week. While hospitalisations, ICU admissions and deaths are not so far following the same steep upward curve and generally remain far below levels this spring, they are rising steadily – and already causing severe problems for health services in some countries. France reported more than 40,000 new cases on two days this week, bringing its 14-day incidence rate to 521. Strict measures including a 9pm-6am curfew now cover two-thirds of the population. Germany, whose infection rate was far lower than most EU countries this spring, is also seeing new daily cases surge alarmingly: from 5,250 a day to 13,500 this week for an incidence rate of 319 – a “very serious” rise, a senior official warned. Spain, one of the worst affected during the first wave, is again facing crisis, becoming the first western European country to pass 1 million cases this week after recording 20,000 new infections on two consecutive days. Italy, another country hit hard this spring, hit a new case record on Friday with 19,000 infections amid fears the pandemic is again spiralling out of control. With a 14-day incidence rate of 240 per 100,000, the situation is “dramatic”. The epidemic in Belgium, which suffered one of Europe’s highest per-capita death tolls this spring, is “out of control” and “the most dangerous in Europe”, the health minister has said, with a 14-day incidence rate of a startling 1,115. The Czech Republic, lauded as a first wave success with infection rates among the lowest on the continent, is now among the highest with an even higher incidence rate of 1,210. Like Belgium, it seems headed for a new lockdown. Sweden, an international outlier with its anti-lockdown strategy, has introduced mandatory regional measures to combat a sudden surge that last week saw the number of new daily infections exceed 1,000 from barely 150 in early September. Finland, with one of Europe’s lowest infection and death rates first time round, is one of few EU countries to be fighting this second wave effectively. Tough regional measures have reversed a surge in new cases over the past week, leaving the country’s 14-day incidence rate at 52 per 100,000 inhabitants.
5||The north-south divide is as old as England itself. Unity is only ever fleetingDivide England? Who could seriously propose that? With all that mighty history behind us? Well, it didn’t seem crazy to Winston Churchill in 1912. He said that if we wanted to preserve the UK we “would have to face the task of dividing England into several great self-governing areas”. Southern England was just too Tory – and too big. Churchill saw that in the democratic era an England dominated by this Tory south could not coexist with the Celts. If anyone thinks he was wrong, just look at what has happened over the past year. By the autumn of 2019, clear majorities of Conservative voters were ready to jettison the UK, and even the Conservative party itself, in pursuit of Brexit. Our very modern, music-hall merry monarch, Boris Johnson, and his tacticians saw the way the wind was blowing. A purged Conservative and Unionist party became the English National party in all but name. Nationalism did what nationalism does, persuading people whose lives are very different that they have mysterious interests in common and many northerners were persuaded to vote, often for the first time, the same way as southerners. It looked like an epochal triumph, but the Tories were forgetting the monster from the English id. Scarcely 10 months after Johnson was enshrined, scientific discussions about how best to fight a pandemic somehow mutated into a political north-south battle. It is as if English history is on autopilot. For this cry has assailed southern leaders from the death of Athelstan (the first Englishman to rule all of England) in 939AD. The struggle adopted many ethnic/religious/political masks, starting with part-Scandinavian northerners v would-be southern rulers. It was this split that in 1066 doomed England to conquest. For three centuries, a French-speaking elite gave England a faux unity, but as they anglicised, the old divide reopened, climaxing in the apocalyptic north v south bloodshed of Towton in 1461. The north became the fortress of Catholicism in the Pilgrimage of Grace (1536) and the Northern Rebellion (1569). Even the civil war had a north-south element. So is geography fate? It looks like it, in England. Or, more accurately, a unique conspiracy of geography and geology. We are divided by the faultline between the rich lands of the south and the rugged, igneous uplands beyond the Trent. By coincidence, the naturally better farmland also has a kinder climate for agriculture and is closer to the great markets and new ideas of the continent: the entire set-up of England conspires in favour of the south. The Venerable Bede, himself a northerner, thought it worthwhile mentioning nine times in his History that the English are divided into northerners and southerners. By high medieval times, the Trent had become thoroughly fixed as the border. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the chivalric heralds of England and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge both used it as an official demarcation. When Daniel Defoe wrote the first guidebook to the brand-new Great Britain in 1727, he compared crossing the Trent to crossing the Rubicon and simply lumped everything “North by Trent” together. This, not the old border between England and Scotland, was what mattered in the new state. The Industrial Revolution could have changed everything: for once, geology, principally, King Coal, was on the side of the north. By 1848, its latest cultural-political expression, the Chartist movement, was ready to mount a challenge to the south and (with the delighted support of Karl Marx) even to try setting up an alternative parliament in Manchester, in 1854. The southern English elite responded with their signature masterstroke: new blood was allowed in on strictly controlled terms through a great new wave of Anglican public schools. Northern thinkers were soon complaining that, as one MP put it in 1897, English manufacturers should “do as the Germans do and bring their sons up to be better manufacturers than themselves, instead of bringing them up to be gentlemen who do nothing but hunt and shoot”. But the cultural pull of the south was too strong and, by 1900, the industrial north was falling off the international pace while the gentleman capitalists of the south played development bankers to the world. How could something so deep and powerful have gone unnoticed by so many English people today, if asked, would probably say that the north-south divide started in the 1980s? Well, that is what happens when something is right in front of our noses, be it in politics or relationships: we can focus it out precisely because it is so close, until, one day, something changes and there it is, waiting where it has always been. It’s back in focus now and it’s not going away. We are all essentially “valence voters”, who will generally go for politicians who, in some nebulous way, we feel to be like us. When George Orwell went north researching The Road to Wigan Pier, he found that the yawning class divide between him (Eton and Oxford) and a sharp-nosed, dark-haired little cockney melted away in face of the cultural otherness of the northerners: “He suddenly divined that I was a fellow-southerner. ‘The filthy bloody bastards!’ he said, feelingly.” That was why Peter Mandelson, in 1994, confident that he could rely on a desperate north to back almost anyone, saw that Tony Blair’s vague “southern appeal” was so vital. Keir Starmer (southern accent, Knight of the Bath, QC) is well placed to repeat that trick, but can anyone ever really appeal for long to both north and south in England? (Blair himself, lest we forget, was under heavy fire from the north by 1999.) Johnson thought he had cracked it, but that now seems risible. It may be time to recognise what voting maps show quite clearly: the English have always voted as much on tribal lines as any of the Celts. “We” are not a single people at all and never really have been. Or we can insist, against all the historical evidence, that we are one nation, a nation that, as Churchill saw in 1912, will almost always be ruled by the party of the south. •James Hawes’ latest book is The Shortest History of England. His novels include Speak For England
18||Dorset's art deco cinema jewel returns to its 1930s splendourIt was the year of the abdication crisis, the Jarrow marches, the Battle of Cable Street and the launch of the BBC’s television service. Beyond Britain’s shores, the world was edging closer to war. In Christchurch, then in Hampshire but now in Dorset, people were flocking to the Regent Centre in 1936 to watch movies such as Charlie Chaplin’s Modern Times and Mr Deeds Goes to Town, starring Gary Cooper. The Regent had been built five years earlier by a local entrepreneur at a cost of £25,000. In the middle of the decade, new owners gave it a plush makeover, featuring a deep rose, gold and silver colour scheme and art deco signage. The cinema thrived. But in 1973 the march of the Rank Organisation reached the south coast town, and the movie theatre became a Mecca bingo hall. Thankfully not for long: Christchurch council bought the property in 1983, and leased it to a charitable trust to run it as an independent. Now, as cinemas across the country are shutting their doors or curtailing their opening hours as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Regent is bucking the trend. Next month it will reopen after the completion of a £350,000 restoration project funded by the local community. “It is a bit of a gamble, to be honest,” Gary Trinder, chair of the trust and a cinema historian, told the Observer. “None of us knows quite what’s coming next. But people were desperate for us to reopen.” Trinder, who oversaw the 2009 restoration of the Grade II*-listed Plaza cinema in Stockport, had a clear vision for the Regent. “We wanted to recreate the way the cinema looked in the mid-1930s. Converting an idea into reality is always a bit worrying, but we’re extremely pleased with the result.” Fourteen different paint colours on the cinema’s walls – “a bit too vibrant, left over from the bingo days,” said Trinder – were replaced with a classic palette of deep rose with features picked out in gold, silver, black and dark brown. A bespoke carpet was ordered from a specialist firm, which consulted its historical files to create a pattern of silver leaves on a mulberry background. New seating, made to a traditional design and upholstered in deep red moquette, was supplied by another specialist company. “They look like period cinema seats, but they’re vastly more comfortable,” said Trinder. The restoration was planned long before Covid-19 disrupted the world. Funds had been raised by a £1 levy on ticket sales, donations and the sale of seat plaques. By the time the cinema closed at the start of lockdown, contractors had been appointed and orders placed with specialist suppliers. “We were committed by then,” said general manager Matthew Vass-White. “We’d planned for a five-week refurbishment. If there was a very slight silver lining to lockdown it was that it gave us more time to do the job.” The Regent had been riding the crest of a wave, with record-breaking years in 2018 and 2019. “Last year, we had 155,000 admissions and were named top independent cinema. We went into lockdown from a better position than some independents, but we can’t sustain zero income forever,” Vass-White said. When the cinema reopens on 12 November, with a screening of a Michael Ball and Alfie Boe performance that was cancelled during lockdown, a maximum of 170 seats out of 509 will be occupied because of Covid-19 restrictions. The cinema’s cafe – usually run by the trust’s 200 volunteers – will remain closed but people will be able to buy a drink from the bar. The pandemic means the cinema will be operating at a loss for the foreseeable future. “Reopening is a way of reducing our losses, rather than making money,” said Trinder. “Every person who comes through our doors helps. If we ever get back to break-even point, I’ll be absolutely delighted. “This is a critical moment for cinemas. Forty per cent of cinemas in this country are run by independent operators. Those with small reserves will be pushed under, but the big multiplexes will rebound.” He reserved particular fury for the distributors of the new James Bond film, No Time to Die, who pulled its release for the second time this month. “We were just about to show the Bond film when we closed in March. We were going to reopen with it in November. It would have been a shot in the arm for struggling cinemas.” As well as reducing its capacity by two-thirds, the Regent has invested £10,000 in Covid-19 compliance equipment and has doubled its cleaning operation. But Vass-White said he was constantly – and anxiously – awaiting further changes to Covid-19 regulations. “The future is unknown for all independent cinema operators. We have fantastic community support, so we’re hopeful. And at the moment, we’re all good to go.”
5||Carry On Coronavirus: why a vaccine trial has saucy potentialLove in a cold climate The news that the government is to fund “human challenge studies” into Covid-19, in which young, healthy volunteers will be infected with the safest possible dose and paid to be quarantined to test the efficacy of vaccines, was a reminder that this country has a unique history in such trials. The Common Cold Unit in Salisbury was set up just after the war at a former Red Cross hospital. By the time it closed in 1990, 20,000 people had taken up its offer to be dosed with cold and flu viruses and monitored for reactions. The camps were advertised as vacations: “How would you like a cheap and comfortable holiday, everything free and no expense, and even 35p a day pocket money?” one typical advert ran in 1974. “It’s true there’s a risk of catching a cold – but in a very good cause!” Much of what is known of the way coronaviruses are transmitted is a direct result of the unit’s scientific work. David Tyrrell, who ran it for 30 years, identified more than 100 strains of the common cold virus, which had been thought to be a single type of infection. Though a cure was never found, there were occasional beneficial side effects for those involved. Information given to new arrivals seemed keen to play up the Carry On potential, advising that “chatting up other volunteers in a different flat can only be by telephone or at a very long range outside”. Despite these restrictions, romances apparently blossomed; at least one viral couple returned to the cold clinic for their honeymoon. Roll of honour In the new British Library exhibition devoted to feminist protest, even the three-foot-long, sequin-encrusted tampon created by the artist Sam Dawood for the charity Bloody Good Period is upstaged by the prison poems of Sylvia Pankhurst. For nearly a century, it has remained a mystery how the suffragette managed to write a volume of poems and a five-act play in solitary confinement in Holloway with only a single slate and a piece of chalk. That mystery has been solved by her biographer, Rachel Holmes, who has catalogued and collated hundreds of perforated sheets of lavatory paper on which Pankhurst wrote with a blunted pencil. The sheets were hidden in the underwear of her prison uniform and passed to other prisoners on release. Subsequently, the papers, bundled in envelopes, travelled with Pankhurst to her final home in Ethiopia, before being archived by the British Library among a cache of her correspondence. Their preserved presence in the exhibition, Unfinished Business: The Fight for Women’s Rights, is not only testament to the extraordinary spirit and fortitude of the suffragette, but also to the disturbing resilience of rough, beige, HM prison-issue loo roll. Bard of Salford It may have been watching the political stand-off in Manchester, or the fact that I’d just booked optimistic tickets for the London leg of his tour next spring, but over the past week I’ve had some lines from John Cooper Clarke knocking around persistently in my head. It’s the refrain from his epic meditation on mortality that goes: “Things are going to get worse, nurse, things are going to get rotten…” Delivered with full Manc relish, I’ve found that the lines seem cheerfully suited to almost any current situation. Every cloud Overheard in a pub garden on Tuesday with Storm Barbara gathering: “In the circumstances, you’d think Rishi Sunak could stump up for some fookin’ gazebos…”
5||We French love our history teachers – Samuel Paty made us remember whySince that fateful morning of 7 January 2015, and the Charlie Hebdo massacre, it sometimes feels as if we French are living our lives between terrorist assaults, each as vile as the previous but each more poignant in its viciousness and symbolism. When we think this can’t get any worse, a new attack proves us wrong. In the past five years, Islamists in France have targeted and murdered journalists, cartoonists, policemen and women, soldiers, Jews, young people at a concert, football fans, families at a Bastille Day fireworks show, an 86-year-old priest celebrating mass in his little Normandy church, tourists at a Christmas market... the list goes on. Last week, a history teacher was beheaded while walking back home from his school, in the quiet town of Conflans-Sainte-Honorine, halfway between Paris and Giverny. The speed with which we learned the facts sharpened the blow, deepened our emotions and focused our minds. The teacher called Samuel Paty was murdered by an 18-year-old refugee of Chechen origin for having shown satirical cartoons, some of them caricatures of the prophet Muhammad, during a history lesson about freedom of speech and freedom of conscience. We tried to process the facts we were given. We had to read and hear the words several times; they just did not add up. In 2020, a history teacher had just been beheaded in France for teaching his pupils tolerance and the use of a critical mind? Worse was to come: his murder was the result of a campaign of hatred and misinformation led by a few bigoted parents and relayed on social networks by a well-known Salafist imam. Children could see the shock on adults’ faces, they could feel their seething anger. They asked what had happened, but how to tell them? We gritted our teeth, swallowed hard and gave them the news. And a country went to bed thinking about its history and its teachers. There are very few countries where the figure of the history teacher is more symbolic and powerful than in France. Since the Third Republic firmly took education from the hands of the church in the early 1880s and made it free, mandatory and secular, its peaceful infantry of teachers has been the bedrock of the French republic. Their task was clear: to spread the values of the Enlightenment to the remotest parts of France – in other words, to open young minds to the world around them in all its complexity. Young, devoted teachers were thus trained by the state not only to educate children but to root out superstition from the classroom. State schools became the places where the French entered as infants and left as citizens. The church was still free to teach children in its schools but those were closely monitored by the state and had to scrupulously follow the national curriculum. These first generations of teachers were nicknamed the “Black Hussars of the Republic” because they wore a black uniform during their training years and looked decidedly solemn in pictures. They had to. After all, everywhere they were posted, they had to gain ground opposite the local priest who continued to exert a powerful influence. Wholly dedicated to their civilising mission, those Black Hussars and their heirs, such as Samuel Paty, succeeded in emancipating minds. They did it with a heightened sense of duty and sacrifice. Thanks to them, religion was eventually relegated to the spiritual realm. They had successfully destroyed the church’s aspirations to weigh in on France’s political life and choices. Like many of my compatriots this past week, I have thought about what I owe my teachers and my history teachers in particular. I looked back with tenderness at their many quirks. One was always dressed in red or green, from head to toe. We thought he was either a communist or a green, only that he couldn’t quite make up his mind. There was another, called Pierre de Panafieu. I was 13 and, just as for Paty’s pupils, this was the year I learned about Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot and the French Revolution. Of all disciplines, history is the one telling us that the people of France have the power to change our destiny, whether we’re sons of peasants or daughters of the bourgeoisie. Powerful stuff for young minds. It was like being struck by lightning. I would go to his class with the elation of an explorer about to discover a continent. I remember where I sat, the colour of my fountain pen and the south-eastern light from the window. I remember every detail vividly, as you do when something momentous is taking place in your life. He was softly spoken, with a kind smile, a man of quiet passion and quick wit. And all the while he was, effortlessly, making us free thinkers and citizens. We just didn’t know it yet. A century after they helped tame religion’s interference in our public life, France’s teachers find themselves again at the vanguard of a new fight against obscurantism. They will need energy, courage and determination, just like the Black Hussars before them. They will also need the whole country behind them. That’s the least we can do, for we now know what we owe them: free thinking. •Agnès Poirier is a Paris-based political commentator, writer and critic
13||How TikTok is proving beauty is more than skin deepHe grew up on a cattle ranch in Arizona before moving to New York to work on a department store makeup counter. Now at just 24, despite having no formal dermatology qualifications, Hyram Yarbro is a skincare guru to millions worldwide. Yarbro is one of a new breed of superstar social media “skinfluencers” who have gained popularity during lockdown – especially on TikTok – and are changing what we buy and why. Lockdown affected grooming routines, with a shift to skincare from make-up and perfume. It will come as no surprise to anyone who’s tried to book a salon appointment since March that home-treatment sales are up, with teeth-whitening products up 180% and hair-dye sales six times higher than last year. But it also affected how we discover new products. “There was an uptick in people accessing social media,” says Samantha Dover, senior beauty and personal-care analyst at Mintel, “but the real impact was among existing social-media users, who spent more time on these platforms and visited them more frequently. This meant they were exposed to more grooming content.” Social media already has an established effect on product sales. “Half of beauty consumers look for reviews online, before making a purchase,” says lifestyle and skincare blogger Lesley Buckle, aka @freshlengths. “There’s also a lot of satisfying videos out there. Dramatic before-and-after visuals go viral.” But in 2020, one platform emerged as the winner: TikTok. “Facebook and YouTube are important for beauty brands, but TikTok users are the most likely to get grooming advice from social media,” says Dover. Influencer marketing firm Traackr found that TikTok users’ engagement with skincare videos has increased by more than 1,000% since last year. In March, Skincare by Hyram had 100,000 followers on TikTok. During lockdown that surpassed six million. “I feel gratitude for the connection I have with my followers on TikTok – I’m not able to replicate that on any other platform. Personally, however, the growth has felt surprisingly normal,” he says. Yarbro’s knowledge about skincare ingredients, and funny, honest reviews have impressed beauty brands and followers alike. In January 2019 he made $50 from affiliate sales. By July 2020, he’d made $265,000 from online ads, brand partnerships and affiliate links. What many of these biggest new names in skincare lack in formal qualifications, they make up for in enthusiasm and humour – and vast audiences across YouTube, Instagram and TikTok. Many skinfluencers are just about the fun of skincare such as Young-Seok Yuh – whose @yayayayoung TikTok account has gathered 1.2m followers since launching in March, and Vi Lai, who often talks about using skincare as a coping mechanism to deal with anxiety and depression. There are also qualified dermatologists such as Dr Dustin Portela, whose @208skindoc has just under 1m followers and aesthetic therapists such as Nayamka Roberts-Smith. Popularity on TikTok does seem to affect sales. CeraVe is a high street skincare brand for dry and problem skin that launched in the UK in 2018. But a 67% increase in influencer posts about CeraVe in 2020, according to influencer marketing firm Traackr, coincides with a run on sales. UK chemist Superdrug reported a 65% week on week increase in sales this summer and CeraVe sold out in the US. The Ordinary was a hit skincare brand long before TikTok, but skinfluencers have affected sales, says Nicola Kilne, co-founder and CEO of Deciem, The Ordinary’s parent company. “The TikTok audience is truly global in a way that we haven’t seen before,” she says. The brand is a skinfluencer favourite, and only started its own TikTok account in February. “Our first video had almost one million views – #TheOrdinary alone has 229.1 million views.” The Ordinary sold a bottle of its Niacinamide 10% + Zinc 1% – a serum for acne – every three seconds at the start of lockdown. Kilne thinks that time at home gave people more time to experiment. “I believe honesty has built our fan base,” says Kilne. “Word of mouth is important for us, but this wouldn’t work if we didn’t produce quality products.” Buckle agrees that quality is the key to the hit products of TikTok. “CeraVe’s mentioned by lots of influencers, but it’s successful because it’s affordable and the formulas are gentle. It’s exactly the sort of brand I reach for if my skin’s had a reaction.” The skinfluencers of TikTok are also hits because of their honesty. “Traditional marketing fails to establish trust,” says Yarbro, who now lives in Honolulu. “People gravitate towards online creators who have real, honest opinions. When a creator establishes trust with their audience, its reach exceeds any marketing budget or exposure strategy. People are drawn to people.”
2||NRLW grand final 2020: Brisbane Broncos beat Sydney Roosters – as it happenedHere is a match report if you’d like an easily digestible recount: And that concludes our live coverage this afternoon. We’ll be back (at another link) to take you through the men’s grand final. Broncos captain Ali Brigginshaw pays tribute to the Roosters, who she says set the standard in rounds one and two. She also thanks the referees, especially grand final referee Belinda Sharpe. McGregor, as the losing captain, makes an eloquent speech, beginning by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land and going on to congratulate Brisbane for “setting the standard for the last three years”. “My Roosters girls,” she continues, “I’m really proud of you. We’re building towards better things.” Amber Hall, unsurprisingly, has won the Karyn Murphy Medal as recognition of her outstanding, ubiquitous display. She does the obligatory thanks to the NRL , sponsors, her team and fans, and family in New Zealand. Brigginshaw (see below) is praising her side for reigning in what she described as “by far the toughest” of the Broncos’ three grand final wins. “The Roosters showed great character out there. The weather didn’t suit both of us but we dug deep.” Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: The three-peat is complete! Brisbane have gone back to back to back, continuing to write themselves into history as the only team to have won the NRLW. The Broncos were tremendous defensively throughout a first half during which the Roosters had their fair share of possession and territory but became somewhat wasteful with the ball. Second half (1 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Everyone is coughing up the ball now. Nobody wants it. The Broncos need merely complete their sets and should have this one wrapped up. Mel Howard is the latest to depart with what looks like an arm injury. Second half (4 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Now Ward is down injured and leaves the field for a concussion assessment having lost the ball in a tackle. Roosters get the scrum 20m from the try line but the Broncos have forced a knock-on. Second half (7 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: Shenae Ciesiolka is quick to take care of business when Temara kicks behind the Broncos’ defensive line. The Roosters have possession and, then another set, as they chase this game. They have had plenty of chances in this half but have lacked the composure of their opponents. The crowd is a tick over 9000 for this decider, with another 30,000 or so expected to come through the turnstiles in time for the NRL finale between the Penrith Panthers and Melbourne Storm. Second half (13 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: A hair pull! Vette-Welsh gets a tug on the ponytail as she looks for a breakthrough down the right side. It’s a penalty, but the Roosters are struggling to get organised enough to make good of field position and McGregor knocks on at dummy half. Second half (16 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 20-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! The Broncos have made this look oh so straightforward, again capitalising on a Roosters error after they missed a repeat set. The Broncos have a seven-tackle set and Dally M medallist Brigginshaw plays a short ball to Tallisha Harden and the latter beats two and scores her first NRLW try untouched from five metres out. Special mention to Hall, who has been superb. Could this be the game? The Roosters have to score soon because this is quickly running away from them. Meanwhile, Brown has left the field. Second half (19 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: Millie Boyle makes an error as she carries with one arm straight into Hannah Southwell. Never a good idea. She loses the ball and the Roosters get the scrum 40 metres from their own line. Second half (21 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: The game has been halted for an injury concern after Lauren Brown came out worse for wear in a head clash with Temara. But she is back up, passes a head injury assessment and ready to play again. Have a look for yourself ... Second half (25 minutes) - Brisbane Broncos 16-10 Sydney Roosters: TRY! Brown darts from dummy half, dummies, goes inside to Lenarduzzi and she scores her second. The Australian shot put champion came off the bench for her first, and Meakes tries to stop her second with the low tackle around the legs from the line. But her effort is in vain. No conversion but the Broncos have a nice little buffer again. Quick word on Roosters forward Vanessa Foliaki, who is 10kg lighter than this time last year and says she feels in the best shape of her career. The former Jillaroo was not confident she would keep a spot under new coach Jamie Feeney, but has proven herself and been a regular on the edge. The Broncos thus far have completed all their sets for a near-perfect first half. Here’s Amber Hall’s try ... And Yasmin Meakes’s effort ... Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters: Well the Broncos piled on two early tries to race to a 12-0 lead, but the Roosters kept their cool under pressure, matched the double defending champions and raised them one with two of their own. Big second half coming. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-10 Sydney Roosters (3 minutes): Fullback Botille Vette-Welsh, on her return to the field, dummies and makes her dash. through Raecene McGregor and Jayme Fressard for a much-needed break. Melanie Howard kicks into space another repeat set. And here’s another try! Quincy Dodd charges over the line after help from the forwards. Dodd, played the ball on the tryline, literally barges through the Broncos defence. Temara converts and the Roosters are right back in this coming into the breakAnd just like that, it’s 12-10 and the Roosters are right back in it. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (7 minutes): McGregor has challenged another knock-on as Togatuki tries to play through again, but she’s incorrect this time. The final minutes of this half are turning into an arm wrestle. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (9 minutes): The rain is starting to come down now as the Broncos pass their fifth tackle and Ali Brigginshaw kicks on the outside of her boot. It’s an awkward landing but the Roosters have it under control. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (13 minutes): Temara cannot make her conversion but the Roosters are on the board. Meakes did very well to hold off opposing centre Julia Robinson. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-4 Sydney Roosters (14 minutes): The Roosters, to their credit, have stayed composed and have a repeat set. And here’s the first captain’s challenge of the match, as Roosters skipper Corban McGregor appeals against a knock-on. Sarah Togatuki was adamant she hadn’t despite Ali Brigginshaw’s appeals and is vindicated. The Roosters use the momentum superbly and go over for their first try. Pass, pass, pass and Yasmin Meakes backs herself to skip over the line. First half - Brisbane Broncos 12-0 Sydney Roosters (21 minutes): Amber Hall the Wrecking Ball has practically fallen over the try line after sending Tricolours counterparts this way and that with her pace and power. Yasmin Meakes makes a last-ditch effort to take her out from behind. Hall converts and this is already looking a little worrying for the Roosters, who will have to start putting pressure on the Broncos’ line instead of inviting them in. First half - Brisbane Broncos 6-0 Sydney Roosters (25 minutes): Peep! And we’re off. The Broncos have possession and the Roosters are hitting them hard, making an early statement. The underdogs are winning the early field position. The two wingers, Brydie and Shanice Parker are heavily involved. The Broncos’ strength is taking advantage of mistakes and it is a simple error that gifts Tarryn Aiken a break. She beats two defenders then passes to Tamika Upton for her sixth try in seven games. Pre-game interview with Broncos coach Kelvin Wright. After last round’s defeat of the Roosters he felt his side had “played inside themselves”. Here he says there were a “couple of areas we really need to tidy up, especially around the ruck”. On the Roosters: “The way they’ve been playing, they look like they’re playing for each other and really enjoying themselves.” Here are the teams ... Good afternoon and welcome to our live coverage of the NRLW grand final. And what a splendid day for it. Mother Nature has put on a wet, windy one. Which way will she blow at ANZ Stadium? Is this a Brisbane three-peat in the making, or will the Roosters exact 2018 grand final revenge over the competition’s dominant force. As the only team to have lifted the NRLW trophy, the Broncos have lost one of 11 games to date and won their two previous deciders against the Roosters and Dragons by a combined margin of 64-18. Kelvin Wright’s team saw off Jamie Feeney’s Roosters 24-16 in round three last week, though star Tricolours forwards Hannah Southwell and Simaima Taufa were rested and there were some positive signs. The Roosters have never beaten the Broncos, and are seeking to remedy this short historical shortcoming without star rugby sevens recruit Charlotte Caslick, who sustained two fractures in her spine during their second match against the Warriors. Kick-off is at 4.05pm AEDT, stay tuned.
13||The US has a good record on fighting monopolies. Now it's Google's turnSundar Pichai, chief executive of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, is a mild-mannered software engineer who is not good at games of verbal fisticuffs with US politicians. He received a drubbing last month during the “big tech” congressional hearing. Pichai can, however, summon lawyers and lobbyists galore as soon as the game gets more serious, which it definitely has. The US Department of Justice (DoJ) last week launched a huge and historic antitrust case against Google, accusing the tech company of abusing its position to maintain an illegal monopoly over internet searches and search advertising. In response, Kent Walker, Google’s chief lawyer, published an indignant blogpost that signalled how the firm will fight this. Google will claim it – and not the DoJ – is on the side of the American people and, by extension, people across the world. “People use Google because they choose to, not because they’re forced to, or because they can’t find alternatives,” wrote Walker. “This lawsuit would do nothing to help consumers. To the contrary, it would artificially prop up lower-quality search alternatives, raise phone prices, and make it harder for people to get the search services they want to use”. This argument has superficial appeal. Google doesn’t charge users and can’t stop them using rivals’ products. In a neat touch, Walker included instructions on how to load Microsoft’s Bing search engine on an Android phone. As for those multibillion payments to Apple to get Google pre-loaded on iPhones and iPads – one of the DoJ’s main complaints – Walker said they are like the promotional fees a cereal brand might pay a supermarket to stock its products at eye level. Other search engines are free to negotiate space on the digital shelf or home screen, he argued, and this is how software has always been distributed. Convinced? You shouldn’t be. There are four reasons, at least, why the DoJ is right to fight this case. First, a product that is free (or free at the point of use) can still cause harm to consumers. The process is just indirect. An overly dominant search engine can, for example, raise its prices to advertisers, who then recoup the extra expense by charging more for hotels, flights, electronic gadgets, books, insurance, and so on. Second, Google’s cereal comparison doesn’t work. A key point about a dominant search engine is that it can gather more data to enhance the offer and thereby achieve greater competitive clout. It has a self-reinforcing aspect that doesn’t apply in the non-data world of cornflakes and Coco Pops. Third, most users don’t change their default settings. Yes, it’s technically simple to do, but most people don’t. That is why Google is happy to pay Apple a fortune every year for default status – it can be extremely confident of a return on that investment, knowing no rival can match its spending power. Fourth, there is the deep problem of Google’s sheer size and effective control of 80% of the search market. How could new ideas and approaches ever get a look-in? “If we let Google continue its anti-competitive ways, we will lose the next wave of innovators and Americans may never get to benefit from the ‘next Google’,” said William Barr, the US attorney-general. In that final respect, this case is similar to celebrated antitrust challenges of the past – Standard Oil, AT&amp;T and Microsoft. It’s about confronting corporate power when it becomes the gatekeeper to an industry, the lawsuit’s description of Google’s position in search. Pichai’s usual plea on that point is that “Google’s continued success is not guaranteed”. And that can be rubbished for a simple reason: it is easy to see how the gates would clang shut on any competitor that became truly threatening. Good luck to the DoJ – this is an important 21st-century case. Johnson’s plans for British industry are full of wind Next week, Boris Johnson is expected to deliver a 10-point plan outlining the government’s green industrial strategy before it publishes a long-delayed energy white paper, possibly in November. A fresh strategy paper is a chance for the PM to persuade the electorate that while his character may not be well suited to fighting a pandemic, he knows how to strike an upbeat note when the subject turns to major building projects. It might have taken him six years as London mayor before he could see cycle superhighways being built across London, but they did happen, and they played a part in transforming the infrastructure of the capital. When he wanted a cable car across the Thames, it arrived and worked, to many people’s amazement. Unfortunately what you cannot say is that any of the prime minister’s achievements so far are glued together as part of a strategy. They can at best be described as ad hoc, and sit alongside schemes that detract from the central message, if that message is about the climate emergency and carbon emissions. At this year’s Conservative party conference, Johnson said a green industrial revolution would repair the economy following the pandemic. This month, he repeated a pledge that every home in the UK would be powered by wind energy within 10 years, at a cost of £160bn. These are laudable aims and show Johnson has been gathering his thoughts. But the manufacturing industry that might have played a big part in building wind turbines was destroyed by previous Tory governments. Now Johnson wants to add a no-deal or limited-deal Brexit that will undermine the rest of the UK’s industrial base. Britain needs a strategy in many areas. Let’s hope the PM has coordinated a plan across all departments that can rightfully be called a green industrial strategy. The ticket king’s bid for Viagogo could be about to stall The $4bn (£3bn) takeover of ticket resale website StubHub by its rival Viagogo had already been dubbed the “worst deal in history”, having been finalised weeks before the pandemic shut down live events indefinitely. Viagogo boss Eric Baker founded both firms and his dream is to preside as ticket king over a reunited empire. Perhaps blinded by that ambition, he dismissed Covid-19 as a flash in the pan and pressed on with the deal, spending some of his own considerable resources – together with those of financial backers including the mega-rich Waltons, the family behind Walmart. As ill-timed as the takeover looked a few weeks ago, it looks even worse now that the UK competition watchdog has signalled its intention to block it. The CMA understandably balked at the idea of a tie-up that would give the combined company 90% of the UK ticket resale market. What now for Viagogo? It’s main target in buying StubHub is the US market, where its rival dominates. Yet the British regulator threatens to scupper everything. If Baker offers to shut down StubHub UK, Viagogo would hoover up its rival’s business anyway, creating a monopoly via a different route. The CMA surely could not allow that. A partial sale of StubHub, a web-based company whose strength is its platform, is impractical to the point of impossibility. The CMA may ultimately force Viagogo to sell StubHub, appointing a divestiture trustee to seek a buyer. That trustee would have no obligation to recoup Baker’s $4bn. That’s not the most remarkable thing, though. Part of the CMA’s remit will be, unwittingly, to look out for the interests of professional resellers, the touts who dominate resale listings. As the Observer has shown, many “resellers” use the same methods that saw super-touts Peter Hunter and David Smith jailed last year for fraud. So the CMA may find itself accidentally defending the interests of fraudsters who make a living scamming the public. It seems anything is possible in 2020.
5||Money fosters the cosmopolitan joy of our football but also its soullessnessIf you want to see the dilemmas of globalisation playing out, forget Brexit or the US elections. Watch a game of football (though in Britain, of course, you can’t actually watch a game in a stadium these days). For it’s in the beautiful game that the many faces of globalisation reveal themselves. Last week, news broke of talks between top European clubs about creating a breakaway lucrative European Premier League. A week earlier, two of the teams reportedly involved in these talks, Liverpool and Manchester United, had attempted a power grab in the English game, offering more money to the sides in the lower leagues in return for a handful of top clubs having control. Liverpool and Man United had to retreat in the face of fierce criticism. It’s unlikely, though, that either plan has been buried. What they reveal is the tension between the needs of commerce and those of supporters, between the demands of elite sides and the burdens on those at bottom of football’s pyramid. Over the past 30 years, football has metamorphosed from being what the Sunday Times called, in the wake of the 1985 Heysel tragedy, “a slum game played by slum people in slum stadiums” into “an optimistic, upwardly mobile, aspirational business”, in the words of Richard Scudamore, former CEO of the Premier League, speaking to MPs in 2011. From unrestrained contempt for the “working-class game” to adoration in management-speak in the space of three decades. When the Premier League launched in 1992, revenue in its first season was £170m; last year, it was €5.16bn. The new wealth has allowed the league to attract some of the world’s best players and managers. On the opening day of that first season, 13 foreign players graced the Premier League. This year, 244 have already stepped on to the pitch. And all this has made it attractive for everyone from Russian oligarchs to Middle Eastern autocrats to buy English clubs. In football, as in politics, globalisation has created a tension between the benefits of a more cosmopolitan game and the erosion of local attachments and the creation of huge inequalities. Football is not just about watching 22 people kick the ball around for an hour and a half. What gives football its heart, its soul and its drama, is that every game, every fan, is part of a wider story. Part of a collective memory, an identity, an imagined community. In many small towns, football clubs are among the most important social institutions, providing both a sense of civic pride and a form of collective hope and aspiration. All this, however, slams against the imperatives of football as a business. That’s why we need to be clear about what exactly is wrong with the globalisation of football. It’s not the creation of a more cosmopolitan game. Few would moan about being able to watch some of the world’s great players (Mohamed Salah, Kevin de Bruyne, James Rodriguez). Or the fact that such players are coached by some of the best managers in the world (Jürgen Klopp, Pep Guardiola, Carlo Ancelotti). Some worry that the influx of foreign players has squeezed out English players. Yet one could argue that it’s improved them, that they have benefited from both playing with and being coached by the world’s best. And foreign players and coaches can have as great an attachment to their clubs as British-born ones. German Klopp is as much part of Liverpool folklore as Bill Shankly. Arsenal fans worship French former forward Thierry Henry as “one of ours” as much as they do Londoner Ian Wright. What grates is the other side of the equation: the commercialisation, the creation of monstrous inequalities. The plans for a European Premier League envisage games between the European top teams as a money-spinning exercise detached from any organic connection to a history of competition or rivalry. It also evinces a desire to corner the market, as if Liverpool and Leeds were like Amazon and Google. The question facing football is about how to foster the one without encouraging the other, how to nurture the openness and cosmopolitanism without cultivating also the soullessness and the inequalities. It’s the question confronting us in politics, too. We can only begin to answer it if we stop thinking about globalisation as a single phenomenon, about which we have to be for or against, but start unpicking its different threads, good and bad. “There is more politics in football,” the former England manager, the Swede Sven-Göran Eriksson, once quipped, “than in politics.” He spoke more truth than he probably realised. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
9||Freshwater Five: radar casts doubt on guilty verdict for £53m cocaine haulIt began like most other fishing trips for the crew of the Galwad. The sea was choppier than they’d have liked but the four men on board were hopeful of rich pickings in the spring tides off the Isle of Wight. They had no idea that the same stretch of the English Channel was that night the focus of a sophisticated policing operation centred on a container ship from Brazil. Around midnight on 30 May 2010 the Galwad came to the attention of the police surveillance teams. When its crew arrived on shore hours later, lugging baskets of lobster, they were arrested. The following day a fisherman found 250kg of cocaine worth £53m floating in holdalls in the island’s Freshwater Bay. Jamie Green and his Galwad crew – Scott Birtwistle, Daniel Payne and Zoran Dresic, along with local scaffolder Jonathan Beere – were jailed in June 2011 for up to 24 years each for conspiracy to import cocaine. All five were far from the image of multimillion pound drug kingpins, described by friends and family as hard-working with modest lifestyles. None had previous convictions relating to drugs. Known as the Freshwater Five, all maintain their innocence. Now compelling new evidence from the radar of a UK Border Agency surveillance vessel casts doubt over the safety of their convictions. Not disclosed during the original trial, the nautical navigation data from the vessel’s Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) appears to show that information presented to the jury was incorrect. Detailed in a fresh submission on the case to the court of appeal and seen by the Observer, lawyers believe the failure to submit the ECDIS evidence at the original trial “was a significant failure that has yet to be properly explored and explained away”. The 22-page submission says that the inexplicable disappearance of the radar data was a serious shortcoming by the since disbanded Serious Organised Crime Agency (Soca), which coordinated the drugs operation that led to the jailing of the Freshwater Five. “The absence of key material was a significant failing on the part of Soca and/or the experts deployed by the prosecution at trial,” the document adds. Dated 2 October, the submission follows a six-year battle to obtain the radar evidence by lawyer Emily Bolton. Bolton, director of Appeal, a charity law practice that fights miscarriages of justice, said: “This is a case where the investigating authorities developed chronic tunnel vision early on and ignored evidence that suggested they were pursuing the wrong suspects. And of course it snowballed from there.” The prosecution case claimed the Freshwater Five were involved in a plot that entailed sailing behind a container ship, the Oriane, to recover 11 holdalls of cocaine tossed from its stern in the dark, in high seas. Yet the new evidence reveals that the path of the fishing boat never crossed that of the container ship, making a transfer of drugs impossible. In fact the ECDIS radar course suggests the Galwad never got sufficiently close to the Oriane to pick up the drugs. The nautical data reveals that a UK Border Agency aircraft and cutter were closely monitoring the Oriane and subsequently tracked the container boat for over an hour after the Galwad left the area. Such monitoring led the UKBA to “specifically discount the Galwad as the drugs-receiving vessel”, says the submission. The radar data also provides striking new details that Bolton feels would have influenced the jury very differently. Another small vessel, recorded as “A50” by the ECDIS, was tracked that night travelling “towards the position in which the drugs were found” nearly an hour after the Galwad had left the Freshwater Bay area. The mystery potential “suspect” boat was not disclosed at trial. Expert analysis of the new data indicates the A50 is “likely to be a RHIB [rigid hulled inflatable boat] or fast power cruiser moving at 46 knots”. The document for the court of appeal states: “It is submitted that A50 was either another suspect vessel or a vessel deployed by a law enforcement agency. “If it was the latter, it would profoundly undermine any suggestion that the Galwad deposited the drugs, as the Soca officers were manifestly unaware where the drugs were to be found until the next day after their discovery by a fisherman.” It adds: “The failure by the prosecution to examine and disclose the ECDIS product at trial deprived the defence of substantial arguments that might have led to different verdicts.” Another central plank of the prosecution case is also challenged by the radar findings. Film from a plane flying over Freshwater Bay the day after the Galwad returned to shore was shown at trial. Clearly visible are the holdalls of cocaine that had been discovered by then. However, the new data shows that a surveillance aircraft flew over Freshwater Bay just after the Galwad passed through. Yet the hi-tech plane noted nothing out of the ordinary and did not report any unusual objects in the water. “Had there been anything suspicious left in the water, the aircraft would have spotted it,” states Bolton. Finally, the ECDIS data shows the crew of a UKBA cutter monitoring the Oriane “had visuals” on its rear deck at the time the drugs were said to have been thrown off. However, there is no entry in the ship’s log indicating this took place. “The jury would then have had evidence that the Galwad was observed and disregarded on account of there being no activity on the stern of the Oriane at the relevant time,” states the submission. Despite extensive searches, no traces of cocaine were found on either the Galwad or Oriane. The families of the Freshwater Five hope the case will be heard in the court of appeal early next year. • The subheading of this article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct a misspelling of Isle of Wight.
5||Farewell James Randi, prince of reason. Now who’ll mock the quacks and anti-vaxxers?A mong many tributes to the great James Randi, who died last week aged 92, one stands out. Hours after the death was announced, cutlery expert Uri Geller reacted with a tweet he piously expanded on Facebook. “How sad that Randi died with hatred in his soul. Love to you all.” One thing that the most professional paranormalist may find it hard to conceal, you gather, is indecent glee. Geller’s public gloat has, however, ensured that many people who might never otherwise have viewed his televised humbling in 1973, at the height of media credulity about his claimed paranormal talent, will now have witnessed the spectacle of his inexplicably interrupted powers. Randi had advised the producers to supply their own props. Even supreme rationalists, it turns out, can exact vengeance after death. Spoon-benders are unlikely to be the only profession toasting the disappearance – supposing we rule out further hauntings – of Randi, who, being himself a brilliant magician as “The Amazing Randi: The Man No Jail Can Hold” (previously “The Great Randall: Telepath”) was repeatedly more effective than scientists at examining paranormalist claims, sometimes by simply performing their stunts himself. Mediums, dowsers, astrologers, homeopaths, clairvoyants, faith-healers, mind-readers, spirit guides and anti-vaxxers also featured among Randi’s targets after he moved on from surpassing Houdini’s escapology to exposing all forms of pseudoscience, on principle but with a showmanship that made him reliably more compelling than his subjects. This made him immeasurably valuable to sceptics. Addressing homeopathy, for instance, he appreciated that argument alone would have less impact in demonstrating the staggering uselessness of these royal-endorsed products than his filmed consumption of a homeopathic overdose. Before Randi’s retirement in 2015, his eponymous educational foundation’s “paranormal challenge”, offering $1m to anyone who could demonstrate supernatural ability in scientific conditions, provided sceptics with a perfect response to ambitious phonies: supposing they didn’t want the money, how about the glory? The cash went unclaimed. Now, with Randi gone, life just got much more comfortable for purveyors of pseudoscience and, it follows, less so for their prey, the public. If, say, the prognostication industry, which proved either unable or unwilling to alert Earthlings to the horrors coming in 2020, does nothing worse than make fools of consumers, Randi showed that more ambitious charlatans, such as the British manufacturer of a fake bomb detector, which he exposed in 2008, could kill them. Now, with lizard-believers hosting UK anti-mask/anti-5G/anti-Covid-19/anti-vaxx/reportedly antisemitic rallies in Trafalgar Square, and with quack remedies and conspiracy theories disseminated by the White House as well as by social media, his death only underlines the absence of comparably effective sceptics to counter lies more baleful than Doris Stokes’s “I’m getting an Eileen”. Long before Covid-19 elicited interventions from influencers including the anti-vaxxer Novak Djokovic and that oracle Eamonn Holmes, Randi had warned against celebrity contributions to vaccination panic. “We have a Dark Age of sorts facing us,” he wrote in 2010, a time when Andrew Wakefield seemed to have done his worst, “one in which a generation of children may be decimated through the ignorance of the public, fuelled by irresponsible public figures who assume expertise they do not possess”. Since then, irresponsible minor figures have learned, in good time to do extensive damage, to transform themselves into major public nuisances. How much did we hear from Piers Corbyn before Twitter plus the virus turned him from weird sibling into a free-speech martyr, currently telling his followers: “Modern Vax is utterly evil. It’s purpose is to maim kill control and depopulate.” If there’s anything to the theory, one that informs Kate Summerscale’s new novel inspired by 1930s poltergeist reports, that superstition thrives in periods of uncertainty and disruption, the appetite for Corbyn, Wakefield, David Icke and their various scare tactics, directed at an already fearful public, could probably have been anticipated, at least by anyone except a professional astrologer. After the First World War and the 1918 flu pandemic, Summerscale has pointed out, “many of the bereaved found consolation in seances. In an era of widespread technological change, it seemed plausible that the living could forge channels of communication with the dead.” Likewise, earlier, Daniel Defoe: “These terrors and apprehensions of the people led them into a thousand weak, foolish and wicked things, which there wanted not a sort of people, really wicked, to encourage them to; and this was a running about to fortune tellers, cunning men and astrologers, to know their fortune…” Updated, amid reports of a renewed appetite for forecasts, we find the Daily Mail keen to gratify the excellent foppery of the world, as someone once called it, with insights from the astrologer Jessica Adams. One statement in a 2019-dated forecast for March 2020, “we’re going to see computer and human viruses”, is widely taken (unlike Bill Gates’s 2015 prediction) to compensate for the failure of apparently all her rivals to spot what frustrated stars/spirits/entrails have been trying to tell humanity about a virus that, according to other paranormalists, does not exist (Icke), is no worse than flu (Trump), was made by Bill Gates (44% of Republicans) or alternatively in China (also Trump), then accidentally transmitted to a human “while delivering the virus to Iran for bacteriological warfare reasons” (Geller). Luckily for us, Adams is also a medium. “I’ve always been able to see the spirit world and I know about things before they happen,” she told the Mail. I know this is a busy time, especially for the world’s only reliable astrologer, but is there any chance she could make contact with The Amazing Randi – shortish guy, big beard – and ask where we can find his successor? • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist
1||'Power grab': how Republican hardball gave us Amy Coney BarrettThe almost certain confirmation of Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court on Monday represents a “power grab” by Republicans facing possible wipeout at the ballot box, activists and analysts say. Republicans on the Senate judiciary committee shrugged off a Democratic boycott on Thursday to advance Barrett’s nomination to the full Senate, which will vote little more than a week before the presidential election. If confirmed, Barrett could be sworn in as a justice almost immediately. To critics, the rushed process represents one of the most naked power plays yet by a party which, confronting dismal opinion polls, is weaponizing unelected judges to compensate for setbacks in elections. Even as they contemplate the loss of political power, Republicans are poised to cement judicial power for generations. “This is like the last gasp by the Republican party to try to lock in their minority rule,” said Christopher Kang, co-founder and chief counsel of the progressive group Demand Justice. “They’re potentially just days away from not only losing the White House but also the Senate, maybe even resoundingly, and so they’re trying to do everything they can to consolidate on the supreme court a Trump supermajority for decades to come.” Under Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, Republicans have built a reputation for ruthless bare knuckle tactics Democrats struggle to combat. They blocked swaths of Barack Obama’s legislative agenda and in 2016 refused to grant a hearing to his supreme court nominee Merrick Garland, arguing that it was an election year so the voters should decide. In 2018, when the conservative nominee Brett Kavanaugh faced credible allegations of sexual assault, Republicans ignored fierce protests and rammed his appointment through. And when liberal justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg died last month, Donald Trump moved like lightning to replace her with Barrett, 48, a lifetime appointment who would tilt America’s highest court to a 6-3 conservative majority. It was another example of Republican hardball – audacious, shameless and devastatingly effective. Comedian Bill Maher told viewers of his HBO show: “If you haven’t gotten it yet, this kind of completely bald-faced premeditated hypocrisy should make it clear. There’s no catching them in an inconsistency. They don’t care because it’s all and only about power. The only rule Republicans play by is: the people who win make the rules. Power talks, losers walk.” Democrats cried foul, pointing out that the Senate has never confirmed a supreme court nominee so close to a presidential election. They were whistling in the wind. During committee hearings Barrett swerved most of their questions, refusing to commit herself on abortion, the transfer or power or the climate crisis. Kang said: “The process was so rushed and she was far more evasive and refused to answer more questions than any other nominee. That was a little bit jarring, if not surprising, but it shows how little respect Republicans have not only for the Senate but the supreme court itself. The Republican party is very blatantly just treating the supreme court as another political branch of government.” Demand Justice has called for Democrats to fight back by expanding the court, noting that its size has been changed seven times before. Joe Biden, the Democratic presidential nominee, has said he will appoint a bipartisan commission to examine such proposals. Kang predicted: “Republicans’ attempt to assert their raw political partisan power grab to get a sixth seat on the court, when they already have five, could end up backfiring spectacularly on them and they could be on the losing side of a 7-6 supreme court before they know it.” All 12 Republicans on the judiciary committee voted in favour of Barrett. Ted Cruz of Texas hailed perhaps the “single most important accomplishment” of Trump’s presidency. Democrats displayed posters at their desks, of Americans who benefited from Obama’s Affordable Care Act which they warn Barrett could help strike down. Democrats have also warned that if Trump follows through on his threat to dispute the outcome of the 3 November election, it might go before Barrett and other members of the supreme court for a final ruling, just like the 2000 election between George W Bush and Al Gore. Laurence Tribe, a constitutional law professor at Harvard University, described Barrett’s probable confirmation as a “‘power grab’ in every relevant sense of the term, especially in light of President Trump’s open concession that he appointed judge Coney Barrett in part to ensure her ability to vote in his favour should his re-election as president end up turning on a case the supreme court would need to resolve in order to give him an electoral college victory in the face of a national popular defeat.” Trump has appointed more than 200 federal judges, likely to be his most lasting legacy whether he serves one term or two. Critics suggest the courts represent the last bulwark of Republican minority rule and the Barrett episode is starkly indicative of a party that has lost its ideological and ethical moorings and now treats power as an end in itself. Kurt Bardella, a senior adviser to the Lincoln Project, an anti-Trump group, said Republicans have betrayed their claims to be the party of fiscal responsibility, pro-life principles, small government and congressional oversight. “When a party diverges from itself on so many issues so many times,” he said, “it tells you they don’t actually have any moral convictions or principles that guide them. Only the pursuit of power.”
24||Twenty years of the International Space Station – but was it worth it?Space scientists are preparing to celebrate a remarkable astronautical achievement. In a few days, they will mark the 20th anniversary of humanity’s continuous presence in outer space. For two decades, teams of astronauts have made their homes 250 miles above our planet through their uninterrupted occupancy of the International Space Station (ISS). First inhabited by US astronaut Bill Shepherd and Russian cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Yuri Gidzenko on 2 November 2000, the ISS has since provided shelter for a steady rotation of crews that has ensured the station has never been left unoccupied. A total of 240 men and women have set up camp on the 420-tonne station as it has swept over Earth at 17,000 mph, making 16 orbits of our world every day. Accommodation on the 109-metre-long station includes six sleeping quarters, two toilets, a gym – and, most popular of all, a European-built set of bay windows, called the Cupola, which provides 360-degree views and allows astronauts to gaze as storms have gathered, and the Sun has risen, over Earth. Tim Peake, the only official British astronaut to make it to the ISS, was a particular fan of the Cupola, where, he says, he first looked at our planet and realised how fragile it is. “You can see the atmosphere, which is only 16km thick. It is not endless,” he recalled in a BBC interview. “All of the gas that keeps us alive on Earth is trapped in that tiny, tiny layer. You suddenly realise that what we put into that layer is really important.” More mundane aspects of station life have included guitar serenades by floating astronauts; a piece of culinary history made by Italian astronaut Samantha Cristoforetti, who drank the first espresso made in outer space out of a zero-gravity mug; and dealing with a series of broken toilets – “the part of the station which attracts most curiosity back on Earth, I discovered”, says Peake. And these domestic details are important, scientists insist. “Running the International Space Station has shown us that human beings can make their homes away from their own planet in outer space, which is a truly hostile environment,” said astrobiologist Professor Charles Cockell of Edinburgh University. “That has been a critically important lesson for us.” Plans to build a permanent orbiting space station were first drawn up in the 1980s by Nasa. However, forecasts of costs indicated these would be alarmingly high – until the collapse of the Soviet Union offered an opportunity to cooperate with Russia. Its space engineers had already gained considerable experience of long-term space missions with their own small orbiting Salyut stations and the much larger Mir station. “It was also a highly pragmatic move by the United States,” said Professor Anu Ojha, a director of the National Space Centre, Leicester. “America wanted to prevent Soviet space experts from getting snapped up by rogue states as the USSR disintegrated. So it sought to get them involved in a joint space programme so that it could keep them at home and give them some degree of input. The ISS was perfect for that.” In the end, the two nations agreed on a plan for the ISS’s construction, with Canadian and Japanese space agencies also agreeing to join the project, along with the European Space Agency, of which the UK is a key member. Assembly of the station began in 1998 and required more than 30 flights by US space shuttles and 40 by Russian rockets to take components and modules to the station before its completion in 2011. For years, astronauts were preoccupied with constructing the station, and only relatively recently have they been able to concentrate on doing serious science, including running more than 3,000 experiments in collaboration with thousands of scientists on Earth. The final bill for constructing the ISS came to more than $100bn. The station soaks up $4bn a year in maintenance costs and service flights. Most of this has been paid by the US. The question is: was this vast expenditure worth it? Planetary science expert Professor Ian Crawford of Birkbeck, University of London, believes it was. “The ISS is a fantastic example of high-profile international cooperation at a time when the world desperately needs examples of activities that can bring people and nations together. And learning how to live and work in space will stand us in good stead as we prepare to return to the Moon and possibly send people to Mars.” Other scientists take a different stance, however. “There is no way you could justify the vast sums the have been spent on building the ISS,” said the astronomer royal, Sir Martin Rees. “For a start, the scientific returns have been meagre. We have learned a bit about how the body reacts to spending long periods in space, and we have grown a few crystals in zero gravity, but that is in no way commensurate to the tens of billions of dollars that have spent on the ISS. Really, the station only makes news when its toilets get blocked or an astronaut sings while floating about with a guitar.” Nasa’s money would have been better spent on launching robot missions to other planets or constructing orbiting observatories, Rees added – a view that is backed by the physicist and Nobel laureate Steve Weinberg of the University of Texas at Austin. “The only interesting science done on the ISS has been the study of cosmic rays by the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer, but astronauts played no role in its operation,” he told the Observer. “It could have been placed in orbit much more cheaply by an unmanned mission.” Ojha added that he was initially very doubtful about the scientific rationale for the ISS but was now convinced it was a major success. “What we have achieved in terms of human spaceflight experience, space engineering, and scientific yield has been immense. We have learned how to assemble huge structures in space and live for long periods up there while dealing with all sorts of incidents that have arisen. It is crucial we do not waste that experience.” A key lesson learned from studying ISS astronauts has been the impacts of prolonged periods of zero gravity on the human body. These include muscle loss, bone density reductions, and vision and taste impairment. Scientists have found it can take several years for an astronaut to recover their bone density after a four- or five-month space mission. On the other hand, by using treadmills and weight machines, astronauts can avoid the worst effects of muscle loss. Nasa is scheduled to continue funding the ISS for four or five years and has said it then hopes private companies will take over and run it commercially while the agency funds more cutting-edge missions to explore and settle on the Moon, and possibly one day take humans to Mars. These projects will involve building Gateway, a smaller version of the space station, in orbit round the Moon as a stopping off point to explore the lunar surface. But is private enterprise interested in taking over the ISS? Early interest has been expressed by a number of companies who say they want to work there. The Texas-based company Axiom Space has signed a deal with Nasa to build a module where research on novel materials would be carried out; actor Tom Cruise and director Doug Liman are scheduled to fly to the station next year on a SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule to shoot scenes for an action adventure film; and the forthcoming reality TV contest, Space Hero – scheduled for screening in 2023 – has announced plans to send a winner to the ISS. Whether ventures like these will be enough to provide the billions of dollars needed to run the station remains to be seen. The alternative would be to dismantle the ISS and send its components spiralling down to the Earth in the hope they would be destroyed as they burn up in the atmosphere. And that would be a terrible waste, says Cockell. “It was a hell of an effort to get everyone to agree to the station and then to build it. We would have little chance of building another one in the near future if we lose this one, so we need to encourage companies to keep the station going for at least another decade.”
12||Lost letters reveal JM Barrie and Robert Louis Stevenson's mutual affectionThey are two of the greatest writers in history and they were also the greatest of friends. But they never met, and the importance and intensity of their relationship has never before been fully understood. Now, the lost letters of JM Barrie to Robert Louis Stevenson – missing for over a century – have been found in a cardboard box in a library archive and will be published for the first time in a forthcoming book. The letters reveal how ardently the young Barrie both adored and admired Stevenson, who was an older and more established writer. A year into their friendship, which was initiated by Stevenson, Barrie wrote to him: “To be blunt I have discovered (have suspected it for some time) that I love you, and if you had been a woman...” He leaves the sentence unfinished. He also imagines in the letters that he and Stevenson are related and were descended from the same Scottish family, a fantasy that allows him to open up to the older man about the intimacies of his family life and his close relationship with his mother. Treasure Island had already been published when the two authors began corresponding in 1892; 12 years later, Barrie went on to write his own masterpiece, Peter Pan, about a dangerous amputated pirate, a young boy and a journey to a far-off fantasy island. He repeatedly fantasises in his letters about meeting Stevenson, who had left their native Scotland in 1879 and was living in Samoa to improve his health. In one letter, Barrie even writes a funny, self-deprecating playlet – never seen before – in which he imagines himself visiting Stevenson’s 314-acre estate, and Stevenson “glumly” saying to his wife about Barrie: “Perhaps he will improve after he has rested a bit.” In reality, Barrie was held back from ever making that thrilling journey to Stevenson’s Pacific island paradise by his desire to stay near his frail, elderly mother – feelings he later explores intensely in Peter Pan – and had to content himself with merely writing 3,000-word letters to his beloved friend. Later, he recounts Stevenson’s whimsical directions to the island of Samoa (“you take the boat at San Francisco, and then my place is second to the left”), which seem to echo Peter Pan’s famous directions for the island of Neverland: “Second to the right and straight on till morning.” While many of Stevenson’s letters to Barrie appeared in print soon after Stevenson’s death in 1894 and the rest were published over the course of the 20th century, Barrie’s side of the correspondence has, until now, remained a mystery. Dr Michael Shaw, a lecturer in Scottish literature at the University of Stirling, stumbled across the missing letters while looking through a neglected box of correspondence at Beinecke Library in Yale University. “When I first saw them, I didn’t realise that these were lost letters,” he told the Observer. “I just assumed that they had been published and I didn’t know about them. I was judging myself, thinking I really should have read these.” It was only when he tried to buy a book of the correspondence and researched why it was not available that he realised what he had unearthed. In Shaw’s forthcoming book, A Friendship in Letters, Barrie and Stevenson’s letters to each other are published together for the first time. “What’s revealed in these letters – and it took me a while to discover the full extent of this – is the influence that both Stevenson and the correspondence have on Barrie,” said Shaw. “In reading over Barrie’s works, I started to see allusions to the letters and to Stevenson that I hadn’t noticed before.” Barrie, he said, loves to play games with his writing and unsettle the line between art and reality. “And I could see how he was doing that with the correspondence. He’s incorporating aspects of the correspondence into his own works, into his poetry and novels, and their friendship is also inspiring his works.” He tries to keep his bond with Stevenson alive in other ways, too. Odd little phrases Stevenson used in his letters creep into Barrie’s stories, and Peter Pan was placed in the same imaginary world as Treasure Island. Long John Silver (who is known by his aliases of Barbecue and Sea-Cook in Neverland) is afraid of only one man, readers are told: Captain Hook. “As a literary critic, I’m trained to be sceptical of biography coming into literary text,” said Shaw, “but the more I re-read Peter Pan, the more potential references I found not just to Treasure Island but to Stevenson, Samoa and their life.” Barrie has a real desire to incorporate Stevenson and his affection for Stevenson in his works, he believes. “I think what Barrie is saying is: if I can never meet Stevenson, because he has unfortunately died, then I want to create the opportunity for our characters to meet. “I think he liked that idea that they could occupy the same world, and could potentially bump into each other.”
5||Why can't questions be asked of Facebook's ads?Facebook wants you to know that it’s being transparent about political ads, requiring advertisers to verify their identity and to show who paid for an ad. But it doesn’t want to be too transparent. It has sent cease and desist letters to two New York University researchers, Laura Edelson and Damon McCoy, part of the Online Political Transparency Project, who are investigating how people are targeted by ads. They helped develop a browser plug-in called Ad Observer, which allows people voluntarily to share data about political ads on Facebook. Edelson and McCoy are particularly interested in two aspects of political ads that Facebook won’t publicly discuss – how particular people are targeted and how campaigns craft messages based on criteria such as race or age. Facebook claims that Ad Observer compromises privacy. This, observes Alex Abdo, a lawyer representing Edelson and McCoy, is “ridiculous”, given that “the plug-in’s users voluntarily sign up to donate data” and it “does not share any personally identifying information”. Facebook also claims that Ad Observer violates its terms of service by automating the collection of data. There are good reasons for blocking data aggregators, but Facebook is trying to block not data aggregation but academic research. It’s not the first time it has tried to do so. Researchers have long called for the company to allow research in the public interest. It has so far refused. The issue here is not simply about political ads. It’s about who controls the narrative. At a time when Facebook, Twitter and other tech businesses are making huge decisions that affect public debate, from blocking tweets to taking down accounts, not only is transparency important, but it is important, too, that the tech giants themselves don’t get to define what it means. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist
26||The big picture: magical realism in everyday DublinThe Irish writer Colm Tóibín was first introduced to the photographs of Tony O’Shea when he was an editor at a magazine called In Dublin back in the late 1970s. O’Shea was in the habit of coming to the magazine’s office every other Friday with a cardboard box containing a fortnight’s black-and-white prints, pictures he’d taken around the city’s streets. The photographs, Tóibín observed, in the introduction to their landmark collaborative book of 1990, Dubliners, “were like nothing I’d ever seen”. He looked forward to O’Shea’s arrival, and each time, though the magazine might be going to press, found himself “taking the cardboard box away with me, looking through the photos again and again on my own and wondering about them”. It was Tóibín who first sent O’Shea out on Dublin buses for a story to capture the life of the city from the upper deck. You would never say of O’Shea’s pictures that anything was typical of his work, but this photograph taken in 1989 of two boys and the kestrel is a memorable example of the magical realism that he so often seemed to locate in the everyday. Strange animal spirits are everywhere apparent in his pictures: raggedy boys stand on horseback on city streets, hounds are held at bay on misty bogland; in a famous series, Dublin housewives carry Christmas turkeys home from a side-street butcher, heads and necks and beaks dangling at their knees. O’Shea is 73 now. A retrospective book of his life’s work to date, The Light of Day, is full of natural wonders and human struggles that surface from the borderlands during the Troubles and in the rituals and recreation of his city. Each image wants to be a short story. And there is genius in revealing the teenage kestrel handlers’ eyes to be quite as bright and sharp as the bird he holds. The Light of Day is published next month by RRB Photobooks and the Gallery of Photography Ireland (£40) An exhibition of his work will be shown at the Gallery of Photography, Ireland, next year.
3||Frustration is rising as clampdowns spread across UK: are we in grip of Covid fatigue?As the people of Sheffield prepared to join Greater Manchester and the Liverpool city region in the premier league of Covid-19 restrictions – tier 3 – there were widely differing views on whether the tough new rules about to be imposed from London were welcome, or would even work. On the streets and in the city’s pubs last Thursday evening there was, however, one commonly held opinion – compliance would be some way short of total. “During the first part of lockdown I abided by the rules very strictly,” said Phillip, a 47-year-old gas engineer, as he waited for a pork wrap outside the Greedy Greek Deli. “We still are doing that, but it’s wearing thin. I think the economy and life still has to go on. But then it’s a balancing act with the NHS and the beds.” Back in March when Boris Johnson shut down most of the country including schools, most people understood and obeyed. “Proper lockdown was easy,” said Jason, 29, sitting on a wall on Sharrow Vale Road eating a butty. “You knew what you could and couldn’t do and you just did that.” Like many others he seemed less sure this time. Simon, 36, who works in hospitality and travels a lot with his work, said his attitudes had been influenced by seeing others breaking the rules and ignoring guidance, meeting people outside their households in places where doing so was banned. If they broke the rules, why shouldn’t he? He said: “We’re sat next to a couple in the pub whose opening gambit was ‘so, how’s things?’ They’ve clearly not seen each other for a while. When you look around and see other people who probably don’t even live in the same postcode, you kind of go: ‘fuck the rules.’” Yesterday some 1.2 million people in South Yorkshire joined around 2.8 million in Greater Manchester and 3.1 million in Lancashire and the Liverpool city region in tier 3. In these areas, social mixing is banned indoors and in private gardens while pubs and bars have to close unless they serve substantial meals. Stoke-on-Trent, Slough and Coventry have also joined London in tier 2. Scotland is to enter a new five-tier system of restrictions from 2 November; Northern Ireland has adopted much tougher restrictions; and a 17-day “fire break” is under way in Wales meaning most non-essential businesses are closed, with people only able to leave home for limited reasons. Supermarkets removed non-essential items from sale – including clothing, kitchen electricals and crockery – using barriers and plastic sheets to cover products. But seven months into the pandemic the views of people in places such as Sheffield raise a very serious question – aside from the intense scientific debates – about whether, whatever the new rules are here and there, the country has still got the stomach for the fight? Professor Susan Michie, director of the centre for behaviour change at University College London and a participant in the government’s scientific committee Sage, rejects the idea that “pandemic fatigue” has set in. But she believes there is a real compliance problem that is of the government’s own making. “There is no evidence to suggest people are getting tired. People are getting angry, frustrated and resentful – they’re not getting tired,” she told the Observer. “The collective solidarity of ‘we’re all in this together’ is a really important part of people following challenging restrictions, [but] adherence is being undermined by many kinds of perceived unfairness.” Michie believes the tolerance of Dominic Cummings’ trip to Durham in the spring, the perceived fuelling of a north-south divide which culminated in the rows over financial support involving Greater Manchester’s mayor, Andy Burnham, and “the ideology of privatisation, giving huge amounts of money seemingly to their contacts” for the test, trace and isolate programme have savaged public confidence and, in turn, compliance. She added that communities did not feel involved or consulted: “There isn’t a strategy that makes sense to an overwhelming majority of people. The restrictions haven’t worked, communities have not been engaged with and instead they have been blamed. The government blames health professionals for using too much PPE, it blames people for having tests, it blames young people – it does not celebrate good practice or make people feel good about themselves or pride in what they’ve achieved.” Michie was backed by social psychologist Professor Stephen Reicher, at the University of St Andrews, and Molly Byrne, director of the Health Behaviour Change Research Group and a public health adviser to the Irish government. Both said Westminster’s approach of imposing fines and encouraging neighbours to snitch on one another would backfire. “It’s a bad road to go down,” said Byrne. “The data shows that the vast majority of people want to adhere to the measures in their areas and it’s really important to boost those levels of solidarity and trust.” On Friday, a major report by the London School of Economics revealed that government policies had exacerbated the problem of non-compliance. Researchers advised that communities be put at the centre of pandemic policy if the rules were expected to be followed. Reicher said: “If people see restrictions which don’t seem to have achieved very much being imposed again, they will be sceptical. The British public have shown remarkable resilience and would get behind a national lockdown. The polling has consistently shown that by a ratio of three to one, people want the government to do more rather than less and do it sooner rather than later.” When Sage first recommended a short national circuit breaker or full lockdown on 21 September, as opposed to regional interventions, infection rates in England stood at 4,500 a day. A month on, the figure is four times that. The latest Opinium poll for the Observer this weekend suggests lack of faith in the government’s handling of the pandemic is indeed growing, hand in hand with public confusion and increasing lack of compliance. Approval of the government’s response to Covid is now at a record low of 29%, with 50% disapproving. Some 50% of people say the new three-tier system in England is clear but 44% say it is not, while 34% say they aren’t confident that they know what the rules are in their own area. And among young people aged 18 to 34 the proportion admitting to flouting the rules has risen in two weeks from 10% to 17%. Among those aged 35 to 44 it has risen from 10% to 18%. A sense that the spirit of national solidarity is crumbling is fuelled by parts of the media who believe the restrictions have gone way too far. Yesterday the Daily Mail splashed with “It’s Covid Hysteria”, adding a list of what it regarded as examples of interventionist madness saying “supermarkets ban sock sales, CCTV spies on social distancing, road checks on Welsh border, teacher threatens playdate pupils with police”. But as the Mail rails against diktats, many scientists take the opposite line – that the restrictions on our lives have gone nowhere near far enough. “At the end of March we went into a very severe lockdown. Students were not at university, children were not at school, and pubs and restaurants were all closed and even then we only managed to bring the virus reproduction value R down to just below one,” said mathematician Michael Tildesley, at Warwick University. In comparison, tier 3, the most severe set of new restrictions that can be imposed in England, still allows students to attend university, children to be at school and pubs and cafes to remain open to a limited extent. “My worry is that tier 3 won’t bring us close enough to the crucial ‘R equals one’ level that has to be reached to ensure that case numbers start to come down,” he added. “We could easily get a situation where cities like Manchester or Liverpool will never be able to come out of tier 3 because they cannot get ‘R below 1’. That is my real worry. All we are going to see is tighter and tighter restrictions being imposed and that will have long-term economic consequences and pose threats to people’s mental health.” Like other experts he backs a draconian national circuit breaker in which really severe lockdown measures are imposed for a fixed period. “People would know that it was only a fairly short period and would tolerate it,” said Tildesley. “Certainly, if we don’t do something now, we will soon be in real trouble.” In Westminster, any semblance of political consensus has disappeared, replaced by open division. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has argued for the same kind of circuit breaker over half-term, while accusing Johnson of having “lost control” of the virus. Worries that the government has not been tough enough were expressed also by Professor Neil Ferguson, of Imperial College London. He told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme on Saturday that the NHS would not be able to cope with the current rate of growth in numbers of Covid cases for much longer. New restrictions on households mixing should have a “significant effect”, he said, but these might not be enough and further action might be needed. “There is a limit to what we can do in terms of reducing contacts, short of starting to target, for instance, the older years in schools and sixth-form colleges where we know older teenagers are able to transmit as adults. Of course, nobody wants to start moving to virtual education and closing schools even partially. The challenge may be that we are not able to get on top of the transmission otherwise.” The government’s failure to provide consistent warnings of the disease’s danger to the public was another major factor in the current rise in numbers of cases, added Bharat Pankhania, of Exeter University Medical School. “They launched their ‘eat out to help out’ to encourage people to go to restaurants without giving any additional advice about the need to continue to be vigilant – and that was a real mistake,” he said. “We need to be giving much better advice to people on how deal with this virus.” Pankhania also urged that the government’s test-and-trace system be moved into local areas. “We need a much slicker operation and that sort of thing can be done much better at a local level. We are going to need our trace-and-track services for a long time, I suspect.” Michie adds that confusion is inevitable among the public as the arguments rage. “People are understandably confused. Over time they become disengaged and think: ‘you know what, I’ll try and extract my own principles and do my own risk assessment and management.’” Back in Sheffield some were indeed making their own assessments, bending the rules where they felt they could. A young resident called Rebecca said she had recently “intimately kissed” on a date, insisting it was not a moment of complete abandon but a measured decision. She said: “I judged it on if, you know [I believed] the other person was taking precautions”, rather than on what the strict letter of the latest government rules told her she was allowed to do.
12||Anatomy of a Killing by Ian Cobain review – a death that casts new light on the TroublesIn certain parts of Northern Ireland in the late 1970s, a stranger arriving at the door could provoke panic, even terror. The town of Lisburn, near Belfast, was not such a place. Predominantly Protestant and home to many members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), it had for the most part escaped the violence that had ravaged other parts of the province. Up until 1977, as Ian Cobain puts it, “not a single member of the security forces had lost their life in Lisburn”. All that would change on the morning of Saturday, 22 April 1978, when Millar McAllister, a police photographer, opened the back door of his home in Woodland Park, having glimpsed a figure moving in his back garden. He was shot three times at close range, twice in the chest and the third time, as he was lying on the ground, in the head. In the silence that followed, the killer noticed McAllister’s seven-year-old son, Alan, standing just inside the kitchen door, frozen to the spot. They stared at each other for a long moment until the boy started screaming. The stranger ran to a waiting car, the boy’s cries echoing in his head, In Lost Lives, the vast book of historical record that chronologically documents every death in the Troubles, Millar McAllister is listed as victim number 2,017. The bare facts of his life are outlined thus: RUC, Protestant, 36, married, two children. In Anatomy of a Killing, Ian Cobain rescues him from the abyss of history, tracing the arc of his short life and contrasting it with the still ongoing, altogether more tangled, life of Harry Murray, his killer. By reconstructing a single murder – its planning, its ruthless execution and its protracted aftermath – through in-depth interviews and the careful sifting of not always reliable evidence from official records, Cobain also casts new light on the culture of terrorist violence and state repression that defined Northern Ireland during 30 years of conflict. Cobain is a seasoned, award-winning investigative journalist (most recently for the Guardian), who also sketches the social and historical context that spawned the Troubles. Throughout, his style is brisk and his tone level-headed, the violence he chronicles often evoked through spartan, but chillingly descriptive, detail. Of the aftermath of the IRA bombing of the La Mon hotel restaurant, which happened on 17 February 1978, just a few months before the murder of Millar McAllister, he writes: “Twelve people, including three married couples, died in the blast. All were Protestant. The dead were so badly burned and shrivelled by the flames that firemen thought initially that some of them were children.” Hell is in the details. Amid such carnage, the death of an individual could pass all too swiftly into the anonymous realm of statistics, forgotten by all but family members and loved ones. Cobain’s book is, among other things, an act of reclamation. It is also, in its skilful telling, a tale of two ordinary lives converging with the inexorability of a Greek tragedy. Millar McAllister joined the RUC in 1961, when the Troubles, as Cobain puts it, “were barely visible on the horizon”. He had two hobbies: photography and racing pigeons. The former provided him with a well-paid job; the second unwittingly led to his death. McAllister wrote a monthly column for Pigeon Racing News and Gazette under the byline “The Copper”, which was accompanied by his photograph. When an IRA suspect, who was being held at the Castlereagh interrogation centre in east Belfast, recognised McAllister from the photo, the word went out to find him. Soon afterwards, Harry Murray was dispatched with another young volunteer to carry out his execution. In almost every way, Murray comes across as the polar opposite of the level-headed McAllister: impetuous, impressionable and instinctively rebellious. What they had in common is that they were both Protestants, Murray being one of the very few from his community to join the IRA. A few years before, he had been driven out of his home in loyalist Tiger’s Bay in Belfast by local paramilitaries. His transgression was to marry a Catholic. Having been resettled where his wife grew up in nationalist north Belfast, he grew increasingly sympathetic to the republican cause. Murray seems to have drifted into the ranks of the Provisionals much like, years before, he had enlisted on impulse with the Royal Air Force and served overseas. His military career ended abruptly after one too many breaches of discipline. “I just couldn’t take orders,” he tells Cobain without irony. Murray’s renegade life was not without principle, however. During his induction into the IRA, he claims to have told his recruiters there were two things he would not do: kneecappings and shooting Protestants “just because they were Protestant”. Like all IRA combatants, though, he regarded the RUC as the enemy in a just war, and, as Cobain discovers, remains remarkably free of remorse for the brutal taking of Millar McAllister’s life. In 1983, while serving time for the killing, Murray would take part in an audacious IRA jailbreak from Long Kesh prison, shooting a prison officer in the leg before being wounded himself. On his recapture, he was set upon by prison officers who berated him as “a turncoat bastard”. As with Patrick Radden Keefe’s recent book, Say Nothing, which uses the IRA’s “disappearance” of Jean McConville in 1972 as the starting point for an illuminating exploration of the conflict, Anatomy of a Killing deftly merges history, social context and anecdotal testimony. Cobain explores the psychology of political violence, citing a study from 1978 which found that, rather than being the psychopaths of tabloid headlines, the IRA’s “political killers tended to be normal in intelligence and mental stability”. He also suggests that vengeance may have been a crucial motivating factor for young men joining the Provisionals and, in Murray’s case, it is clear that he has never forgiven his own community for the humiliation of his expulsion. The immediate aftermath of the killing also makes for deeply unsettling reading. On information obtained from an IRA informer, Murray and his accomplices were arrested and taken to Castlereagh, where they were beaten and interrogated relentlessly by Special Branch men working in shifts. Anne, an IRA courier, confesses to her role and, Cobain writes, “appears to have suffered a fairly complete physical and psychological breakdown”. The man she gave the gun to after the killing, Brian Maguire, whom Cobain describes as “highly strung”, was not an IRA member. He was interrogated non-stop for 12 hours and, the next morning, was found hanged in his cell. His death remains disputed. Among the revelations in Cobain’s book is testimony given at the time by another suspect called Phelim, which provides what Cobain calls “an accurate description of the torture technique that became known as waterboarding when used by the CIA in the years after 9/11”. If there is much that is compelling in Anatomy of a Killing, what lingers longest is the awful mundanity of the events leading up to and after the killing. Cobain describes how, on that fateful morning, Anne calmly carried the gun from Belfast to Lisburn on a bus, and, having arrived early, went shopping for a birthday present for her brother. Just a few hours after he killed McAllister, Murray returned to Lisburn to play football on a pitch close to his victim’s home. As the Troubles begin to fade into history and forgetting, it is in these incidental actions that the deep moral fracture caused by the conflict comes sharply and chillingly into focus. We would do well to remember how quickly violence can become almost normalised in a culture riven by intractable differences of identity and belonging. • Anatomy of a Killing: Life and Death on a Divided Island by Ian Cobain is published by Granta (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply
10||Into the night: why walking in the dark is good for the soulThe lights from the cottagewindows recede, all too rapidly, as we walk along an unlit country lane and take a footpath through a field into open countryside. Thick cloud cover prevents the moonlight from illuminating the way ahead. Yet, as my eyes begin to get used to the darkness, the landscape around me reveals itself in a new light – albeit a shady one. The contours of Mount Caburn, an iron-age hill fort, are like shadows against the sky. On the horizon, a tree bent by the wind is silhouetted, and the rocky outcrop at the top of the field turns out to be a flock of sleeping sheep. A fox cries, a pheasant crows and the air is full of a heady earthy scent. “For most of human history man lived in close contact with the land,” says Nigel Berman, my guide, whose company, School of the Wild, organises guided night walks on the South Downs. “Only in the past few hundred years have we shut ourselves off from our natural surroundings. Walking at night is a powerful way of reconnecting . When your vision is reduced, your other senses are sharpened.” Darkness is a thing we have come to fear and shy away from. It has become a metaphor for evil and depression, a place held at bay by our electric-lit world. But in the parts where darkness holds sway for much of the winter, inhabitants embrace it rather than yearning for longer days. In the Arctic Circle during the polar night, when the sun never rises and the Earth is swathed in darkness for several months, the Norwegians simply wrap up, strap on a head torch and head for the hills. As nights in the UK close in and a Covid-induced indoor isolation looms, it is a perfect opportunity to take note and go into the countryside, or walk across a deserted beach, to see starlit skies and moonlit rocks, spot owls, see bats swooping and breathe in the night air. Nigel and I walk from Glynde, a village near Glyndebourne opera house, across the South Downs towards the town of Lewes. It’s a walk I know well by day but at night everything is different, and a familiar stroll becomes a mini adventure. The lighter strip of sky above it highlights the ridge of the downs that we head towards to start. At the top, we edge along a wire fence looking for the gate that will take us along a path through the Mount Caburn nature reserve to Oxteddle Bottom. When Nigel told me not to bring a torch, I was alarmed. I can’t remember the last time I used my night vision and I’m not even aware of how it works. Nigel explains that in the dark our pupils not only expand to allow light in they also switch to use different light sensors. In bright light, cone-shaped sensors respond to different colours of light and allow us to see fine detail, but in the dark the eyes switch to rod-shaped sensors, far more sensitive to light but unable to sense colours. We descend past clumps of trees into the darker, hill-surrounded valley, aiming for the eerie shimmer of a dew pond where we pause to sit. I’m aware of the breeze caressing my face, the rustle of leaves and, as I watch the clouds swirling and slowly changing colour against the sky like a natural sound and light show, it feels mesmeric. Normally at this time of night I’d be having a glass of wine in front of the television, but being out in the countryside is a purer form of relaxation. I forget about work and family tensions and begin to blend into the surroundings. There is no one other than Nigel to see or hear me and, with little visual distraction, my mind calms. Walking at night is not without risk, but with knowledge and preparation it opens up a new side to walking. For example, it’s important to know your route by day so that you know what features to pick out by night; to have good navigational skills; take the right kit (hat, gloves, insulated layers and a daypack with a flask of hot drink); and pick favourable weather. A deep unfamiliar sound rouses me from my reverie and Nigel tells me it is the “cronk” call of the raven. We continue walking and, having got used to the dark, the chalk path that leads up the escarpment of Saxon Down now appears to almost shine in front of us. We climb carefully, feeling, rather than groping for, our way on the uneven ground. As we reach the top, Lewes appears below as a twinkly mass of lights, a sight I’d generally think of as inviting. But in just a few hours I have gone over to the dark side and find myself reluctant to walk back down. Walking at night is like discovering a new world on your doorstep, one that allows you to roam beyond the duration of winter’s short days and explore in the time of Covid. As Henry David Thoreau wrote in Night and Moonlight: “Night is certainly more novel and less profane than day.” • Guided mindful night walks are available from schoolofthewild.com, price information is available through the website More ways to explore by night National parks are some of the best places to see the star-studded autumn and winter skies, and there are a number of dark sky festivals that include organised stargazing walks. • darkskiesnationalparks.org.uk The Bat Conservation Trust has groups across the UK and most run local bat walks. • bats.org.uk Ramblers groups offer group night walks. • ramblers.org.uk Many charities now run organised night walks as a way of raising money. The original MoonWalk, organised by breast cancer charity Walk the Walk, now takes place all around the world. • walkthewalk.org
3||Rush for results could lead to inferior Covid vaccine, say scientistsScientists have warned that early adoption of a Covid vaccine with only moderate effectiveness could disrupt efforts to test and create improved versions. Immunising against the disease is not going to be a simple business of turning off the virus once the first vaccine appears, they say. In fact, there could be considerable confusion as researchers struggle to pinpoint the best versions for different vulnerable groups, such as the elderly. “The vaccines coming through fastest are the most experimental. It is possible they won’t be all that great and that others – created using more tried-and-tested but slower methods – might be better,” said Professor Adam Finn of Bristol University. “But to prove that point will become very difficult if lots of individuals have already been given the first vaccine. It will need vast numbers of people to demonstrate which is best or if a different vaccine is more suitable for particular groups, like the elderly.” Finn said such confusion could cause setbacks in dealing with Covid, adding: “We should be preparing to meet this challenge and work out ways to compare the effectiveness of early vaccines – but at present we are not doing that well enough.” A total of 198 Covid vaccines are now under development across the globe with four key versions undergoing final phase 3 trials. These include Pfizer’s BNT162b2 and the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine. Results of those trials – in which each is compared with a placebo – are expected in weeks or months. Once the first vaccine that shows efficacy in countering Covid-19 is revealed, there will be enormous pressure to use it immediately. Key candidates would be healthcare workers who deal with Covid cases and others at high risk of becoming infected. But for groups such as the elderly, who tend to have weaker immune systems, caution will be required. “The problem is that early vaccine trials are not likely to show how well these products work in these populations,” said Kanta Subbarao, a World Health Organization director, in an editorial in Nature last week. “We know vaccines often work better in young, healthy adults, which is why they are enhanced with a higher dose or an adjuvant to boost immunity for diseases such as flu and shingles. It is also unclear how well clinical trials will assess effectiveness in those in minority ethnic communities.” In other words, by spring, several vaccines may have passed their trials without any mechanism being in place to select which is the most effective for different groups. Nor is the problem confined to the UK. “The complexity and chaos and confusion that will happen in a few short months has hardly dawned on anybody,” Dr Gregory Poland, director of the Vaccine Research Group at the Mayo Clinic, told the New York Times. It is expected that approval would be given to any vaccine that protects at least half of those injected with it. The problem will come when other vaccines appear and it is unclear whether or not they are better than the first licensed product. Bryan Deane, a director at the Association of British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI), said: “There was a lot of over-optimistic talk earlier this year about Britain having a vaccine before Christmas. However, that really looks unlikely now. Results of trials are not likely to arrive until next year, and when they do they are likely to come out sequentially. “The first one that shows any significant protection will be the one people will want to start using straightaway. The problem will be that when the others come through their trials, you won’t be able to say that one is better than another because we have not set up ways to compare them.” This concern was backed by Finn. “It is a paradox. If we get a vaccine that works, but not very well, it’s almost worse than not having one at all because it gets in the way of getting a better vaccine. We need to be thinking about it to avoid that situation urgently.”
16||For Halloween match dark lips with facial glowIn the run-up to Halloween, you’ll see a lot of impractical makeup options. While I accept pragmatism isn’t at the top of Halloween’s cosmetic agenda, if you’d rather something less terrifying, try Rodarte’s AW20 look. The trick is to juxtapose brooding lips with a glowy – not ghostly – face. Mimic skin by mixing in a bit of foundation with moisturiser. Apply subtle hints of highlighter to your cheekbones, add a dark eyeliner and finish off with a moody lip. 1. Dior Rouge Dior Ultra Rouge Lipstick £30, dior.com 2. Dolce &amp; Gabbana Passion Lips Lipstick £36, harrods.com 3. Laura Mercier Caviar Intense Ink Waterproof Liquid Eyeliner £22, feelunique.com 4. Westman Atelier Super Loaded Highlight £69, net-a-porter.com 5. Guerlain Rouge G de Guerlain Lipstick £26, guerlain.com I can’t do without… An excellent but simple cleanser that doesn’t break the bank Long before single-ingredient products became fashionable, Indeed Laboratories was there, quietly getting on with it producing clever formulations at great prices. As someone who grew up battling skin issues, I have always had a soft spot for efficacious, targeted skincare brands that are not financially prohibitive. The basis of good skincare is a decent cleanser, but even the very best shouldn’t cost you three figures – so if yours does, you are wasting your money. Especially when you have this. Now, a lot of cream cleansers irk me because I find they don’t clean well enough and they leave a residue on the skin. This one, however, has a myriad of characteristics I could champion all day long. The formula is made up of hyaluronic acid (hence the name) thereby enhancing moisture in the skin. It also includes a resurfacer and exfoliant that is gentle but powerful (clinically proven to brighten skin in 14 days) and grapeseed oil, which is a non-clogging source of antioxidants that also helps to reduce hyperpigmentation. The texture – a thick cream that lathers, but not too much – cleans like a gel counterpart. Like really cleans, but not in a way that leaves my skin feeling tight. Instead, my skin feels completely balanced. Which means on the days I am feeling particularly lazy I can skip my toner and go straight to moisturising. Always a winner in my book. Indeed Laboratories Hydraluron Cream Cleanser, £19.99, boots.com On my radar… A trio of body treats to sooth and smooth Salt of the earth Using avocado oil and sustainably sourced mineral salts from the Dead Sea and Kalahari desert, these bath salts create a relaxing soak, replenishing moisture and soothing aching muscles. Olverum Bath Salts, £37, spacenk.com Called to the bar I’m obsessed with this body-exfoliating bar. It has orange blossom and neroli, as well as bamboo powder for dead skin, and sunflower seed and aloe vera to lock in moisture. Glossier Body Hero Exfoliating Bar, £12, glossier.com Cream de la cream This thick luxe body cream – infused with soothing saffron flowers and moisturising shea butter and babassu – is excellent for dry skin. Feel the silkiness. Sisley Velvet Nourishing Body Cream, £102, sisley-paris.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto
19||Bail out our musicians or risk losing them for ever, say classical music starsLeading figures in classical music say many highly-trained orchestral musicians are giving up on music as they face homelessness and hunger this autumn. Speaking to the Observer this weekend, the internationally renowned conductor Sir Simon Rattle warned that an “exodus is happening right now”, while top English soloists the violinist Tasmin Little and the pianist Stephen Hough both spoke of despair and desperation among even successful performers. “Next month, we will all expect to hear the traditional sound of music as we commemorate Armistice Day,” said Little, an acclaimed virtuoso musician who trained as a child at the Yehudi Menuhin School. “But consider who is playing all this beautiful music for us and where it will come from in the future?” When the Last Post sounds, Little suggests, it will be heralding the end of Britain’s celebrated musical culture if there is no rescue for thousands of professional freelance musicians without work. She called on the government to support more distanced concerts to make them commercially viable for venues. Earlier this month, leading orchestras and music festivals received a first government bailout grant, including Rattle’s London Symphony Orchestra. But there is renewed concern that the majority of musicians who are freelancers have no safety net while only a few socially distanced concerts are staged. “While some of us working in established institutions have been fortunate to be given grants that help us to hang on, the vast majority of freelancers are in a desperate situation,” said Rattle. Institutions such as the LSO, BBC Radio 3, London’s Wigmore Hall or Snape Maltings Concert Hall in Suffolk, home of the Aldeburgh festival, have been creating as much paid work as possible since the lockdown eased, staging performances in front of reduced audiences and for live broadcast. But it is a tiny proportion of the scale of music once made. “My worry is that so many musicians will be forced to leave the profession that we will not be able to return to anything like the cultural life that we enjoyed previously. And that this exodus is happening right now, and that it will not be noticed until it is too late,” said Rattle. The controller of Radio 3, Alan Davey, said he hears worry and sometimes despair from musicians on a daily basis. “Everything that was certain for the next year has been thrown into complete uncertainty. “Music has got me through this so far, but musicians are particularly exhausted now because of the effort of finding new ways to reach audiences.” Radio 3 now stages concerts every week for live broadcasts that go out around the world, including a current residency at the Southbank Centre and upcoming events at the Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival. “What we are doing is a small thing, but if we can find ways to do it safely we will keep on, of course, because it matters.” Davey’s words were echoed by Cheshire-born concert pianist Stephen Hough: “It is strange, then distressing, to find oneself suddenly cut off from the joyful exhilaration of making music for an audience,” he said this weekend. “Musicians almost always chose this life not because of financial rewards but because of an inner necessity to communicate the beauty to others. And then … the concerts stop and the money stops too – voice silenced, and pockets emptied.” But Hough said he has found hope by playing at the Wigmore Hall and with the Liverpool Philharmonic, where he performs this week to a small crowd and an online ticketed audience. “It feels like a healing of the soul.” Petroc Trelawny, breakfast presenter on Radio 3, fears the new generation of young musicians will miss their moment to start a career while older audiences will lose the concert-going habit. “You have only a few years to sell yourself as a young performer,” he said. “You start out at the age of seven or eight, with the same commitment a doctor makes but with no guarantee at the end at the best of times,” he said. “There are wonderful things still happening, of course, but there is a danger in taking comfort from that. The vast majority of concerts are not happening. It is pretty grim for most musicians and they are very tired.” Trelawny added that he knows of one “really very famous name who his hit massive financial problems”. The difficulty for freelance musicians, he said, is that even those with viable careers rarely earn enough to save. “Many had just banked on being able to carry on.” For some performers the sudden drop in income has already forced them out of their homes or made the weekly shop unaffordable. He paid tribute to organisations, such as the Oxford Lieder festival, that are “still heroically staging distanced events and online concerts and paying musicians a normal wage” from any remaining funds. He also praised local musical groups, such as one in Kendal which has moved into the local church to allow smaller concert audiences to socially distance. “At the beginning of this, musicians tried to raise our spirits and now they need our help because there is no national organisation protecting them all,” he said. Little, who is playing out her last season as a violinist through the pandemic, having already decided last year to quit at the top of her career, urged music fans to support performers. “A huge percentage of us now have no work and yet we all expect music to be everywhere around us, on the radio, on television and in films. And musicians create great value for this country in terms of culture and the wider economy,” she said. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the spelling of Tasmin Little’s first name.
16||The Danish plot is all about trees, but it’s hard to resist flowers, tooIt took us years to add flowers at the Danish plot. An aesthetic thing to some extent. It is, after all, a simple piece of land by the sea, surrounding a black wooden beach hut, or summerhouse as they call them. There were already delicate wild hepatica, clumps of cowslip and campion, and carpets of celandine and cow parsley. We planted a crimson rugosa, an echo of the beach-side banks that colonise this coast. Next, a pale-blushed clambering rose, an old Danish variety. Here is where we mostly plant trees, replenishing the birch and beech, the larch and pine and fir that grow everywhere. Our first flower for its own sake: a shy naturalising species tulip that promptly disappeared for a few years. Next, Henri’s birthday lily of the valley, set in clumps by tree roots, quietly in keeping with a woodland feel to the plot. But then the species tulip showed and spread, and we were lost in admiration. Most years since, we have added to them, though always in small numbers. Sometimes we’re there when they’re at their best. Other times, we simply find the fallen petals. Our most recent tulip plantings: in late September, pale ‘Coerulea Oculata’ and a more exuberant T acuminata in the longer grass. We also added our first snake’s head fritillary (Fritillaria meleagris from Farmer Gracy) that we dotted though patches of the meadow. These all still in modest amounts. Then, as we were leaving, Henri’s missing parcel arrived with Sarah Raven border tulips and another tall French mix. I blame lockdown loneliness and the siren call of online shopping. I suspect we may stop. Though this year I’m trialling overwintering, calendula covered by clear storage boxes. For now, our thoughts turn to a Danish family Christmas and bright spring. A few more scattered flowers by a northern sea. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.com
5||The Observer view on Poland's draconian abortion banLast week’s flawed ruling by a constitutional tribunal in Warsaw drastically restricting the right to abortion is a grim reminder that women’s rights and, more broadly, the rule of law are under serious threat in Poland. This oppressive decision is part of a slide towards authoritarianism that began in earnest after the rightwing populist Law and Justice party (PiS) of Jarosław Kaczyński won an absolute majority in 2015. It must not be allowed to continue. Halting this deterioration is, first, a matter for the people of Poland. Although this predominantly Catholic, socially conservative country already has some of the strictest abortion prohibitions in Europe, surveys suggest that only a small minority supports additional curbs. Not for the first time, Kaczyński and PiS are deliberately ignoring the democratic consensus to advance a narrow ideological and religious agenda. Pro-choice supporters have reacted quickly. Angry crowds besieged streets around Kaczyński’s home in Warsaw waving signs that read “You are building women’s hell”. More demonstrations are planned this weekend in a nationwide upsurge of protest reminiscent of 2016, when tens of thousands of women dressed in black marched against earlier anti-abortion legislation. The new restrictions ban terminations in the case of severe foetal impairment, currently the reason given for most legal abortions. In future, abortion in Poland will be allowed only in cases of rape, incest or where there is a threat to the mother’s life. Such cases account for only 2% of legal terminations. Each year, thousands of Polish women seeking abortions are forced to travel abroad. The ruling is a direct assault on women’s rights and a moral obscenity. It is also legally flawed, in the sense that the PiS packed the tribunal with loyalists who delivered the result it wanted. Sadly, this is not unusual in Poland, whose government is locked in a long-running dispute with the EU commission over its repeated attacks on judicial independence, free media and LGBT rights. Past attempts by Brussels to impose penalties have been ineffective, owing to a lack of solidarity and, more recently, to Polish threats to block the new EU budget and pandemic recovery fund. Last month, the commission singled out Poland (and Hungary) for criticism in its first rule-of-law audit of EU states. Some MEPs and governments want to withhold EU financial aid, from which Poland benefits hugely, unless or until the PiS shifts ground. A poll last week showed overwhelming public support for linking EU funding to the rule of law. Those who doubt the Europe-wide relevance of Poland’s assault on women’s rights and the wider dispute with Warsaw should study Kaczyński’s recent remarks: they are the typical distortions of a populist-nationalist politician disdainful of democratic and legal norms. He vowed not to succumb to “threats and blackmail” from Brussels. “Those who want to take away our sovereignty based on their own whims are headed for a fall,” he said. “Today, the EU institutions, their officials, some politicians that the Polish people have never elected, demand that we verify our whole culture, reject everything that is very important for us, just because they like it,” Kaczyński told the Gazeta Polska Codziennie newspaper. His words could equally have been spoken by Italian, French or Brexit-touting British ultra-nationalists. For the sake of women’s rights and its own integrity, the EU must stop pulling its punches and crack down on governments that mock its core beliefs. And it should be clear eyed about the universality of this fight. Last week, the Trump administration promulgated a “global anti-abortion declaration” along with 31 like-minded illiberal or authoritarian regimes. Poland is a signatory. What do these governments have in common? They are run by men and they oppress women.
1||From climate to China, how Joe Biden is plotting America’s restorationBy any measure, Joe Biden is old in the ways of the world. As Barack Obama’s vice-president, he met all the big international actors. As chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee, he helped direct US foreign policy. After four years of Donald Trump’s manic leadership, the Democrat offers a steady, dependable hand on the tiller. Biden’s grand aim: a glorious American restoration, at home and abroad. But his long experience cuts both ways. For many on the left, Biden’s conventional global outlook represents not so much a new dawn as a return to the Washington establishment-led policies of the pre-Trump era. Those hoping for radical action on pressing issues such as the climate crisis, global inequality, or confronting authoritarian “strongman” leaders could be disappointed. If he wins, Biden’s supporters say, America will be back in charge at the global helm. Normal service will resume. Biden’s critics say he is but a pale shadow of his old boss – a cautious, centrist politician like Obama but lacking the latter’s vision. In either case, who Biden selects to be his secretary of state, national security adviser and defence secretary could be crucial. Pressure from Democratic party progressives such as Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren pushed Biden leftwards during the campaign. The twin health and economic crises caused by the coronavirus pandemic also shifted his thinking. He now talks about “reimagining” America’s relationship with the world. Whether his views have really changed remains to be seen. And for all his foreign policy expertise, it’s clear Biden’s primary focus, if elected, will be domestic. Writing in Foreign Affairs magazine earlier this year, he set out a “foreign policy for the middle class” whose top priority was “enabling Americans to succeed in the global economy”. Strengthening the US at home was a prerequisite for restoring global leadership, he said. His priorities were plain. The idea that America must and should lead internationally, and that Trump “abdicated” that duty, is nevertheless hard-wired into Biden, a child of the cold war. This assumption of supremacy is challenged nowadays by those who believe post-1989 and post-9/11 US leadership, and particularly its armed interventions abroad, have served neither the US nor the world. They point to Iraq – a war Biden supported. “If you liked US national security policy before Trump mucked things up, then Biden is probably your kind of guy,” wrote historian Andrew Bacevich, a former army colonel. “Install him in the Oval office and the mindless pursuit of ‘dominance in the name of internationalism’ will resume.” Bacevich argues foreign policy-making – for example, decisions about sanctions on Cuba or Iran – should be taken out of the hands of the foreign policy elite, publicly debated, and democratised. Biden’s is more a top-down approach. To be fair, he says he will rebuild alliances, nurture multilateralism, and always try diplomacy first. But the worry remains that his grand project could become a restoration tragedy, heralding a return to old-fashioned, high-handed American exceptionalism. Climate &amp; health Trump abandoned the Paris climate agreement last year; Biden has pledged to immediately rejoin it, committing the US to meeting international global warming targets by cutting national greenhouse gas emissions. In July he announced a $2tn, four-year plan to invest in a range of climate crisis solutions and a separate scheme to decarbonise the electricity sector by 2035. On the pandemic, Biden has said the US will rejoin the World Health Organization and restore funding. He has proposed a US-led coalition to coordinate the search for a Covid-19 vaccine and new treatments. Democracy &amp; values Biden says the world is caught in a battle between democracy and authoritarianism – and that the US must be at the forefront. “As a nation, we have to prove to the world that the US is prepared to lead again – not just with the example of our power but also with the power of our example,” he wrote in Foreign Affairs. He says he will convene a “global summit for democracy” within his first year in office “to renew the spirit and shared purpose of the nations of the free world”. He has vowed to ensure the US presidency is again seen as a principled defender of open and fair elections, judicial independence, human rights, and free speech. Britain &amp; Europe As a man proud of his Irish roots, Biden is strongly opposed to any Brexit outcome that jeopardises the Good Friday agreement or threatens peace in Ireland. Even if such concerns are allayed, a swift US-UK free trade deal, as promised by Trump, is likely to prove harder to achieve. Given Boris Johnson’s perceived Trump-style brand of rightwing populist politics, Biden is expected to call on Berlin and Paris, rather than London, as preferred partners on European issues. Like Obama, he favours a strong, united EU that makes common cause with the US. Biden may be the undertaker who finally buries the “special relationship”. China Despite Trump’s repeated claims to the contrary, Biden says he will be tough on China, citing its threats to Taiwan, its “unfair” trade practices, and its habit of “robbing” American companies of technology and intellectual property. To do so, he proposes “to build a united front of US allies and partners to confront China’s abusive behaviours and human rights violations – even as we seek to cooperate on issues where our interests converge, such as climate change, non-proliferation and global health security”. He has been notably critical of Beijing’s treatment of Uighur Muslims. Nuclear proliferation Biden plans to revive the system of nuclear arms control treaties with Russia degraded during the Trump years, starting with an extension of the 2010 New Start strategic arms treaty negotiated by Obama. He also says he will rehabilitate the 2015 Iran nuclear deal that Trump abandoned, if Tehran recommits to observing its terms. On North Korea’s nuclear weapons, he has little new to say. However, the modernisation of the US’s own nuclear arsenal, begun by Obama, looks set to continue. Conflicts Biden says he wants to reinvigorate Nato and strengthen alliances in Asia; will adopt a strong deterrent stance in the face of Russia’s anti-western machinations; will try to revive the Israel-Palestine peace process short-circuited by Trump; will end US support for the Saudi war in Yemen; halt family separations on the Mexican border and reform immigration; and support the UN and international law. Like Trump, he also vows to end what he calls “forever wars”. “We should bring the vast majority of our troops home from wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East and narrowly define our missions as defeating al-Qaida and Isis,” he states. Another Middle East war, in Syria, is rarely mentioned. Diplomacy first “Diplomacy requires credibility and Trump has shattered ours,” Biden says. “In the conduct of foreign policy, a nation’s word is its most valuable asset. As president, I will elevate diplomacy as the United States’ principal tool of foreign policy.”
4||Refugee advocates concerned for detainee held in Brisbane hotel for 16 monthsRefugee advocates have raised concerns about the welfare of a 37-year-old man who is under suicide watch at the Brisbane Immigration Transit Accommodation after attempting self harm. The man, from Somalia, had been detained in a hotel at Kangaroo Point in Brisbane since being transferred to Australia from Nauru under now-defunct Medevac laws in June last year. He was approved for transfer under clauses allowing people to reunite with family members in Australia for medical treatment. His wife and infant son were transferred to Australia in 2017 because his son was having trouble breathing. They now live just 20 minutes from the motel where he has been detained for 16 months. But the family has not been reunited, and since coronavirus restrictions were introduced in March they have been unable to visit. “The only time he has seen his wife and son is when his wife brings his son to the fence,” Refugee Action Coalition spokesman Ian Rintoul said. “That’s the only time he has seen them since March.” In recent weeks they have been unable to visit because both have been unwell. “He is extremely distressed to be so close to them and not be able to provide any kind of support,” Rintoul said. The man attempted to self-harm about 3am on Saturday but guards at the Serco-run facility intervened. He was then kept at Kangaroo Point, without any medical support or assessment, for about 12 hours before being transferred to Brisbane Immigration Transit Accomodation and placed under watch as high risk. As of June there were more than 100 people held in detention at Kangaroo Point, which has been designated as an alternative place of detention. All were transferred to Australia from Nauru or Manus Island under medevac laws, which were repealed in December. Rintoul said detainees at Kangaroo Point, and the Mantra hotel in Melbourne, were now living in more restricted conditions than existed on Nauru. Because of the coronavirus lockdown, all in-person visits have been banned. Meanwhile prisoners in Queensland are now allowed to receive visitors, with Queensland Corrective Services allowing the resumption of in-person from 28 September. There have been suicide attempts among the immigration detainees at both hotels. “They thought when they were transferred here they were going to get medical help, including in some cases for mental health,” he said. “Many of them have not got that medical help that they were promised. There are people who have applied [for refugee status in] Canada, but that has been stalled because of the pandemic. “At least there is a balcony at Kangaroo Point. At Mantra they can’t open the windows.” Guardian Australia has sought a response from the Department of Home Affairs. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org
23||The Loire’s chenin blanc is a master of disguiseBouvet Ladubay Saumur Brut, Loire, France NV (£13.99, or £9.99 as part of a mixed case of six, majestic.co.uk) If you’re a producer of chenin blanc in France’s Loire Valley, you get used to ceding the spotlight. You have to accept that the grape variety you’re working with is currently better known around the world for its contribution to the recent proliferation of superb dry white wines from South Africa. And you know very well that the white grape variety for which your home region is most famous has for some years now been sauvignon blanc, as found in the wines of Sancerre, Pouilly-Fumé and Touraine. But there are some compensations. Chenin blanc grown in the Loire Valley has a kind of super-power shared by very few other grape varieties (riesling is the only other one I can think of): you can use it to make any style of wine at the very highest quality level, from golden sweet dessert wines to crisply apple-scented, incisive champagne-alike sparkling wines such as Bouvet Ladubay’s reliably fresh and tangy fizz from Saumur. Domaine la Rouletière Patrimoine Vouvray Sec, Loire, France 2015 (from £17.49, allaboutwine.co.uk; greatwinesdirect.co.uk; corkingwines.co.uk) My current favourite Loire chenin fizz is a little more expensive than the Bouvet Ladubay. But at £21.95 (vincognito.co.uk) Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Triple Zéro is pretty competitive alongside the likes of champagne and English wine. It gets its name from the absence of sugar, which is commonly added in three stages in the production of sparkling wine, but not here: what you get is a tinglingly dry wine of luminous clarity and depth of ripe apple (a classic chenin character) and more exotic fruit. It’s made by one of the stars of Loire still wines, Jacky Blot, whose Domaine de la Taille aux Loups Remus 2017, a still dry chenin from vineyards around the village of Montouis-sur-Loire (£26.68, justerinis.com), has the same mix of fruit-depth and struck-bell resonance of flavour as the Triple Zéro, and which you can also find in the silkily elegant Patrimoine from Domaine la Rouletière in Vouvray. Domaine des Forges Coteaux du Layon Chaume 1er Cru, Loire, France 2016 (£18.56, gauntleys.com) The very best Loire chenin is certainly a match for the best chardonnay from Burgundy, and at a fraction of the price to boot. But the combination of grape and region is also responsible for some charming wines at more accessible prices: I’m thinking of reliable staples such as Waitrose’s Les Andides Saumur Blanc (currently on offer for £7.49) and Yapp Bros’ never-less-than-fun, tangy-racy and drinkable Saumur Blanc (£11.49). For sheer gastronomic pleasure from chenin, however, it’s hard to beat the dessert wines, which combine the lusciousness of honey, brown sugar and crystallized apple with that resounding, cleansing, Cox’s apple acidity you find in the dry and sparkling wines. A wine such as Domaine des Forges’ lingeringly lovely Chaume 1er Cru, for example, is the closest thing the wine world has to the experience of eating a perfectly made tarte tatin. Follow David Williams on Twitter @Daveydaibach
22||TV tonight: Hugh Laurie's Tory chancer flirts with misfortune in RoadkillRoadkill 9pm, BBC One “People like me because I break the rules. Voters think of me as a character.” While similarities to current politicians are no doubt entirely coincidental, it is impossible not to detect echoes of modern populism in David Hare’s drama as Hugh Laurie’s Tory chancer Peter Laurence continues to push the boundaries of probity. This week, Laurence isn’t the sole architect of his misfortune as his daughter attracts the attention of the tabloids. But her indiscretion comes at an unfortunate time in the light of other events. Phil Harrison Michael Palin: Travels of a Lifetime 8pm, BBC Two Of all the shows repurposed for pandemic viewing, these travelogues have been among the most likable. Partly, that’s down to Palin himself, but they have also tapped into our current longing for freedom. Tonight’s final episode sees Palin revisiting his journey across the Sahara. PH Enslaved With Samuel L Jackson 9pm, BBC Two The powerful series concludes with changing attitudes and the eventual abolition of slavery. Jackson, along with Afua Hirsch, looks at the activists, petitions and cultural changes that led to its demise, while Divers With Purpose examine the wreckage of slave ship the London. Hannah Verdier Piers Morgan’s Life Stories 9pm, ITV The older the guest, the better the chat; that’s a general rule of thumb and one that bodes well for this week’s interviewee. Sir Cliff Richard has just celebrated his 80th birthday and he’s here to discuss his poverty-stricken childhood, conversion to Christianity and an extraordinary life in British pop. Ellen E Jones The Bridge 9pm, Channel 4 There’s little bridge-building and lots of contrived machinations by the programme-makers as the reality show continues. The contestants, one of whom wins cash if they all complete their task, are going hungry, so food is offered – with a catch designed to manufacture division. Jack Seale The Olivier Awards 2020 10.20pm, ITV Originally scheduled for April and celebrating the best of 2019, the theatre awards finally get the go-ahead. Enjoy them while you can because it’s hard to imagine any similar ceremony next year. Nominees include Wendell Pierce and Phoebe Waller-Bridge and our master of ceremonies is Jason Manford. PH Film choice The Lighthouse, 12.50pm, 9.45pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Two salty seadogs question their sanity in a lighthouse: Robert Eggers’s follow-up to The Witch is a claustrophobic yarn of 19th-century mariners, superbly shot in shadowy monochrome by Jarin Blaschke, with haunting performances from Willem Dafoe and Robert Pattinson. Paul Howlett Live sport Scottish Premiership Football: Aberdeen v Celtic, 11am, Sky Sports Main Event Top-flight action from Pittodrie. F1: Portuguese Grand Prix, 1.05pm, Sky Sports F1 From Autódromo Internacional do Algarve. Premier League Football: Southampton v Everton, 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event With Wolves v Newcastle United to follow at 4pm.
23||Land, Birmingham: ‘Vegan cookery to file under thrilling’ – restaurant reviewEditor’s note: we have decided that, while restaurants remain open, we will continue to review them Land, 26 Great Western Arcade, Colmore Row, Birmingham B2 5HU (0121 236 2313). Two courses £20, three courses £26, five-course tasting menu £35, wines from £29 In the beginning there was a wild mushroom risotto and the non-meat eaters looked upon it and saw that it was seriously lame. Really? Is that it? For many kitchens cooking in the European tradition, it was. Going back 20 years or so it often seemed that, without a lump of animal protein to put front and centre, many lazy cooks would fall back swiftly into the heavy embrace of the carbs. Those damn vegetarians and vegans might not get something imaginative, but at least they’d get fed. Bring on the rice and pasta. Or, if you’re really lucky, a vegetable gratin that could grout a bathroom. A lot has changed. A lot hasn’t. As recently as February this year, at the splashy new restaurant of a chef who not only should know better but generally does, the meat-free options were pasta to start and gnocchi for the main. The come-hither menu descriptions listed roasted pumpkin and amaretto biscuits, pickled Thai shallots and dukkah. But none of that disguised those dishes’ true nature: pasta and gnocchi. There has, of course, been innovation. All hail Ottolenghi. Likewise, new generations of cooks have arrived in waves, fully aware that the diverse traditions of the Indian subcontinent, of China and the Middle East and all points in between often get along just fine without reaching for an ingredient that once had a pulse. Give thanks, too, for the rich blessing that is miso; for the uncompromising heft of gochujang. And yet, what occurs to me early on in my terrific lunch at Land, a small restaurant tucked away in the sort of Victorian shopping arcade in Birmingham that Pevsner wrote about, is how many clichés are still present in non-meat cookery in so many British restaurants. And how many of them are completely absent here. In your service I have been living through the cauliflower years. I have survived the aubergine years. Fine, sturdy vegetables, both. Love a bit of roasted cauliflower, me. I haven’t met an aubergine that I couldn’t spank with miso, grill to a charred mess and call dinner. But these can become as deadening a trope as that damn wild mushroom risotto. At Land there is none of that. It’s why I would encourage as many cooks as possible to get to Birmingham right now to see what chef Adrian Luck is doing there. The rest of you should pop along, too. His menu of almost entirely vegan cookery is short – just three choices at each course – but it should be filed under thrilling. There’s enormous, nerdy attention to detail alongside a precise understanding of both acidity and spice that lifts the seemingly humble far beyond its origins. We sit in the small downstairs dining room, at the bare wooden tables overseen by just one masked and attentive waiter, peering at plates of edible wonder. There are crescents of roasted onion squash the colour of a setting sun, on a bed of still-nutty puy lentils, bound by a mustardy dressing tangled with roasted red onion. What makes it sing is the addition of crisp lentils, perhaps deep-fried, to give it texture. There are the sweetest of Indian spice-roasted carrots, perched on a brilliant and vivid sweet-sour carrot and ginger purée. I could do serious damage to a bowl of that alone. There is the crunch of roasted seeds across the top. There are dribbles of what’s described as yogurt. As it’s a vegan dish, let’s assume nuts have been press-ganged into service. A potato rösti isn’t really, but let’s not get too hung up on nomenclature: it’s a plank of multilayered sliced potatoes, deep fried to an encouraging golden. There’s a cloud-like smoked-potato purée draped across the top, dusted with cep powder and, next to it, a spoonful of a boisterously acidulated mushroom ketchup. Oh boy. And on it goes. For a main course, a chunk of sweet potato has been roasted and partnered with a deep and sultry mole, that classic Mexican exercise in controlled burning used to produce a sauce full of spice and toasty dark-chocolate notes. There are whorls of avocado purée, and petals of the sweet potato skin, deep-fried for crunch. In another dish, sautéed king oyster mushrooms come on a cassoulet of borlotti beans lubricated with a little cream, the only dairy in the whole meal. The plate is topped with lacy “carbon tuiles” looking encouragingly like something worn by the women painted by Jack Vettriano. Celeriac, as familiar a non-meat trope as cauliflower and aubergine, is given a new and complex seeing to here. Chunks arrive roasted, under snowy slices of more of the same. Underneath are pearls of barley in a dark, umami-rich yeast broth. There’s a dusting of yeast across the top as well as dollops of a black garlic purée. I have a credo: non-meat dishes should be good because of that fact, rather than in spite of it. But I can’t help describing this celeriac dish as deep, intense and, well, meaty. With all these descriptions I will have missed a detail. I will have missed an ingredient or a moment of wizardry, because so much is going on. Adrian Luck is in complete control of his ingredients. It’s why I wish I could be just as enthusiastic about the desserts, but I can’t. Non-dairy creams can all too often have a musty, cereal back note, especially when sweetened. That’s what happens here in a sweetcorn tart with blackberries. The shell is tough and over-engineered, and the sweetcorn “cream” betrays its origins. Coconut milk might have been Luck’s friend here. A rapeseed oil cake with stewed apple, dribbles of caramel and a scoop of brisk buttermilk sorbet is much better, but lacks a certain largesse. Which is my fancy way of saying it needs loads more caramel. But ignore all that because of the brilliance that has gone before. Land is designed to take you somewhere new. Even the wine list is calculated to encourage experimentation. “If you like pinot noir,” says one heading, for example, before suggesting a gamay. And so we toast Luck’s cooking with a couple of glasses of godello because we like pinot grigio. I am aware that describing a restaurant like this as a find, when it’s been there for three years and always knew exactly where it was, might be a little insulting. But I can say that I’m delighted I’ve now found it. You should find it, too. News bites A new take on the cook-at-home ingredient delivery model: outside caterer Rocket, has launched a programme of food boxes entitled “A cook’s tour”. Alongside those ingredients, available for delivery nationwide, you also get access to a video cook-along, complete with live chat. Upcoming boxes include Flavours of Istanbul, Temples of Balinese Cuisine and Korean Street Food. The boxes cost from £55 for two. For more info visit acookstour.co.uk The tier 2 and 3 Covid-19 rules, prohibiting people meeting up indoors with anybody other than members of their own household, have resulted in mass restaurant cancellations. The Corbin and King group, which runs the Wolseley and Brasserie Zedel among others, says it lost 2,000 covers across the group to the end of October. At the same time a number of restaurant managers have told me that they are not clear how they are meant to police it. ‘Am I supposed to ask the members of every table for a proof of address?’ one maître d’ said to me. Another said there was a concern that, even to enquire of a table, might breach discrimination and equality legislation. In other news, Harrods in London’s Knightsbridge has announced it will be opening a branch of Gordon Ramsay Burger. It follows the success of the first in Las Vegas where the chef’s take on the humble hamburger costs up to $25.99. So there’s that. No opening date has yet been announced (gordonramsayrestaurants.com). Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1
1||Biden gains as suburban women and elderly voters turn backs on TrumpJoe Biden’s hopes of reaching the White House could rest on two crucial demographic groups that appear to be deserting Donald Trump: elderly people and suburban women. They would join a broad coalition that includes strong support among African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans, the LGBTQ community and young people. With the gender gap potentially bigger than ever, the president appears more reliant than ever on white men. Little more than a week before election day, Biden enjoys a double-digit lead in almost every national poll and is ahead in the crucial battleground states. More than 52 million people have already voted, according to the US Elections Project. In the past four presidential elections, Republicans have led among the elderly by around 10 points. But about four in five Americans killed by the coronavirus were older than 65 and a majority of Americans say Trump has mishandled the pandemic. The president trails among elderly voters by more than 20 points, according to recent CNN and Wall Street Journal/NBC News polls. This swing could prove critical in states such as Arizona and Florida, which have a high number of retirees. “In terms of voting blocs, there are two that are absolutely dooming Donald Trump,” said Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota. “He won the senior vote by seven points in 2016; that was very important in Florida and a few other states. He’s now losing that bloc and the polls differ about how much, but the fact that he no longer has an advantage among seniors is really crippling for him. “And then he has so alienated suburban women that it’s put a whole number of states in play, including states you wouldn’t expect, like Georgia. This kind of macho presidency has gotten the ringing rejection by women, particularly educated women who are so tired of the 1950s.” The suburban revolt against Trump’s bigotry, hardline agenda and chaotic leadership was manifest in the 2018 midterm elections when Democrats gained 41 seats in the House of Representatives, the biggest such shift since the post-Watergate 1974 elections, and won the popular vote by 8.6%. Trump’s campaign to win back this constituency, variously known as “soccer moms”, “security moms” and “hockey moms”, has been anything but subtle. He has tried to tap racist fears of suburbs overrun by crime, violence and low-income housing. In one tweet, he promised to protect “the Suburban Housewives of America”. At a recent rally in Pennsylvania, he pleaded: “Suburban women, will you please like me? Remember? Hey, please, I saved your damn neighborhood, OK?” Polls suggest the plea is falling on deaf ears. Biden leads by 23 points among suburban women in swing states, according to the New York Times and Siena College, and by 19 points among suburban women overall, according to Pew Research. Pew also found that Hispanic women prefer Biden by 44 points and Black women go for the Democrat by a staggering 85 points. Andrea Moore, 45, a stay-at-home mom in suburban Wayne county, Michigan, voted for Trump in 2016 because she was tired of career politicians. “He was an unknown quantity, but now we know,” she told the Associated Press, explaining that she will not vote for the president again because of “a million little things” including his divisiveness, fearmongering and failed Covid-19 response. The trends were underlined this week by a national survey of 2,538 Americans by the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) that showed Trump haemorrhaging support among the elderly and suburban women as well as another, less expected group: white Catholics. Only 38% of people aged 65 or older approve of Trump’s handling of the pandemic while 61% say they disapprove, the PRRI found. Among white college-educated women, seven in 10 disapprove of Trump’s handling of the pandemic, seven in 10 disapprove of his response to racial justice protests and a similar share believe he has encouraged white supremacists. There are also signs of erosion among religious conservatives, a bulwark of Trump’s base. PRRI found that while three in four (76%) white evangelical Protestants still approve of the job Trump is doing, only 52% of white mainline Protestants and 49% of white Catholics agree. Biden would be only the second Catholic president. Robert P Jones, chief executive and founder of PRRI, said: “White Catholics are a group that particularly in those swing rust belt states – Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Ohio – are really on the president’s must-win list. They’re also important in a place like Arizona. They are as big or bigger than white evangelicals in those states, so in terms of religious groups they are quite an important constituency. “White Catholics in 2016 were basically evenly divided between Trump and Hillary Clinton at this stage in the race. We have them at 54% Biden, 41% Trump, so that’s a sea change. This group is going to play an outsized role in Trump’s path to the electoral college and he’s not doing well with them at all.” Clinton was beaten in the electoral college after suffering heavy losses among non-college-educated white voters – a majority of the population in battleground states such as Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin – and failing to turn out African Americans at levels Barack Obama achieved. Current polling suggests Biden will do better on both accounts. Whereas Clinton lost whites without a college degree by more than 20 points, Biden is trailing by just 12 in UCLA Nationscape’s polling, according to an analysis by the FiveThirtyEight website. This appears to vindicate strategists’ view that Biden, a 77-year-old white male from humble origins in Scranton, Pennsylvania, would resonate more with this demographic than the New York-based wife of a former president. But, FiveThirtyEight added, Trump is performing slightly better than four years ago among college-educated white voters, and has made modest gains among voters of colour. The president’s support among Black voters aged 18 to 44 rose from around 10% in 2016 to 21% in UCLA Nationscape polling. He is also at 35% among Hispanic voters under age 45, up from the 22% in 2016 – and potentially significant in Florida. Jason Miller, a senior adviser to the Trump campaign, told reporters on Friday: “We’re very proud of the president’s efforts to turn out Latino voters … There’s a lot of enthusiasm for the president, not just for everything that he’s done so far but also because people are really scared about Joe Biden’s appeasing the regimes from Cuba and Venezuela.” Older voters of colour remain overwhelmingly Democratic, however. Biden is also dominant among all people under 35 even in Republican strongholds, with leads in Texas (59% to 40%), Georgia (60% to 39%) and South Carolina (56% to 43%), according to Axios and SurveyMonkey.
1||Many midwest Democrats stayed home in 2016. Will they turn out for Biden?Jamal Collins took the trouble to vote four years ago even though, like a lot of people in Cleveland, he didn’t imagine it would change very much. Eight years of deflated hopes for Barack Obama had left the African American teacher wondering if any president could really make that much difference to the lives and livelihoods Collins saw around him. He even thought there might be an upside to the election of Donald Trump. “I’m kinda glad it happened,” Collins said a few weeks after the new president moved into the White House. “It really is an eye-opener on what’s really going on. The real truth about America. The real truth that there’s still a lot of racism. People voted for this sort of stuff.” A lot of people in Cleveland chose not to vote. Driven by disillusionment with Obama and dislike for Hillary Clinton, turnout fell in the overwhelmingly Democratic city where nearly half the population is black, as it did in others across the midwest, helping to usher Trump to victory. This year, Collins sees it differently. “Trump’s presidency, the last four years, have been absolutely horrible. Trump blew life back into white supremacy. Him being so open and unapologetic about the stuff he says, and things that he’s done, really gave that power,” he said. “Plus coronavirus, because now we have tens of thousands of people, especially in the black community, really suffering from Covid-19. We have an economy decimated to almost the proportions of the depression. The loss of jobs and loss of wealth is worse than I’ve ever seen before.” Collins will be voting for Biden and encouraging anyone else he can to do the same because the election hangs in good part on the turnout in major midwestern cities. Trump decisively won Ohio four years ago after the state had voted twice for Obama. But with the president holding a lead of just 1% in the aggregate of recent polls, the result in Ohio may come down to just a few thousand votes in Cleveland. Four years ago, Clinton won nearly 50,000 fewer votes than Obama in Cuyahoga county, which includes Cleveland and its small satellite cities, in part because so many Democrats stayed home. In neighbouring Michigan, Democratic turnout in Detroit fell by about 60,000 votes in 2016. Trump took the state with a majority of just 10,704 votes. Similarly, the drop in turnout between presidential elections in the Democratic stronghold of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, was more than double the number of votes – just 23,000 – that Trump won the state by. Those victories were key to the president winning the electoral college and taking the White House. The Democrats have reason to hope Biden can turn that around on 3 November. More than 8m people have registered to vote in Ohio, the second highest on record after Obama’s 2008 race. The number registering as Democrats has surged 20% in the state this year while Republicans have fallen 6% although they still have a slight lead in total registrations. Little more than half of the electorate are independents. Two-thirds of the drop in Republican voters is in Cuyahoga county. Those retreating from Trump include blue collar workers and white women living in the Cleveland suburbs. “Voting for him was a big mistake,” said a shop assistant, Lynn, who is married to a factory worker, after a campaign worker knocked on her door. “We both didn’t like Hillary and thought Trump would be good for bringing jobs back. I lost it with him that first year. I realised he was completely unfit to be president. But my husband hung on, believing in him until Covid. We’re both voting Biden just to get him out. I don’t know what Biden will do but at this point I don’t care.” Like others who once backed Trump and have turned away she did not want to be identified because “we have some crazy neighbours around here”. Lynn is among about 2.5m Ohioans who applied for absentee ballots, double the number in 2016. Nearly one quarter of the electorate has already voted in Cuyahoga county, whether by post or in person. “What we’re seeing right now is astronomical volumes of people voting by mail,” said Erika Anthony of Cleveland Votes, a nonpartisan get out the vote group. “Weirdly, despite the fact that every sort of tactic that we normally would be deploying to get people to vote has been compromised because of the pandemic, I will say there’s been an increased excitement when we are engaging with residents, potential voters.” But for all that, less than half of the population of Cleveland registered to vote. Some in the city have never been to the polls. Others turned out for Obama but not since. “Voter apathy is a real thing,” said Anthony. “If I’m a black person particularly, I really am not seeing anything that’s demonstrating to me that democracy is working for me.” Cleveland is among the most racially segregated cities in the country and one in three residents lives below the poverty line. It struggled through the Obama years, never really recovering from the 2001 recession or the national economic collapse seven years later. Then came coronavirus. Amanda King, an African American volunteer working to register voters in Cleveland said some voters are more motivated to turn out this year. “I think that among young and educated voters, there’s a feeling that this is our duty to vote in this election because it’s consequential. It feels more pressing than the Trump-Hillary election,” she said. “I think for some people, their bubble has been burst. After the Obama presidency they were thinking we’re a progressive society, things are great. And then this four years of Trump has really made some people come to the realisation that our country is not the democracy that it could be or should be.” But King, who runs an art collective, Shooting Without Bullets and who helped curate City Champions, the Guardian’s week-long focus on the city last year, said she met far less enthusiasm in one of the city’s poorest neighbourhoods, Hough, where she visited barbershops, a popular gathering place for discussion among African American men. “When I do voter registration in Hough, which is a majority black neighbourhood that has been disinvested from, redlined, a lot of that population is functionally illiterate, it’s a very different response over there. There’s a lot of people who are not interested and who don’t believe in electoral politics,” she said. “Many of their arguments were that whether it’s Trump, whether it’s Obama, whether it’s Bush, whether it’s Clinton, they’ve never cared about me. Me choosing them as leadership has never changed the conditions in which I’m living. And you look at that neighbourhood, and you look at those statistics, and you say, you’re damn right. I understand that frustration.” King said dire predictions for four more years of Trump are doing little to galvanise people in neighbourhoods like Hough. “That might work for white women who voted for Trump last time but that’s not going to work necessarily for the people on the fence. You can’t say to someone who has nothing, to someone who is constantly in a state of struggle, well this guy is gonna make it worse. There’s no more fear to be had. They’re not selling greatness here, they’re selling well, it’s worse or worse,” she said. “I’m thinking that there’s a lot of barbershops around the midwest where this conversation is happening. It scares me because I know that we need to turn out for this election.” Detroit and Milwaukee also saw a drop in voting in African American neighbourhoods in 2016 that local activists in part attributed to a lack of interest because Obama was not on the ballot or disillusionment because he was able to achieve less than they had hoped, in part because of Republican obstruction. Collins grew up in overwhelmingly black East Cleveland where his father worked for General Electric and his mother was a bus driver. “People feel like their vote is not going to make a difference. And people may be too concerned with other stuff that’s going on right in front of their face versus getting into politics. They don’t trust politicians, never have,” he said. “Up until Obama, there were never a lot of people voting around here because I don’t think they really saw them making a change.” Collins, who teaches at a school and a community centre, said coronavirus forced his classes online but some of young people he teaches don’t have computers. Others lack decent internet connections. They might rely on their phones for social media but that doesn’t work for interactive lessons. “These are the kinds of problems a lot of their families are focused on, not voting,” he said. Democratic politicians remain confident but have a different concern. Kent Smith is running unopposed for re-election as a state representative in Euclid, a majority black small city within Cuyahoga county that is effectively a suburb of Cleveland. He is less worried about turnout than whether the votes get counted. “I really think that in 2020, because of the global pandemic and the change in how people are voting, it’s really going to be turnout versus the number of votes that are ruled ineligible,” he said. Smith said a combination of voters not being used to filling out postal ballots – a common error is to put the date instead of date of birth – and efforts by Ohio’s Republican secretary of state, Frank LaRose, to throw roadblocks in the way of voting by post which is more favoured by Democrats, has raised concerns of large numbers of ballots being discounted. “Projections of turnout are healthy for the Democrats. It’s a matter of how many of those votes will actually count,” said Smith.
5||Better late than never –  how Rishi Sunak ended up with a planThree mini-budgets from the chancellor in four weeks isn’t normal. But then nothing much is these days. This trilogy started at the end of September, with the winter economy plan. The name gives you a clue that this was meant to be the plan for the whole winter. Far from getting through to the spring, the plan’s flagship policy didn’t make it to the end of October before being totally reinvented by the Treasury last week in the third instalment of this economic policy saga. The policy in question is the job support scheme (JSS), the replacement for the furlough scheme that ends a week today. For those returning to work for a fraction of their previous hours, the scheme pays them two-thirds of their wages for the hours not worked. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said its goal was to give businesses “the option of keeping employees in a job on shorter hours rather than making them redundant”. That is the right aim, but the scheme didn’t give many firms that option. It was too expensive, asking firms being hammered by this pandemic to pay a third of wages for hours not worked. This design flaw was obvious a month ago. As we at the Resolution Foundation pointed out within minutes of the chancellor’s announcement, there’s a reason other short-hour work schemes, like that in Germany, do not ask employers to pay towards the costs during downturns. Government’s response was that our analysis might be right on a spreadsheet but didn’t reflect the real world. You didn’t need a spreadsheet to tell you that the scheme incentivised firms to keep one worker on full time rather than two on half-time, which is not how you reduce the coming rise in unemployment. On Thursday, the chancellor recognised this reality, slashing the employer contributions from 33% to 5%. What sounds like a tweak is a revamp of the JSS, turning it into a functioning short-time work scheme. The cost to an employer of keeping two staff earning £17,000 on for half their usual hours has fallen from £233 to just £35 a month – an 85% reduction. This will make a huge difference to take-up, incentivising firms to cut hours, not jobs. It won’t be cheap, increasing its cost many times over, but it will lead to lower unemployment and protect household incomes. So we’ve got to the right place, albeit too late, with the now heavily revised scheme set to go live in seven days’ time. It’s worth asking how this mess happened, because there are lessons for policymakers. Fundamentally, this is a classic case of optimism bias. The hope that the summer pause in the pandemic would last was understandable, but a terrible basis for policymaking. It, combined with talk of a V-shaped recovery, lies behind this painful display of economic policy slowly catching up with the return of the virus. High employer contributions might have made sense if we were phasing out lockdown restrictions, but make little sense when we are ramping them back up. Optimism bias is something almost all of us are guilty of. In our private lives we tell ourselves we’ll make it on time even when it’s clear we’re running late and it’s a common pandemic survival technique not to admit to ourselves quite how long this will go on. This same optimism bias explains why it took until Wednesday for the government to confirm that this autumn’s spending review, which was set to hand our departmental budgets for the coming three years, had been scrapped. It’s been clear for months that we’re in no position to plan public spending three years ahead right now, and only placing a lot of value on hope over evidence would make you think otherwise. We don’t know what we’ll be spending next month, let alone in 2024. Underpinning this optimism bias is a misdiagnosis of our pandemic-stricken labour market. We’re regularly told that, while it’s sad jobs are going in sectors such as hospitality and leisure, it’s best for those workers to enter unemployment because they’ll swiftly find jobs in less pandemic-hit parts of the economy. This works in textbooks but ignores the evidence. The UK is seeing the largest rise in unemployment in over a decade. That is driven more by huge falls in the chances of someone out of work finding a new job than by increased job losses themselves. Far from growing fast and hiring, even firms less affected by the pandemic have stopped investing, given the huge uncertainty. The real lesson here is that, while optimism bias may be a human flaw that we all live with in our private lives, it’s a dangerous force in politics. History shows us that previous pandemics lasted years not months, and that second and third waves were common. In a pandemic it’s fair enough to hope for the best, but policy needs to be set with a closer eye on the painful and messy reality. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation
27||Malcolm Turnbull signs Kevin Rudd's petition challenging News Corp media dominanceFormer Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has signed Kevin Rudd’s petition calling for a royal commission into News Corp’s dominance of the Australian media. Rudd, also a former Australian prime minister, launched the petition to the Australian parliament earlier this month, saying the media company employed tactics that “chill free speech and undermine public debate,” and calling for a royal commission to ensure a strong and diverse news media in the face of “new business models that encourage deliberately polarising and politically manipulated news”. Both Rudd and Turnbull faced negative campaigns from News Corp during their time in office. On Sunday, Turnbull shared that he had signed the petition. “Kevin has done well to get this petition going,” he said on Twitter. “I doubt it will result in a Royal Commission and Murdoch’s print monopoly (since 1987) is only part of the problem. But I have signed it and encourage others to do so.” Rudd said it was “good to have you on board”. “Supporting media diversity isn’t about left or right, Labor or Liberal, but preserving the lifeblood of our democracy,” he said on Twitter. In Australia, there is no requirement for the parliament to respond to a petition once it reaches a certain number of signatures. Rudd told Guardian Australia that he knew it was unlikely the current federal government would respond. “Obviously, the beneficiaries of the Murdoch protection racket, the Liberal National party, will not do that [act],” he said. “It will take some time to convince the Labor party that it’s in their interest as well. That will be influenced directly by the volume of public support.” The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has a distanced himself from the petition, saying Rudd was acting as a private citizen and it was not reflective of Labor policy. Rudd told the ABC on Tuesday that Turnbull had reached out to him to see how they could work together on curtailing Murdoch’s influence over Australian politics. “Malcom reached out to me a couple of days ago,” he said. “He wants to have a discussion about how we handle these matters in the future, so I’ll do that in due course.” He highlighted that NewsCorp campaigns against him and against Turnbull were a matter of documentary record. “That is all about the influence and the exercise of Murdoch’s media muscle and knocking over an Australian prime minister,” he said. “Now, I don’t support Mr Turnbull, as you know, for a whole range of policy reasons – although in some areas of policy we have a common view – but this petition of mine is not about partisan politics. “I’m no longer a player in national politics, I’m not seeking elected office but I am concerned about this cancer on our democracy and if Mr Turnbull wishes to join forces with me on this, well and good.” Rudd said News Corp’s owner, Rupert Murdoch, was a “virtual monopoly player” in Australia. In his home state of Queensland, which is currently in a state election campaign, every newspaper is owned by NewsCorp. “This is a one-newspaper state, not just a one-newspaper town,” he said “And anyone who thinks that’s fair in terms of every side of politics having a fair go has got rocks in their head.” The two former prime ministers have been strange bedfellows in the past 12 years of Australian public life. Turnbull was made opposition leader in 2008, after Rudd won the 2007 election, and then lost the leadership to Tony Abbott in 2009. In 2012 they appeared together on an episode of ABC’s Q&amp;A, when they were viewed as so similar – moderate, wealthy, and “not very popular in your own parties, but very popular among people” – that one audience member asked if they had considered joining together to form their own political party. Rudd quipped: “Malcolm and I could never agree on the leadership.”
16||We are railing: Britain embraces the joys of the humble train setIt started with a standard Scalextric set: two slot cars, some track, a 10-year-old boy and his enthusiastic father. Six months later, Ben Martin has a 75ft raceway in his loft and a growing collection of cars. “I went down a rabbit hole with my son,” Martin said. “There was a time when the postman was bringing track every day. He was laughing, ‘What’s all this about?’ But you can never have too many straights. It’s fulfilling a childhood dream. I played with Scalextric with my brother and I always wanted a track in the loft that lived there, that you could use whenever you wanted, not just taking over the living room for a few days before your parents made you pack it up and maybe get it out months later.” Martin is not alone. Slot cars, model railways and model-making have boomed during the pandemic. Hornby, that stalwart of the British hobbyist industry, said last month it had seen far higher sales between April and August than expected. Peco, which makes tracks and scenery, is struggling to keep up with demand. And hobby shops have seen a huge increase in customers. Hattons has supplied customers in Widnes and beyond for decades, and Richard Davies, the managing director, said sales had been “a blur”. “We’ve been inundated with orders,” he said. “Last year, people were buying three and a half items on average, but in March and April that went up to seven or eight. We were about 50% up. “The whole crisis has prompted people to take a look at how they use their time – people think they’ve been spending too much time at work, and now they want to make the model railway that’s been on their mind for the last 20 years.” Some are new model enthusiasts, like the Martin family. Others, such as Chris Chewter in Oxfordshire, are established hobbyists who have had more hours to invest in getting a little closer to perfection. For the last five years, Chewter and his daughter have been recreating Tetbury station in Gloucestershire, which was a victim of the Beeching railway closures. The layout is a “small piece of utopia where the sun is always shining and the world is Covid-free”, Chewter said. “I’ve always wanted to take a real location and model it as close to scale as I possibly could. There’s something about making a model when it looks like it’s been shot by a Bond villain’s shrink-ray that captures my imagination.” Steve Haynes, Peco’s sales and export manager, said: “It appeals to people who have artistic flair, to people who have a technical mind because they like the electronics, to people who have an interest in history. It stimulates the mind.” Peco had to shut its factory in Devon for five weeks at the start of the pandemic. “Now we’re trading at a much higher level this year than we were last year, even with that disruption,” Haynes said. “We’re recruiting more staff and we’re still behind the curve – the demand is relentless. Some of our retail customers have seen more business than at Christmas.” It helps that model railways now have a stamp of celebrity approval, and geek culture is not merely tolerated but feted. Rod Stewart was proud to show off his extraordinary reconstruction of an American city to Railway Modeller magazine last year. The sprawling layout of 1940s cars, trains and skyscrapers is 125ft by 23ft, and he is reportedly shipping it back to Essex from Beverly Hills. Musician Jools Holland, another enthusiast, has recreated the Channel tunnel and 1960s London. “There are plenty of people showing off their model railways on Instagram,” Davies said. “When I was 15, I was embarrassed by my model railway. I didn’t want anyone at school to know about it. It seems like we’ve moved forward.” Hornby, which owns many of the brands in British model shops, had been in the doldrums for some time, but its fortunes turned a corner after Lyndon Davies took over as chief executive three years ago. Stock market rules prevent him from revealing details before its interim results in November, but he is ebullient. “Whenever there’s a national crisis, people turn inwards and look for things of comfort,” he said. “And we’ve tried to give people more fun.” Hornby now makes Scalextric models of Batman and Joker cars, and Del Boy’s Reliant van from Only Fools and Horses. The track was more reliable now, Davies said, and customers also liked controlling their trains and cars with mobile phone apps. “I had a race with my grandson, he had Superman, I had the Reliant Robin,” Davies said. They have a range of Yellow Submarine buses and trains that has launched in time for Christmas.” “It’s so wholesome and innocent, and there’s absolutely nothing negative about it,” Ben Martin said. “It’s not like screen time. Everyone is interested. We’ve had load of visitors in the loft, from six-year-olds to my uncle in his 70s. “But I’m done now. I’ve got enough track. We’ve started collecting Star Wars figures.” • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to add a photographer credit to the main image.
14||Man in critical condition after shark attack on Great Barrier Reef north of TownsvilleA man is in a critical condition after being attacked by a shark at the Great Barrier Reef. He was airlifted to Townsville University hospital after being bitten at Britomart Reef around 12.20pm on Sunday, Queensland Ambulance says. The area, off the north Queensland coast about 150km north of Townsville, is a popular spear-fishing location. Seven Australians have died from shark bites in 2020 including six in unprovoked attacks – more than any year since 1934. While the total number of shark bites is in line with the annual average over the past decade, it has prompted experts to consider whether the La Niña weather event, associated with cooler sea surface temperatures in the central Pacific, may be affecting where sharks search for prey. According to the Australian Shark Attack File, it has been 86 years since six people last died from unprovoked shark bites in a single year. In 1929, nine people died from unprovoked shark bites in Australia – a record that preceded debate about introducing the first shark nets at Australian beaches several years later. There have been 18 unprovoked shark bites so far in 2020, one more than last year and the same as in 2018. In 2015, there were 22. In January, a 57-year-old experienced diver, Gary Johnson, was killed by a shark near Esperance in Western Australia, and in April, a 23-year-old wildlife ranger, Zachary Robba, was killed by a shark off the Great Barrier Reef. In June, Rob Pedretti, 60, died after he was bitten by a shark while surfing in northern New South Wales, and in July, a teenager died from a shark bite while surfing at another beach in the region. In September, 46-year-old Nick Slater died after being bitten while surfing near the Gold Coast. Authorities called off a search for the body of Andrew Sharpe earlier in October after friends saw the 52-year-old attacked while surfing near Esperance. While surfing is not considered provoking a shark, the death of a 36-year-old while spearfishing off Queensland’s Fraser Island in July is considered to be the result of a provoked bite, as the release of fish blood can attract sharks.
5||Letters: Britain at fault for Brexit fishing woesYour interesting article did not explain why so much fish in British waters is now caught by boats from other EU countries (“Brixham fishermen hope Brexit will tip the scales for shrinking industry”, Business). In the late 1980s, grants from Europe were made available for fishing communities to modernise their boats and tackle. This funding had to be match-funded by national governments. Other governments supplied this funding, unlike the UK. The result was that British fishermen were unable to compete with the bigger, more efficient boats, and many sold their quota to French, Spanish or Dutch fishing companies. The quotas were introduced to preserve fish stocks. The reason the future of fishing is so fraught in the Brexit negotiations is that other European nations paid British fishermen to be able to fish for what had been British quotas. Veronica Hardstaff, MEP for Lincolnshire 1994-1999 and former member of the European parliament fishing committee, Sheffield The most serious threat to the UK fishing fleet is that 37% of fish caught by UK boats are landed in the European Economic Area, with the largest shares being exported to Norway, the Netherlands and France. The UK fleet may well want a larger quota of available stocks, but the main species found in UK waters are mackerel and herring, which do not have a UK market. The continuation of EU/EEA landing rights without tariffs, quotas or phytosanitary restrictions is far more important than sharing a few cod with France. A no-deal Brexit would result in the loss of substantial and valuable exports for the UK fishing fleet. Eric Goodyer Birsay, Orkney Rough justice on golf course It is regrettable that Aberdeen has granted planning permission for a new Trump golf course on the Menie estate (“New Trump golf course provokes fury in Scotland”, News). But had Trump been refused planning permission, he could have appealed directly to the Scottish government. But objectors to planning applications have no equal right of appeal, despite repeated attempts to get this introduced into Scottish law. Should Trump act on his granted permission, the invaluable coast and dunes will be further destroyed. Rose Harvie Dumbarton, West Dunbartonshire Arts bailout ‘blackmail’ I am appalled that arts organisations are being compelled to give public praise to named members of the government and to the Treasury and Arts Council England (“Want an arts bailout? Then you’d better praise Sunak &amp; co”, News). Were the artists told that this blatant blackmailing would be integral to the government’s culture recovery fund? It appears the government is shamefully taking advantage of the Covid crisis to bring the arts to heel and to give the appearance that artists are supportive of its notoriously unprincipled behaviour. Philip Hedley, director emeritus, Theatre Royal Stratford East, London WC1 Land is our heritage too Joe O’Donnell, the director of the Victorian Society, is not alone in his concerns about the government’s proposed changes to the planning system (“‘Greatest threat in a generation’ faces heritage buildings”, News). Heritage is just one of several qualities that places possess. He cites English Heritage research on the carbon savings of refitting existing buildings. In Wales, government agencies were quick out of the blocks, introducing in 2008 their unique land use information system, Landmap, with its all-Wales coverage of areas that merit being taken into account in land management and change decision-making. This information base of more than 10,000 areas is freely available online, just the kind of thing England’s public sector ought to introduce without delay to ensure a place’s qualities are properly understood and not wasted, for example, in carbon-costly new developments or habitat loss. David Eagar Birmingham Word ban is hard to swallow Barbara Ellen hit the nail on the head in her criticism of the powerful meat industry’s attempt to ban words such as “banger” and “burger” in relation to similar-tasting alternatives that cut out the cruelty (“Bangers and burgers belong to us vegetarians and vegans too”, Comment). It is obvious that the meat industry does not, and cannot, own words. The use of the phrase “cultural hijacking” by the meat industry is frankly hilarious and rather pathetic. The only “hijacking” I can see is directed towards our planet, exploiting its precious resources for the mere benefit of a consumer to buy a chunk of butchered meat. Sebastian Monblat Sutton, London Held back by my class I share Kenan Malik’s scepticism about the reporting, both political and academic, of the assumed educational disadvantage of “white”, working-class boys (“Being white won’t hold boys back. Being working class just might”, Comment). I am from a northern, white, working-class background, failed the 11-plus and then got to university from a secondary modern, which limited my academic choices and future. I found the work of the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu a useful insight into this “disadvantage”. Like Malik, he contended that the main factor was the constrained life chances of being working class; he contended that this was “operationalised” through “cultural capital”. Our heavily exam-based, traditional and elitist schooling and curriculums are biased towards “middle/upper class cultural capital”, with all the enrichment, private tutoring and access to literary/musical/cultural opportunities that go with it. Philip Wood Kidlington, Oxfordshire Sins of the Flesh Your article on the “lost” Nic Roeg Flash Gordon film does not mention that an “erotic” comedy version titled Flesh Gordon actually was released in 1974 (“Flesh Gordon? Artwork reveals erotic version that was never made”, News). Having sneaked in to see this film aged 15 in the days before ID was required, I can vouch that it was neither erotic nor particularly comedic, although I do remember many people in the audience rolling about with laughter at the heavy-handed script. But a Nic Roeg version I would love to have seen! Dougie Mitchell Edinburgh
28||For the recordAn article said that Scotland “is due to conduct” a census in the spring. In fact, the impact of Covid-19 means its national survey has been postponed a year to March 2022 (“Census to ask about sexual orientation for the first time”, 18 October, page 12). The term of office served in the US House of Representatives is two years, not four, as we had it (“How the US Senate might change”, 18 October, page 39). Visiba, a company that undertook research into incidents involving people suffering from mental health crises in England, is a digital healthcare platform provider, not an online mental health care provider, as an article said (“Police 999 callouts to mental health incidents soar”, 18 October, page 28). A review of the documentary film White Riot referred to punk bands in the 1970s having “significant numbers of NF and Britain First supporters”. Britain First was not founded until 2011; the intended reference was to the British Movement (TV review, New Review, 18 October, page 29). A column described the artist Laura Knight as “the first female Royal Academician” (“Guess the painting”, New Review, 11 October, page 38). Knight was the first fully elected female Royal Academician, after the founding members Mary Moser and Angelica Kauffman. Other recently amended articles include: Coronavirus: 1 million young Britons ‘face jobs crisis within weeks’ Police call for urgent review of stop and search protocols after officer’s death in Croydon Pizza, kebabs, chicken tikka masala: make your own takeaway favourites Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736
1||Kleptopia review: power, theft and Trump as leader in Putin’s own imageIn a year dominated by a US presidential election between a kleptocrat and a democrat, a book about world-class thieves laundering trillions ought be the perfect bedtime reading for anyone curious about the unprecedented amounts of money that have been looted and hidden over the last 20 years. Tom Burgis, a reporter for the Financial Times, is certainly an impressive investigator. He works hard to explain how myriad financial institutions, from the Bank of New York to Merrill Lynch and HSBC, have tried to deceive regulators and wash the ill-gotten gains of countless dictators. The oligarchs of Putin’s Russia are big players in these pages. So are Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, British bankers turned regulators, a trio of Central Asian billionaires, and no fewer than 30 other major characters, all listed at the beginning. This results in so many competing storylines that it becomes almost impossible to keep track. We bounce back and forth, from the Russian and Italian gangsters of Brooklyn to the oil fields of the former Soviet Union, from the platinum mines of Zimbabwe to the copper and cobalt of the Congo. There are long sections about the wholesale theft of natural resources in post-Soviet Russia and the birth of the oligarchs, all of whom were forced to become Putin’s partners – or face imprisonment or death. For example, the purchase of a three-quarter stake in Yukos, for $350m, made Mikhail Khodorkovsky the richest man in Russia. Five years later, the vast oil company with 100,000 employees was worth $12bn. Khodorkovsky was arrested, jailed and eventually sent into exile. Burgis draws useful parallels between Putin’s kleptocracy and Hitler’s Germany, each home to both a “normative state” that generally respects its own laws and a “prerogative state” that violates most of them. According to the German-Jewish lawyer who was the author of the theory in the 1930s, “Nazi Germany was not a straightforward totalitarian system. It retained some vestiges of the rule of law, chiefly in matters of business, so that the capitalist economy had the basic rules it needed to keep going. But the prerogative state – Hitler’s political machinery – enjoyed … ‘jurisdiction over jurisdiction.” Putin has used his jurisdiction over everything to vanquish almost all of his enemies. And since Donald Trump has been collaborating with Russians in one way or another for almost 40 years, our kleptocrat-in-chief does finally make an appearance in Kleptopia, on page 250. After we’ve read a lot about Felix Sater, a second-generation Russian mobster connected to several schemes including the Trump Soho in lower Manhattan, Trump is identified as the “crucial ingredient” in Sater’s “magic potion for transforming dirty money”. Once the ratings of The Apprentice had washed away the public memory of multiple bankruptcies and “reinvented” his name as “a success”, Trump’s role in real estate deals became simply to “rent out his name”. “The projects could go bust,” Burgis writes, and “they usually did – but that wasn’t a problem.” The money had completed “its metamorphoses from plunder to clean capital”. Then there was the notorious sale of Trump’s Palm Beach mansion, to Russian oligarch Dmitry Rybolovlev for $95m, more than twice what Trump paid a few years before. According to Michael Cohen, Trump’s former fixer, Trump thought the real buyer was Putin – a story which hasn’t gotten nearly as much attention as it should. With his election as president, as Burgis puts it, Trump helped to construct a new “global alliance of kleptocrats”. Their whole goal is the privatization of power, and they control “the three great poles” – the US, China and Russia. In our new world of alternate facts, corruption is “no longer a sign of a failing state, but of a state succeeding in its new purpose”. The new kleptocrats have subverted their nations’ institutions, “to seize for themselves that which rightfully belonged to the commonwealth”. This is a ghastly and very important story. But the secret to great storytelling is knowing what to leave out. If Burgis had found a more focused way to tell this one, he would have written a much more powerful book.
5||Trump assaulted American democracy – here's how Democrats can save itBarring a miracle, Amy Coney Barrett will be confirmed on Monday as the ninth justice on the US supreme court. This is a travesty of democracy. The vote on Barrett’s confirmation will occur just eight days before election day. By contrast, the Senate didn’t even hold a hearing on Merrick Garland, who Barack Obama nominated almost a year before the end of his term. Majority leader Mitch McConnell argued at the time that any vote should wait “until we have a new president”. Barrett was nominated by a president who lost the popular vote by nearly 3m ballots, and who was impeached by the House of Representatives. When Barrett joins the court, five of the nine justices will have been appointed by presidents who lost the popular vote. The Republican senators who will vote for her represent 15 million fewer Americans than their Democratic colleagues. Once on the high court, Barrett will join five other reactionaries who together will be able to declare laws unconstitutional, for perhaps a generation. Barrett’s confirmation is the culmination of years in which a shrinking and increasingly conservative, rural and white segment of the US population has been imposing its will on the rest of America. They’ve been bankrolled by big business, seeking lower taxes and fewer regulations. In the event Joe Biden becomes president on 20 January and both houses of Congress come under control of the Democrats, they can reverse this trend. It may be the last chance – both for the Democrats and, more importantly, for American democracy. How? For starters, increase the size of the supreme court. The constitution says nothing about the number of justices. The court changed size seven times in its first 80 years, from as few as five justices under John Adams to 10 under Abraham Lincoln. Biden says if elected he’ll create a bipartisan commission to study a possible court overhaul “because it’s getting out of whack”. That’s fine, but he’ll need to move quickly. The window of opportunity could close by the 2022 midterm elections. Second, abolish the Senate filibuster. Under current rules, 60 votes are needed to enact legislation. This means that if Democrats win a bare majority there, Republicans could block any new legislation Biden hopes to pass. The filibuster could be ended with a rule change requiring 51 votes. There is growing support among Democrats for doing this if they gain that many seats. During the campaign, Biden acknowledged that the filibuster has become a negative force in government. The filibuster is not in the constitution either. The most ambitious structural reform would be to rebalance the Senate itself. For decades, rural states have been emptying as the US population has shifted to vast megalopolises. The result is a growing disparity in representation, especially of nonwhite voters. For example, both California, with a population of 40 million, and Wyoming, whose population is 579,000, get two senators. If population trends continue, by 2040 some 40% of Americans will live in just five states, and half of America will be represented by 18 Senators, the other half by 82. This distortion also skews the electoral college, because each state’s number of electors equals its total of senators and representatives. Hence, the recent presidents who have lost the popular vote. This growing imbalance can be remedied by creating more states representing a larger majority of Americans. At the least, statehood should be granted to Washington DC. And given that one out of eight Americans now lives in California – whose economy, if it were a separate country, would be the ninth-largest in the world – why not split it into a North and South California? The constitution is also silent on the number of states. Those who recoil from structural reforms such as the three I’ve outlined warn that Republicans will retaliate when they return to power. That’s rubbish. Republicans have already altered the ground rules. In 2016, they failed to win a majority of votes cast for the House, Senate or the presidency, yet secured control of all three. Barrett’s ascent is the latest illustration of how grotesque the power imbalance has become, and how it continues to entrench itself ever more deeply. If not reversed soon, it will be impossible to remedy. What’s at stake is not partisan politics. It is representative government. If Democrats get the opportunity, they must redress this growing imbalance – for the sake of democracy. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a columnist for Guardian US
5||The Observer view on the Commons vote to let poor children go hungryIt speaks volumes of the government that it has taken a 22-year-old footballer to step into the vacuum to provide moral and compassionate leadership during a pandemic. Perhaps Boris Johnson thought that giving Marcus Rashford an MBE for his campaign for holiday food vouchers for poor children would muffle his voice. But Rashford has continued to speak truth to power in a way that puts the government to shame. Johnson last week instructed Conservative MPs to vote against a motion to uphold Rashford’s continued calls to extend holiday food vouchers for poor children. Just one Conservative minister, Caroline Ansell, thought this was a resigning matter. The rest of the sorry pack, including education secretary, Gavin Williamson and children’s minister, Vicky Ford, dutifully trooped through the lobby. That vote to deny children who get free meals during the school term food vouchers in the school holidays was bad enough. Even worse are the arguments MPs wheeled out to justify their decision. Brendan Clarke-Smith said giving food to hungry children was akin to “nationalising children”. Ben Bradley implied these vouchers were spent in crack dens and brothels over the summer. Mark Jenkinson argued that food parcels were being traded for drugs in his constituency. (Neither offered a shred of evidence for these ridiculous suppositions.) Selaine Saxby hoped those businesses in her constituency stepping in to provide free meals would not be seeking further government support. Philip Davies lambasted a 16-year-old constituent who wrote to him about the issue for being “intolerant”. Senior ministers know better than to openly voice these sentiments. But these views are far from fringe: they offer an ugly glimpse into a persistent strand of Tory thinking about poverty. Too many who have lived privileged lives on the Conservative benches believe their successes are down purely to their hard work, not the advantages that were handed to them on a silver platter. The corollary of this fantastical belief is that people who live in poverty, who cannot get a job that pays enough to support their family, are somehow morally deficient. This is nonsensical dogma. Poverty is less the product of individual life choices but overwhelmingly the inevitable result of the deficient economic and social orders that shape all of our lives. It is generated by low pay, unemployment and poor mental health. Minimum-wage jobs do not pay enough for parents to provide for their children without state support; little wonder that seven in 10 children in poverty come from working families. Just as bad is the poverty that sets in when large numbers of jobs vanish from an area and a lack of support to retrain consigns many to the scrapheap, making it hard for their children and grandchildren to escape the shackles of multigenerational joblessness. But it does not suit small-state Conservatives to acknowledge this. Even as they stigmatise people for relying on state handouts, they refuse to ensure cleaners and carers are paid enough to support their families. The Conservative MP Kit Malthouse justified voting against last week’s motion because a better way to help children in poverty was to “pump money into the welfare system”. We wholly agree, but this was an odd sentiment from someone whose party has spent the last decade eroding tax credits and benefits – many families lost the equivalent of thousands of pounds of support a year – in a way that has contributed to rising levels of child poverty. Conservative chancellors may have told us it was a necessary economy, but the tax cuts they handed more affluent families and businesses that cost billions of pounds a year suggested otherwise. If unemployment soars, as expected, in the coming months, things will get worse. The £20 a week boost to universal credit is set to be rescinded next April, dropping unemployment benefits to their lowest real-term levels since the 1990s. Meanwhile, the government has failed to mitigate the educational and mental health impacts of the pandemic on children. And, rather than address the root causes of the under-attainment of poor children at school over the last decade, Conservative ministers have flirted with the notion that it is somehow the widespread teaching of critical race theory in schools that is disadvantaging white, working-class children. Alongside asylum seekers and the legal profession, children now appear to be fair game in the culture-war politics of Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings: whether it is to take potshots at those campaigning against structural racism or to make Victorian-era aspersions about the feckless poor. They have made a massive misjudgment. The dogwhistle politics of Vote Leave cannot carry the country through a pandemic and the overwhelming response to Rashford’s call – the hard-pressed businesses, councils and individuals who have come forward to reduce the number of children going hungry – shows they have misjudged a nation. It is a heartwarming antidote to the callousness of ministers. But what do we teach our offspring when, though we can afford to, we choose not to ensure that all children have somewhere safe and warm to live, that they don’t go to bed hungry, that they have a pair of shoes without holes? We teach them that to be poor is to be shameful, that there is nothing wrong with a world where despite working all the hours under the sun you will never escape the fear and anxiety of what would happen if your fridge breaks or your landlord serves notice. We teach them that what should be theirs by right is theirs only through charity and benevolence.
4||Daniel Andrews under fire over delayed easing of restrictions after seven new cases reportedScott Morrison has criticised the Victorian government for delaying an announcement about the easing of coronavirus restrictions, saying Victoria’s public health systems “are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not”. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews on Sunday held off announcing opening dates for the retail and hospitality sectors pending the outcome of tests connected to an outbreak in the northern suburbs. It prompted criticism from the business community, the state opposition, the federal government and his own former health minister. Morrison said the decision to delay the announcement – which he interpreted as a decision to keep businesses closed longer – was a “profound disappointment”. “At some point, you have to move forward and put your public health systems to work in a bid to reclaim the jobs that have been lost, and rescue the livelihoods and peace of mind of so many Victorians who have been affected by the inability to contain the outbreak that led to the second Victorian wave,” Morrison said in a statement “Victoria’s public health systems are either up to the task of dealing with future outbreaks or they are not. The decision to keep businesses closed suggests that there is still not sufficient confidence within the government that their systems can support reopening.” The prime minister’s statement was another step in an increasingly bitter dispute between the Victorian and federal governments. In a heated press conference earlier on Sunday, the Victorian premier said he had “hoped” to be able to announce significant steps about opening up the retail and hospitality industries from the middle of the week. “We are not in a position to do that today because we have at least 1,000 test results from that northern metropolitan outbreak that are in the labs,” Andrews said. “We will get those today, probably the balance of them tomorrow, and [there] will be additional testing conducted throughout the day. “This is not anything other than a cautious pause, to wait to get that important information, to get the results of those tests. Just to rule out whether there … is more virus there than we think.” However, Andrews did announce a further easing of restrictions for regional Victoria. Victoria recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday, the same number as on Saturday. Six of those were linked to other known cases in the outbreak in Melbourne’s northern suburbs while the seventh was a healthcare worker with no known links. About 3,500 people in the northern suburbs got a Covid-19 test on Saturday, including 250 identified as close contacts of two schools at the centre of the outbreak: the East Preston Islamic College and Croxton specialist school in Northcote. Those 250 tests are among the 1,000 tests still awaiting results on Sunday. Andrews said it would be irresponsible to announce an easing of restrictions until those test results had been received and analysed, to determine whether any new cases were linked to the outbreak or if there were signs of untraced community transmission. That could take 24 hours, and Andrews said he would then be able to announce changes on Monday or Tuesday. After 60 minutes of questioning, he said that he still anticipated that restrictions would be eased by 1 November, as slated last week. “I wouldn’t want anyone watching here to be in any doubt,” he said. “November 1, absolutely, still well and truly on track to be able to have opening up before then.” Asked by a reporter why he did not say that at the start of the press conference, Andrews sighed and said he’d had a late night and early morning discussing the northern suburbs outbreak. From midnight on Sunday, greater Shepparton, which had been held back due to an outbreak, will be under the same rules as the rest of the regions. From midnight on Tuesday, 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funeral; 20 an outdoor religious service; and gyms and indoor pools will reopen to a maximum of 20 participants. Children’s indoor non-contact community sport will also be allowed to resume. Andrews had been foreshadowing a Sunday announcement for a week and said, as recently as Friday that the northern suburbs outbreak would not delay the “significant” easing of restrictions from Sunday. On Saturday he warned that he would “caution people from banking” on that announcement. The timeline for easing restrictions in Victoria has changed several times. In early September the government released a roadmap for reopening, which included a plan to lift Melbourne out of lockdown on 26 October provided the rolling 14-day average was fewer than five cases per day, and there had been no more than three mystery cases in the proceeding 14 days. The rolling average on Sunday was 4.6, and there have been seven mystery cases. Then in early October, Andrews brought forward the easing of restrictions to 19 October. On 18 October, he announced a limited easing of restrictions and promised a further easing from 1 November, with some changes to be outlined from 25 October. The shifting goalposts have caused frustration among some Victorians. At the press conference, Andrews rejected suggestions that the Victorian public had been on a rollercoaster of announcements. Asked if he had misled the public, he said “no”. The Business Council of Australia said it was “at a loss” to understand why Victoria was unable to reopen, when businesses in New South Wales have been able to operate with low numbers of locally-acquired cases for months. New South Wales recorded no new locally acquired cases on Sunday, for the third day in a row. It recorded seven cases in hotel quarantine. “Victorians cannot hang on week to week,” the Business Council CEO, Jennifer Westacott, said. “People are at a financial and mental breaking point.” Earlier on Sunday, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said the only reason the Victorian government would not open up “is if they didn’t have confidence in their own contact tracing system”. Andrews, the Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, and Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, all separately rejected that suggestion, saying that the number of tests conducted in connection to the northern suburbs outbreak, with up to 400 primary and secondary contacts identified and isolated, showed the system was working well. Andrews refused to comment on a comment from his recently departed health minister, Jenny Mikakos, who tweeted: “The set reopening is gradual and safe so any delay is unnecessary. It’s paralysis in decision-making.” “I have nothing to say about those comments because I have nothing to say about them,” Andrews said. “That is a choice I make and it does not make any sense to be interrogated on why I do not say anything.” Sutton said none of those criticising Victoria’s public health response were privy to all of the the health data. “None of them are in the tent,” he said.
3||Hopes for Kylie Moore-Gilbert after detained academic moved out of Iran's Qarchak prisonDetained British-Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert has reportedly been moved from Iran’s Qarchak prison, along with all of her belongings, but it is not known to where she has been taken. Family and friends who have been campaigning for her release hope the move is a positive sign, but there is no official word from the Iranian government. A Cambridge-educated Middle East scholar, Moore-Gilbert has served just over two years of a 10-year sentence for espionage. She was arrested in Tehran in September 2018 and convicted in a secret trial. No evidence of Moore-Gilbert’s alleged crimes has ever been publicly presented. She has denied the allegations against her and the Australian government rejects them as baseless and politically motivated. The Iranian Association of Human Rights Activists reported Moore-Gilbert was moved on Saturday – along with all her possessions – to an unknown place. That move came 11 days after she was shifted, along with 15 other political prisoners, to Ward Eight of Qarchak prison, formerly known as the Mothers’ Ward. Qarchak has been trying to quash an outbreak of novel coronavirus among inmates and guards at the prison. Iran, more widely, is suffering under a surging third wave of infections, with nearly 600 new cases and more than 300 deaths in the last 24 hours. Moore-Gilbert’s health has been poor in detention and she has had difficulty getting food that she can tolerate. But sources with knowledge of Iranian detention cases are cautiously hopeful the move could be good news in Moore-Gilbert’s case. “Obviously one hopes the move might be good news for Kylie, but we don’t know yet,” said Elaine Pearson, Australia director of Human Rights Watch. “Kylie has been detained for more than two years now, and she has endured very difficult conditions including extreme isolation. The Australian government should press forcefully and consistently for Kylie’s release and safe return to Australia.” Moore-Gilbert spent the first 22 months of her incarceration in Tehran’s Evin prison, including months in solitary confinement, before being moved to the desert prison Qarchak, widely regarded as the worst women’s prison in Iran, and known as a site of extrajudicial killings, torture and other rights violations. Sources have told the Guardian Moore-Gilbert was closely watched inside Qarchak – with two fellow prisoners assigned to follow her – restricting her contact with the outside world. Australia’s ambassador to Iran, Lyndall Sachs, has met with Moore-Gilbert in Qarchak and urged more regular consular access. In letters smuggled out of prison, Moore-Gilbert revealed she had rejected an offer to spy on behalf of Tehran in exchange for her freedom, but said she felt “abandoned and forgotten”. In a rare phone call earlier this year she said couldn’t eat anything in Qarchak: “I feel so very hopeless … I am so depressed.” On Friday, Human Rights Watch said Iranian judiciary authorities were prosecuting human rights defenders for reporting abuse inside detention, despite the presidential cabinet ordering its justice minister investigate claims of torture against an environmental conservationist, Niloufar Bayani. There has been no report. Born in Bathurst, New South Wales, Moore-Gilbert is a lecturer in Islamic Studies at the University of Melbourne. She hold both British and Australian citizenship, but was travelling on her Australian passport. She was arrested in September 2018 after attending an academic conference in Qom. Fellow conference delegates and an interview subject for her academic work flagged her as “suspicious” to Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, who arrested her at Tehran airport as she prepared to fly out of the country. Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said their efforts to secure Moore-Gilbert’s release were “an absolute priority”. “We remain focused on her health, wellbeing and safety,” a spokeswoman said. “We do not accept the charges upon which Dr Moore-Gilbert was convicted, and want to see her returned to Australia as soon as possible. Our Ambassador in Tehran has regular consular access to Dr Moore-Gilbert.”
4||Regional Victoria ‘step 3’ coronavirus roadmap restrictions and lockdown rules explainedRegional Victoria has consistently outperformed its metropolitan counterpart in suppressing the Covid-19 virus and as such is subject to significantly fewer restrictions. Currently, it is in the third step of the state’s roadmap out of lockdown allowing for a significant reopening of the retail and hospitality industries. On 19 October, premier Daniel Andrews announced some easing of restrictions, increasing capacity in restaurants and cafes as well as allowing more guests to enter private homes. Further changes were announced on 25 October. Here are the main things you need to know about the step three restrictions in regional Victoria: When can I leave my house? The only restriction on leaving home is that you cannot travel into areas with higher restrictions, which includes metropolitan Melbourne. Otherwise, there are no restrictions on reasons for leaving your house or on where you go within the state. People can gather in groups of up to 10 people outdoors. What are the rules for wearing masks? People must still wear a mask or covering whenever leaving the house. There are a few exceptions. People with a medical reason are exempt, as are children younger than 12. Those who have a professional reason “or if it’s just not practical, like when running” are also exempt, but those people will still be expected to carry a face covering at all times “to wear when you can”. In schools, teachers will not need to wear a face covering while teaching, but students attending classes will. Both teachers and students will need to wear a mask on the way to and from school. Andrews said “common sense” would guide how the new rules are enforced. People would not be required to wear one when it was impractical, such as when exercising or visiting a bank. Breaking the rules is punishable with a $200 fine. Can I have visitors to my house? Can I see my partner? Whereas previously regional Victoria operated under the “household bubble”system, this was replaced from 19 October. You can now have up to two people visit you at home once a day. These do not have to be the same people each time and the two people can come from separate households. Infants under 12 months are not included, and other children or dependents can come if they cannot be left unattended or cared for by another. There is no time limit on how long they can visit but you can only have a single visitation each day. Can I now dine-in at a restaurant or cafe? Hospitality businesses are now able to serve up to 70 people outdoors with a minimum of one person per two square meters. From 19 October, indoor spaces are allowed to operate with up to 10 people per distinct space, with a minimum of four square meters per person and no more than 40 indoor customers total. Tables must be spaced at least 1.5m apart, cleaned after every customer and the details of all patrons must be kept. Businesses must continue to ensure people from metropolitan Melbourne do not eat-in. Will the shops be open? Yes, all shops can open. Hairdressers, tattoo parlours and beauty servers are also open, but only where a mask can be worn for the duration of the service. What about other businesses and services? Similar to dining out, entertainment venues and events that are predominantly outdoors are now open. Real estate inspections are still by appointment only, but outdoor auctions can return, subject to gathering limits. Libraries and toy libraries can open for up to 20 people indoors, but no more than 10 people can gather in a single space, and there must be at least four square meters per person. Licensed tourism services that use open-air vehicles only are also now allowed to operate. A vehicle is considered an open-air if at least two sides are open to airflow at all times. What are the rules for exercise? All community sports have resumed for children in regional Victoria, but only non-contact sports are allowed for adults outdoors, within gather and density limits. Outdoor exercise is also now allowed for groups of up to 10 people. Outdoor skateparks have also opened. From 11.59pm on 27 October, indoor gyms will be open to a maximum of 20 people, with minimum space requirements in place. Children’s indoor non-contact community sports will also be allowed to resume, provided participants can remain 1.5m apart. Outdoor pools are open and from 19 October indoor swimming pools can open exclusively for those aged 18 and under. One parent or guardian is allowed per child to supervise, and swimming classes can resume. Indoor pools can also open for one-on-one hydrotherapy sessions with a limit of 10 people in the pool at one time. From midnight on 27 October, indoor pools will be open to up to 20 people. What is happening with schools? All students in regional Victoria will now be expected to return to onsite learning. The return will be staggered and will apply when term four begins during the week of 12 October. Childcare centres remain open while adult education remains restricted, with students encouraged to learn from home if they can. What happens to weddings, funerals or religious services? Weddings can now have up to 10 people, including the couple, two witnesses and a celebrant. Funerals are now allowed to have up to 20 people, not including children under 12 months and people required to conduct the funeral. From 28 October, up to 50 people will be allowed to attend an outdoor funerals. Outdoor religious gatherings are allowed for up to 20 people plus one faith leader. This includes ceremonies, but no sharing of food, drink or utensils is allowed. From Wednesday up to 20 people plus one faith leader will be allowed to attend a religious gathering indoors, and up to 50 will be allowed to attend outdoor religious gatherings. Where can I travel? Restrictions on travel within regional Victoria have been eased, with people now allowed to travel within the state, with the exception of areas with higher restrictions. In this case, that means everywhere except metropolitan Melbourne. Tourist accommodation is open, but exclusively for regional Victorians travelling and holidaying within regional Victoria. Caps and density limits still apply, however. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
4||Australian production of non-protein Covid-19 vaccine may take an extra year, minister saysIt could take up to a year for Australian biotech company CSL to develop the capability to make a Covid-19 vaccine if a non-protein-based version proves safe and effective, the country’s industry minister has said. Karen Andrews said CSL would be able to immediately start making a protein-based vaccine, but “significant work” would be required if it was another type based on mRNA, or messenger ribonucleic acid. Vaccines traditionally introduce proteins into the body to provoke the immunity system into responding but if an mRNA vaccine of the kind being developed by US company Moderna is approved it would be the first of its type, experts say. During an interview with the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday, Andrews was pressed to give a timeframe to get production up and running in Australia if an mRNA vaccine was approved. “I would hope that we would be able to do it in about the nine-month to 12-month timeframe,” she said. “But I think we need to be really conscious that with a vaccine, there are a lot of variables in there. So we don’t have the vaccine proven at this point in time, we don’t know what the base for that vaccine is going to be, so we are trying to prepare across a wide range.” Andrews said the government would give support to CSL to help it ramp up its capability and roll out technical upgrades – with some of that work already under way. The rollout of a successful vaccine has implications for opening international borders and restoring a sense of normality to social and economic activity in Australia. The federal budget, released earlier this month, assumed that a population-wide Australian Covid-19 vaccination program would be “fully in place by late 2021”, with social distancing restrictions continuing until a vaccine was available. The health minister, Greg Hunt, moved to assure people later on Sunday that Australia was “very strongly placed” when it came to securing access to and producing vaccines. “We in a strong position, we’re progressing, there’s never a guarantee – but what we know is that we’ve been exceptionally cautious in relation to vaccines and each day the evidence is stronger and the proximity to distribution of that treatment is closer,” Hunt told reporters in Canberra. Hunt said Andrews had been asked a hypothetical question about non-protein vaccines and was “absolutely right that some of the mRNA ones will take longer”. But he said the protein-based vaccine candidate being developed by AstraZeneca and the University of Oxford remained “on track for first quarter [2021] commencement and significant rollout during the course of the year [2021]”. “So our timeframes are unchanged. On the hypothetical if there were no protein-based vaccine, Minister Andrews was 100% correct. But when you take away that hypothetical, when we look at the board reality, Australia is on track for first quarter commencement of that rollout.” Hunt said Australia had reached a deal to access 33.8m units of the Oxford and AstraZeneca vaccine, including 3.8m units brought in from overseas in early 2021, subject to approvals in the UK and Australia. He said Australian manufacturing would able to commence and be well under way in the first quarter of 2021. Hunt said CSL was also aiming to make sure that the vaccine developed by the University of Queensland was “available during the course of next year – about the middle of the year”. He said there were contracts for 51m units of the UQ vaccine to be manufactured in Australia throughout 2021. He said the government was also “highly advanced” in investigating other vaccine candidates, and had joined the Covax international buying facility.
4||Storm cuts power in Queensland as thunderstorm asthma alerts issued for southern NSW and CanberraAlmost 29,000 homes in south-east Queensland have been left without power due to wild thunderstorms. Large hailstones, damaging winds and heavy rain hit the region on Sunday afternoon. Electricity provider Energex reported 28,898 outages around 3pm (AEST), with about 7,000 of those in Brisbane. Social media photos have shown ice cube-sized hail in the city’s northern suburbs. The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe weather warning for Redland City, parts of Ipswich, Logan, Scenic Rim, Lockyer Valley, Gold Coast, Brisbane City and Moreton Bay Council areas. Earlier this weekend, thunderstorm asthma alerts were issued for the Australian Capital Territory and New South Wales’s nearby Murrumbidgee region. The Bureau of Meteorology said a low-pressure trough and strong cold front would continue to cross NSW on Sunday, reaching the north-east of the state by evening and leaving significantly cooler conditions in its wake. A new high-pressure system was forecast to strengthen south of Tasmania early this week, with the potential to maintain showery conditions across eastern areas for a number of days. Health authorities warned that severe thunderstorms, combined with existing elevated pollen levels, could create a situation conducive to a thunderstorm asthma event. “Not all thunderstorms produce an asthma event, and thunderstorm asthma is a rare event,” ACT Health said in a statement. “However, people who suffer from hay fever or asthma are encouraged to be vigilant over the weekend for any worsening of their condition. Where possible avoid being outside during a thunderstorm – especially in the wind gusts that come before the storm. Go inside and close your doors and windows. If you have your air conditioning on, turn it on to recirculate.” The NSW public health unit director, Tracey Oakman, issued a thunderstorm asthma alert for the Murrumbidgee local health district area for the entire weekend. “If you know you have asthma, carry your asthma puffer with you at all times and try to stay indoors with the windows and doors closed during the storm period,” the NSW Health statement said. “Be aware that thunderstorm asthma can also affect people who have not had asthma before.” Ten deaths were attributed to a thunderstorm asthma event in Melbourne in November 2016 and 14,000 people were taken to hospital with breathing difficulties. A sheep graziers’ warning was also in force for the NSW south coast, southern tablelands, Snowy Mountains and parts of the Illawarra, south-west slopes, Riverina and Australian Capital Territory. And in Victoria, the north-central, south-west and central districts and parts of the west and South Gippsland and East Gippsland areas were subject to the same warning. The BoM said cold temperatures, showers and strong winds could cause losses of sheep and lambs on Sunday. A gale warning was in force for the Hunter and Sydney coastal areas on Sunday and a minor flood warning was in place for the Murray River around Jingellic. In Victoria there were also flood warnings for the Bunyip and Kiewa rivers and Dandenong Creek.
20||Investors fear there'll be no bright post-Covid dawn for oil majorsThe oil market may have heaved itself out of the darkness of “Black April” but investors are far from convinced that major oil companies will walk away unscathed from the coronavirus pandemic. Royal Dutch Shell and BP will both face investors this week with quarterly financial results that will deliver profits well below those achieved a year ago, against a backdrop of tumbling share prices and rising Covid infections across major economies. On Tuesday, BP is expected to report an underlying loss of $120m for the last quarter, according to analysts’ estimates. This would be a major improvement on its underlying loss of $6.7bn in the second quarter, following heavy writedowns on the company’s exploration business, but would still be well below the $2.3bn third-quarter profit reported in 2019. BP’s announcement will come days after its share price fell below 200p a share for the first time since 1994, and months after the company cut its dividend for the first time since the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and set out plans to cut 10,000 jobs. In the same week, Shell is expected to reveal a modest underlying profit, of $146m, for the third quarter, according to analysts, after plunging to a loss of $18.4bn for the second quarter. This is still a fraction of the $4.76bn profit recorded in the same quarter last year, and follows the company’s decision to cut 9,000 jobs and reduce the dividend for the first time since the second world war. This trend is expected to be followed across the world’s oil companies, tracking the fragile and uncertain recovery of global oil markets amid a second wave of coronavirus infections. The price of oil reached an average of $43 a barrel in the third quarter – stronger than the average of $30 a barrel in the second quarter, when US oil prices fell below zero for the first time in April – but still well below the $62 a barrel price that prevailed in the third quarter a year ago. Oil industry investors may have already weathered the darkest days of the pandemic, but in recent months it seems to have dawned on many that there is a very long road ahead – and that a full oil industry recovery may never happen. Many experts believe that the heavy hit to demand for oil during the pandemic may mean it is years before market prices recover to $50 a barrel. BP’s own global energy forecasts suggest that oil demand may never recover from the impact of coronavirus on the global transport industry, heralding a sooner-than-expected existential decline for fossil fuels. The company’s energy outlook report seemed to underline the importance of BP’s plans to reduce production of oil and gas by 40% over the next decade while investing billions in renewable energy to transform it from oil major to modern energy company. But in investors’ eyes the oil industry’s battered balance sheets don’t look in good shape for fuelling a green energy transition. BP’s shares have languished at 25- year lows for the past month, taking its £41bn market cap to less than a third of what it was a decade ago, following its failed bid to move “beyond petroleum” in the early 2000s. The company’s market value has been topped by offshore wind developer Ørsted, once known as Danish state oil company Dong Energy, which has a market valuation of £49.6bn on the Copenhagen exchange. Its valuation has doubled in the past two years after it switched from fossil fuel investments to renewable energy a decade ago. Ørsted is a stark reminder of what might have been possible for other oil companies had they seized the opportunity to invest in the nascent renewables industry, and may prove a formidable rival for the favour of investors, too.
3||Test-and-trace chief Dido Harding should quit, says senior ToryBaroness Harding, the Tory peer who leads the government’s much-criticised test-and-trace programme, should be removed and replaced, a senior Conservative MP has said. Sir Bernard Jenkin, MP for Harwich and chair of the powerful parliamentary liaison committee, called for her to be given a “well-earned rest” and moved on to focus on “lessons learned”. He warned of a “vacuum of leadership in test and trace, which is destroying public confidence and compliance”, it was reported on Saturday evening. He went on to criticise the handling of calls and data in a “spaghetti of command and control” at the top of the organisation. Jenkin, a former deputy chairman of the Conservative party, is the most senior Tory to call into question the government’s running of test and trace, as concerns over its operations mount. “Announcing fresh targets (now 500,000 tests a day by the end of October) does not instil confidence because people lack faith that there is a coherent plan. Instead ministers should see this as an opportunity to make changes; to show that we are all learning from experience. “The change must be visible and decisive … the immediate priority is to fill the vacuum of leadership in test and trace,” he wrote in the Sunday Telegraph. His sharp criticism came as it was reported that officials on the Downing Street Covid-19 taskforce have been asked to consider cutting the self-isolation quarantine period for those infected from 14 days to between seven and 10 days. After a week in social isolation, people testing positive could be offered a second test, with the quarantine period ending as soon as a negative result is declared. The proposal came after the prime minister was apparently told that 14 days’ isolation is a major barrier to widespread support for the rules.
29||Azed crossword 2,524Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.
29||Speedy crossword No 1,308
3||Colombia due to surpass 1m cases; arrests made at London anti-lockdown protest – as it happenedWe’ll be closing down this blog shortly, as the Sydney team get a new one up and running. Thanks to everyone who wrote in with tips and suggestions for coverage. In the meantime, here’s a quick summary of recent key developments: Several European countries have reported record daily increases in coronavirus cases, including Italy, Greece, Austria, Luxembourg and France. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police fired tear gas and beat up demonstrators, some of whom had set up barricades and set fires. The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. The government is facing a legal battle with academics over its “unlawful” decision to reopen universities for face-to-face teaching last month. The UK’s largest academic union is seeking a judicial review of the government’s decision to ignore advice from its own Sage committee of experts to move all non-essential university and college teaching online in September. In a pre-action letter, sent to the education secretary Gavin Williamson and shared with the Observer, the University and College Union (UCU) argues the government’s failure to direct universities to move to online teaching this term was unlawful, unfair, unjust and irrational. The proportion of younger adults in the UK who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a new poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer shows the proportion of 18- to 34-year-olds who admit breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35- to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. Interesting Reuters update from Colombia amid global anticipation for a vaccine: As scientists around the world race to find a coronavirus inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine which proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme which offers 21 vaccines to everyone in the South American nation - among the region’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not just Colombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country distributes about 23 million doses per year. Colombia has already committed $213 million to the global COVAX initiative, guaranteeing COVID-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. In Australia, Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24-hours. This is a small figure on a global scale, but to residents of Melbourne it is worryingly high. Melbourne has been under stay-at-home orders for 109 days and the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is scheduled to announce an easing of restrictions today. It comes as the 14-day rolling average of new cases in the city fell below the target of five cases per day, to 4.6. However, Andrews said on Saturday that the easing of restrictions could be in doubt because of a new outbreak in the city’s northern suburbs. Labour is ramping up the pressure on the UK government to U-turn and extend free school meal provision over the holidays, warning it will bring the motion back to parliament if ministers do not reverse their position before Christmas. Shadow education secretary Kate Green called on the prime minister to meet with the taskforce set up by footballer Marcus Rashford “as a matter of urgency” to discuss its proposals for ending child poverty. “There is still time to change approach, but the Government must act quickly. If you change your policy now, we can ensure that no child goes to bed hungry on Christmas Day,” Green wrote in a letter to education secretary Gavin Williamson. “Labour will not give up on the fight to ensure that no child goes to bed hungry, and if you do not change course we will bring this issue back to the House of Commons before Christmas.” Australians have become accustomed to the daily announcements of new Covid-19 cases. Although the majority of those cases – bar Victoria – have come through returning travellers from overseas, little has been known about Covid-positive cases that have passed through hotel quarantine, and how governments are tracking the origins of these cases. But data provided to Guardian Australia by three states – New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia – offers some important insights into Covid-positive returning travellers. The states each provided data from 29 March, when the travel restrictions were introduced, to 19 October, revealing that they were indeed monitoring countries-of-origin where returning travellers may have contracted the virus. Data from NSW Health shows the majority of 873 Covid-positive travellers who arrived in the state were returning Australian nationals. Melissa Davey with the full report here: Angolan protesters defied coronavirus restrictions in the capital of Luanda on Saturday, taking to the streets to demonstrate against the government. Police, some mounted on horseback, fired teargas and beat up the protesters, who had set up barricades along the roads using skips, boulders and burning tyres, while others set a national flag ablaze, according to an AFP photographer. A police source who asked not to be identified told AFP that the demonstration – demanding the holding of local government elections – “resulted in barricades and acts of vandalism”. Municipal elections, which had been scheduled for this year, have been postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic. “Those were acts of rioting, in a flagrant violation of (new pandemic restrictions), which do not allow street gatherings of more than five people,” he said. UK paediatricians have published an open letter calling on the government to extend provision of free school meals until at least Easter 2021 – you can read it here: The number of coronavirus deaths in the Czech Republic has doubled to 2,047 in two weeks, data from the health ministry showed on Saturday. It took the country of 10.7 million seven months to reach 1,000 deaths after the first reported case. The number of patients in a serious state grew to 772 as of Friday, up from 438 two weeks ago. Hospitals were treating 5,314 people with coronavirus in total. Here are the main developments from over the last few hours: Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, has entered self-isolation after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared to 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is the first local case in the region since 15 August. Net approval of the UK government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has fallen to a record low of -21%, a poll by Opinium shows. Public health officials and contractors in England have barely used check-in data from millions of people who have visited cafes, pubs and restaurants, the Guardian has learned. As a legal condition introduced last month, venues are obliged to record customer details in an effort to contain the spread of Covid-19, but the government’s hamstrung test-and-trace scheme has appeared unable to cope with the swiftly rising number of coronavirus cases. Mattha Busby reports here: France reported 45,422 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, compared with 42,032 on Friday. The country has registered a total of 1,086,497 cases. A further 138 people have died, taking the toll to 34,645. The Welsh first minister has said the government will be “reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets”, amid anger over a ban on selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. A petition to reverse the ban has gathered more than 30,000 signatures. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. Mark Drakeford has said the restriction is in place as a “matter of fairness” to non-essential shops that have been ordered to close. The US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections above 100,000 a day, health experts have warned, just as a presidential campaign with the pandemic as its core issue enters its final week. In a further blow to Donald Trump’s hopes of keeping the White House, the US death toll from Covid-19 will pass 225,000 by early this week, bringing extra scrutiny to the president’s repeated but evidently false claims that the crisis is “rounding the turn”. Richard Luscombe has the story here: Spain’s cabinet will meet on Sunday morning to discuss announcing a national state of emergency, the government announced on Saturday. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez “has called an extraordinary cabinet meeting at 10am to study the conditions for a new state of emergency,” it said, saying such a proposal had been “positively welcomed by most of Spain’s autonomous communities, who had requested it”. The meeting comes just days after Spain registered more than one million virus cases, becoming the sixth country in the world to pass the grim milestone – and the first in the European Union. Greece announced a record 935 new infections on Saturday, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 29,992. Five further deaths were also reported, taking the country’s toll to 564. The previous highest increase in cases was on Thursday, when 882 cases were reported. New measures were announced on Thursday, including a 12.30am-5am curfew in areas with high numbers of infections which comes into force tonight. Face masks are now compulsory in outdoor spaces as well as indoors. The Metropolitan police have said they made 18 arrests at today’s anti-lockdown protest in central London, for offences including breaching coronavirus regulations, assaulting an emergency service worker, violent disorder and for being already wanted. Three officers suffered minor injuries, the force said. Commander Ade Adelekan, the Met’s gold commander for the protest, said: “Organisers did not take reasonable steps to keep protesters safe which then voided their risk assessment. At this point, officers then took action to disperse crowds in the interests of public safety. “I am grateful that the vast majority of people listened to officers and quickly left the area. Frustratingly, a small minority became obstructive, deliberately ignoring officers’ instructions and blocking Westminster Bridge.” Coronavirus cases have risen by the record figure of 862 in Luxembourg, while a further three deaths being reported. The previous record daily increase in cases was on Thursday, when 595 infections were added to the tally. This brings the country’s total number of cases to 13,713, while the death toll stands at 144. It follow Friday’s announcement of new measures to tackle the virus’s resurgence, including a curfew between 11 and 6pm. Austria has reported a record daily rise in coronavirus cases, with 3,614 infections in the last 24 hours. It is a significant increase from the 2,571 announced on Friday. Last Saturday, 1,747 cases were reported – which was also a record at the time. The total confirmed cases in Austria rose to 79,770 cases, There are currently 25,825 active cases in the country, according to Metropole. Algeria’s president, Abdelmadjid Tebboune, entered self-isolation on Saturday after several senior officials displayed coronavirus symptoms, the presidency has said in a statement. Tebboune, who is 74, has been advised by medical staff to isolate for five days. Algeria has officially recorded 55,630 coronavirus cases and 1,897 deaths so far. Jason Rodrigues with the latest from the anti-lockdown protest at Westminster Bridge New coronavirus measures have been announced in Brussels. From 26 October, masks will be compulsory throughout the country, while cultural venues (museums, galleries) and sports facilities will be closed. Other measures include shops closing at 8pm, and takeaways operating until 10pm. Italy reported a new daily record of 19,644 new coronavirus infections on Saturday as the government considered further measures to limit the surge in cases. Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte has said he wants to avoid a nationwide lockdown like the one during spring. Several regions have imposed overnight curfews. It follows clashes between protesters and police in Naples late on Friday night after a nighttime curfew was ordered in the Campania region. Arrests have been made on the anti lockdown demonstration in London after a group of protesters decided not to disperse and instead carried on a march from Trafalgar Square to Westminster Bridge. Police blocked the path of protesters at the north end of the bridge, leading to scuffles as some tried to carry on marching and calls went up from some to rush the police lines. The Guardian saw police making at least three arrests. One group of protesters tried to stage a sit down protest on the bridge. They were being forced south by a line of police. Damien Gayle with a video from London’s anti-lockdown protest, which has been ordered to disperse: Jason Rodrigues also reports that there’s been “at least one arrest” by Westminster Bridge: There have been a further 23,012 lab-confirmed coronavirus cases recorded in the UK, according to government data. This compares with 20,530 new cases registered on Friday. A total of 854,010 people have tested positive. A further 174 deaths within 28 days of a positive test were reported on Saturday, bringing the total to 44,571. There were 224 deaths on Friday. An investigation is underway in the Chinese region of Xinjiang after an asymptomatic coronavirus case was identified in the city of Kashgar on Saturday, the health commission said. It is mainland China’s first local case since 14 October, when one was reported in Qingdao. No new cases have been found in Xinjiang since 15 August, when a cluster of infections were reported. The case was identified after the patient, a 17-year-old woman, was tested during a regular inspection. She has been transferred to a hospital in the city and all close contacts have been isolated. Police have called time on the anti-lockdown protest in London, where several thousand people remain in Trafalgar Square after a long march through the city. In a tweet posted on a Metropolitan police account, the force said: “The protest under the name of ‘Stop The New Normal’ have failed to comply with the terms of their risk assessment, government guidelines and they are not maintaining social distancing. “The officer in charge has now determined their protest is no longer exempt from the regulations and is an illegal gathering. “We are now telling those participating in this protest to leave. Officers will be engaging with crowds and informing them of this development. “By leaving now, you can keep yourself safe and avoid any enforcement action being taken by officers.” The square was flooded with police asking people to leave soon after. The announcement came at the end of a long and noisy protest march through the city. Louise Creffield, founder of Save Our Rights UK, who organised the protest said: “We’re really pleased, the turnout was phenomenal and we’ve managed to get away with no one being injured or arrested. “It’s really good to be able to have a voice, and this is the only way we get it.” Among the protesters taking part was Chloe Toop, 32, a schoolteacher. “I’m doing it for the next generation, fighting for them,” she said. She said she was anxious about young people “not having a life that I have growing up, not being able to go on holiday or to festivals”. “Kids are now scared to go and meet each other, hug each other. Social interaction is so important,” she said. Hello, Clea Skopeliti taking over the blog for the next few hours. My Twitter DMs are open for any suggestions for global coverage, or you can drop me an email. Thanks in advance! I will shortly be handing over the blog to my colleague. Below are the latest updates. Welsh government called on to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit country tried to tackle its third wave of infections. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Thousands of people have signed a petition calling on the Welsh government to reverse a ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the firebreak lockdown in Wales. The country’s first minister, Mark Drakeford, said the restriction was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retail has to close during the two-week period, which began at 6 pm on Friday and will last until 9 November. Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. Supplies for the “essential upkeep, maintenance and functioning of the household” - such as batteries, lightbulbs and rubber gloves - can be sold during the lockdown. Colombia is set to surpass a million Covid-19 infections on Saturday, becoming the eighth country to do so. As scientists around the world race to find an effective inoculation, Colombia says it is ready to distribute any vaccine that proves effective. Its preparedness is thanks to decades of work on a free government immunisation programme that offers 21 vaccines to all Colombians, among the South America’s most generous for vaccine provision. “We have a really strong vaccination programme that serves as a model and which will incorporate the new formula that will arrive against Covid,” Gerardo Burgos, the secretary general of the health ministry, told Reuters. The programme covers not onlyColombia’s own population of about 50 million people but also more than 1.7 million Venezuelan migrants and includes everything from infant shots to human papillomavirus. The country delivers about 23 million vaccinations a year. Colombia has already committed $213m to the global Covax initiative, guaranteeing Covid-19 vaccinations for about 10 million people. People over 60, those with pre-existing conditions and healthcare workers will be immunised first. Colombia’s cases have climbed steadily despite more than five months of a gradually loosened lockdown. The death toll is set to top 30,000 people over the weekend. Chile has identified more than 500,000 coronavirus cases since the outbreak began in March, the health ministry said on Saturday. The ministry said 500,542 Chileans were now confirmed to have suffered from the virus, including 1,631 cases added in the past day and 48 deaths, taking fatalities to a total of 13,892. Active cases are at a record low of 9,900, it added. Chile, which was among the worst-hit countries in July, ranking only behind Qatar globally for per capita cases , has gradually eased its lockdown over the past two months. Restaurants and bars have opened with limited capacity, office workers are returning and some schools have reopened. Chileans will vote on Sunday in a referendum on whether to replace the country’s Pinochet-era constitution. The charter, drawn up by a key lieutenant of the military leader Augusto Pinochet in 1980, is blamed for segmenting pension, health and education provisions and entrenching inequality. The organiser of a party attended by more than 50 people has been handed a £10,000 fine for “blatant disregard” of Covid-19 regulations. Police were called to a flat in Simpson Street, Angel Meadows, Manchester, shortly after 11.20 pm (BST) on Friday. Officers found DJ mixing decks, speakers, a buffet and about 50 people in attendance, Greater Manchester Police said. The force said the party was closed down and the organiser given a £10,000 fixed penalty notice for breaching coronavirus legislation, one of the first issued since Greater Manchester entered tier 3 restrictions. A further 1,324 people have tested positive for coronavirus in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 41,577. Public Health Wales said 16 people with Covid-19 had died, bringing the total number of deaths to 1,772. The government is set to deliver £75m in grants to 35 of the country’s top cultural organisations and venues, from the Old Vic to Shakespeare’s Globe. It is the latest tranche of money to be distributed from the government’s £1.57bn culture recovery fund. These grants are the largest to have come from the package to date and will go to bodies which require between £1m and £3m. Money was allocated based on whether applicants provided jobs, supported the wider community and engaged with the public through innovative means during the pandemic. More than £52m – 70% of the total awarded in this round - will go to organisations outside London. The culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, said: “As part of our unprecedented £1.57bn rescue fund, today we’re saving British cultural icons with large grants of up to £3m - from Shakespeare’s Globe to the Sheffield Crucible. The fund has also distributed £188m to the devolved administrations - with £97m for Scotland, £59m for Wales and £33m for Northern Ireland. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, called on Saturday for strict punishments for violators of Covid-19 restrictions as the Middle East’s hardest-hit nation battled the third wave. Latest officials figures showed coronavirus had killed 32,320 Iranians and infected 562,705, with 5,814 new cases and 335 fatalities in the previous 24 hours. Taking a swipe at arch-foe the United States, Khamenei said Iran must enforce curbs better and end disputes between institutions over the pandemic. Thanks, everyone for following the blog and for your emails. Please do get in touch if you have any news tips or want to share any information from where you are. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com Spanish regions are urging the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as the country battles a resurgent coronavirus epidemic. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. “I would say with almost total certainty there will be one. But it has not officially been called yet,” a source from the Spanish government told Reuters. While many regions favour some form of curfew, the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Thousands of anti-lockdown protesters have begun a noisy march through central London. After gathering at Speakers’ Corner in Hyde Park, crowds began to walk down Oxford Street in the direction of Oxford Circus. Before leaving, they heard from Piers Corbyn, the brother of the former Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who exhorted followers to “stop new normal, save lives”. Louise Creffield, the founder of Save Our Rights UK, one of the groups behind the protest, told the crowd: “Today we are standing in our power and we are not abiding by their rules. “It doesn’t matter what they say, it doesn’t matter what threats they bring, it doesn’t matter if they try and intimidate us, we are not going to accept it, because we don’t abide by their rules. We don’t listen because we do not consent.” As they marched down Oxford Street, protesters chanted for freedom and told passersby to take off their masks. Others played the drums, blew whistles and played music on portable sound systems. Here are the latest developments in the coronavirus crisis: More than 1.1 million dead The virus has claimed at least 1,145,847 lives worldwide since it first emerged in China late last year, according to an AFP tally based on official sources. At least 42,262,299 cases have been registered across the globe. The US is the worst-affected country with 223,998 deaths, followed by Brazil with 156,471, India with 117,956, Mexico with 88,312 and Britain with 44,571. WHO warning The WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. Germany deaths top 10,000 The Robert Koch Institute, a federal government agency, has recorded a total of 10,003 coronavirus deaths in Germany, where 14,714 new cases have also been diagnosed in the last 24 hours, a record figure. Lothar Wieler, the president of the institute’s disease control authority, said the country was facing a very serious situation. The chancellor, Angela Merkel, told citizens in a weekly video podcast that “the order of the day is to reduce contacts, to meet as few people as possible”. New daily record cases in US Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Poland president tests positive Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive, adding another name to the list of leaders to have been diagnosed with the virus. Aside from the diagnosis, the 48-year-old Duda is believed to be in good general health. Naples clashes Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late on Friday during a demonstration against restrictions in the southern Italian city. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as a curfew in the Campania region started at 11:00 pm. Some protesterslit smoke bombs. Grants for UK arts institutions The British government has announced a £75m rescue package to save 35 cultural institutions hit by the pandemic, including London’s Globe Old Vic theatres. New coronavirus restrictions are to take effect in Madrid on Saturday as the Spanish government weighs declaring a national state of emergency to allow curfews to be imposed. Days after the country registered more than a million cases of Covid-19, the regions - which are responsible for managing public healthcare - have put pressure on the government to give them legal right to impose tighter restrictions. In practice, that would involve the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez declaring a national state of emergency that would enable the regions to impose curfews, a measure increasingly applied across Europe. Nine of Spain’s 17 autonomous regions have formally requested such a move, and a decision is expected to be at an extraordinary meeting of ministers on Sunday. The government can impose an emergency for up to a fortnight, but it would need parliamentary approval to extend it. Spain used the powers in spring to enforce one of the world’s tightest lockdowns, and a similar measure has been in force in Madrid for the past fortnight, although only to impose movement restrictions on the capital and various nearby towns. That measure ends at 4:47 pm (1447 GMT) on Saturday, when new restrictions drawn up by the regional authorities will come into force. Hello everyone. I am running the Guardian’s global live feed, updating you on all the latest coronavirus news from around the world. Please do feel free to contact me while I work today, providing any news tips or comments. Thanks Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and the World Health Organization (WHO), probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Istanbul’s mayor Ekrem Imamoğlu has been admitted to hospital after testing positive for coronavirus and suffering a fever. “Yesterday evening around 9pm I got a fever and with a temperature of 38 degrees. I came and spent the night in hospital,” he said in a video. “Now I am actually well. My fever is not bad. The process is continuing. There is nothing that can be viewed as negative in a medical sense.” Istanbul’s American hospital said in a statement that Imamoğlu, an opponent of the country’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, was admitted at 10pm (1900 GMT) after displaying symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection. It said he tested positive for coronavirus and that his treatment was continuing. Imamoğlu, from the secular Republican People’s party (CHP), was elected mayor in a re-run election in June 2019 in a blow to Erdoğan and his ruling AK party. There have since been sporadic tensions between his municipality and the central government, including disputes over fundraising and measures to combat the coronavirus pandemic in its early stages. Spanish regions have urged the central government to take measures that would give them legal backing to impose curfews as coronavirus cases rise. As of Saturday, 10 of Spain’s 17 regions, including Valencia, Asturias, Castilla-La Mancha and the Basque Country, had called on the government to decree a state of emergency, which would allow regions to limit people’s movement, Reuters reported. Regions expect the government to call an extraordinary council of ministers on Sunday to approve the measure, Spanish media including El País reported. Many regions favour some form of curfew, but the powerful Madrid region opposes it, which has so far prevented a nationwide decision. Spain has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections in western Europe. Total cases rose to 1,046,132 on Friday, and the death toll is nearing 38,000. Catalonia said on Friday night that it would impose a curfew across the region, which includes Barcelona, as soon as the central government acted. The deputy Catalan leader, Pere Aragones, told a press conference: We need a decentralised state of emergency in which the Catalan government maintains all management capacity. The evolution is very worrying. Either we increase our efforts or Covid-19 increases. Some regions are considering imposing curfews by alternative means, such as going through regional courts, if the central government does not act. “We cannot wait any longer and we have to take steps forward,” Murcia’s regional president, Fernando López Miras, told the Spanish broadcaster TVE on Saturday. “If the central government does nothing, we will approve a curfew.” Malaysia reported 1,228 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, a record daily jump since the start of the pandemic, bringing the total number of cases to 25,742. The health ministry also said seven new deaths had also been recorded. Recent data has highlighted the struggle authorities around the world face in bringing the coronavirus pandemic under control, as the US reported 80,000 infections in a single day, France extended a curfew to two-thirds of its citizens and Germany’s death toll passed 10,000. The World Health Organization had earlier warned of an exponential rise in infections that threatened health systems’ ability to cope. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions to slow the resurgent virus’ spread. There were clashes overnight in Naples between Italian police and hundreds of protesters. Covid-19 has become a central election issue in the US ahead of the presidential election on 3 November. Donald Trump promised attendees at a Florida rally on Friday that “we’re going to quickly end this pandemic, this horrible plague”. Joe Biden matched Trump’s vow to make a vaccine available free to all who want it “whether or not you’re insured” and said the Republican incumbent has “given up” on controlling the outbreak. Johns Hopkins University had earlier reported 79,963 new US cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. Ministers may be forced to close schools in England to older children if coronavirus cases continue to increase at the current rate, a scientist has said. Prof Neil Ferguson, whose modelling led to the original lockdown in March, said the NHS would soon be unable to cope unless the spread of the disease was stemmed. He said there were 8,000 people in hospital with coronavirus - around a third of the peak earlier this year - and that numbers were continuing to rise. “It is a worrying situation,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “If the rate of growth continues as it is, it means that in a month’s time we will above that peak level in March and that is probably unsustainable. “We are in a critical time right now. The health system will not be able to cope with this rate of growth for much longer.” His warning came as South Yorkshire became the latest region to enter the tightest Tier 3 restrictions in England following Liverpool city region, Greater Manchester and Lancashire. Ferguson said it would be another week or two before it became clear whether the stricter measures would have an impact on case numbers. He said the restrictions on households mixing should have a significant effect, but that further action may also be needed. Bulgaria’s capital Sofia, home to about 2 million people, will close nightclubs and discos on Sunday for two weeks in an effort to contain a surge in coronavirus infections straining its health system. Speaking on national BTV television on Saturday, the city’s mayor, Yordanka Fankakova, also urged Sofia universities to switch to online education and appealed to businesses to let as many employees as possible work from home. “The situation is Sofia is becoming increasingly alarming. We have a new increase in infections and of people who need hospital treatment. This is straining the hospitals,” she said. Hello everyone and thanks for following the Guardian’s live feed today. I am keeping you up to date with all the news on coronavirus from around the globe. Please do email or message me if you want to share thoughts, comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com In the UK, Prof Neil Ferguson has said a decision about whether restrictions on households mixing should be relaxed over Christmas will be a “political judgment” . “It risks some transmission and there will be consequences of that. Some people will die because of getting infected on that day,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “But if it is only one or two days the impact is likely to be limited. So that is really a political judgment about the cost versus the benefits.” Indonesia reported 4,070 new coronavirus infections on Saturday, taking the total number of cases to 385,980, official data from the country’s Covid-19 taskforce shows. It also reported 128 new deaths, taking the total to 13,205, and 4,119 people recovered from the virus on Saturday, bringing the total to 309,219. Wales’ firebreak lockdown should bring the R value - the number of people each coronavirus case infects - below one, health minister Vaughan Gething has said. Gething told BBC Breakfast the 17-day period would be followed by a set of national measures to control the spread of Covid-19. Asked about economists warning that the lockdown could cost the Welsh economy more than £500m, Mr Gething said: “It’s not just about the direct costs within the firebreak, when we know there will be a challenge and loss in economic activity. “It’s about saving a much greater loss if we need to have longer, deeper, more sustained measures.” The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus and is subject to quarantine but is feeling good, presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country imposed new restrictions on Saturday to curb the spread of the illness. Poland faces a surge in the COVID-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of 13,632 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. Russia has reported 16,521 new coronavirus cases and 296 deaths in the past 24 hours, up from 17,340 new cases and 283 deaths the previous day. The Czech Republic reported 15,252 new cases for 23 October, the highest daily tally. Deaths rose by 126 to 1,971. In the UK, Sheffield city region mayor Dan Jarvis has said he will not hesitate to seek additional government support for South Yorkshire after the region entered the strictest Tier 3 coronavirus controls. Jarvis said a 41 million funding package had been secured after a “tough” process of negotiation and he had won an agreement from ministers to keep the situation under review. “The scale of the challenge is very significant,” he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “We are acutely aware of the pressures our NHS is under, not least because winter hasn’t bitten yet, so we are looking very carefully at what we need to do. “But if there is a requirement for more resource - whether it is economic support or it is other measures of assistance from the Government - I won’t hesitate to go back and ask for them.” Morning all from London, where it is 8am (BST). I am taking over the coronavirus live feed, bringing you all the latest information on the virus from around the world. Please do keep in touch with me while I work, by sharing any comments or news tips. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com That’s where I will leave you for now, but never fear Sarah Marsh is here to take you through the rest of the day’s news. The Czech Republic recorded 15,252 new Covid-19 cases on Friday, the country’s highest ever daily increase. It also recorded 126 deaths overnight, bringing the death toll to 1,971. The Czech Republic managed to escape the first wave of Covid-19 relatively unscathed, with case numbers rarely rising above 200 a day prior to September, but has been hit extremely hard as Europe battles a resurgence in the virus. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for coronavirus but is feeling good, the presidential minister Blazej Spychalski announced on Saturday. “The president yesterday was tested for the presence of coronavirus. The result turned out to be positive. The president is fine. We are in constant contact with the relevant medical services,” Spychalski said on Twitter. Duda’s infection comes as the country faces a surge in the Covid-19 epidemic, with new infections hitting a daily record of more than 13,600 on Friday. Duda, 48, holds a mainly ceremonial role, but has the power to veto legislation. He is an ally of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party. From Saturday, more restrictions to curb the spread of the virus are due to come into force in Poland, including a two-week shutdown of restaurants and bars. The health ministry reported 153 coronavirus deaths on Friday, taking the total toll to 4,172. The Conservative MP Ben Bradley has been accused of “stigmatisation of working-class families” over a tweet that labelled the free school meals programme as “20 cash direct to a crack den and a brothel”. Bradley replied to the post, which was by another user. The MP wrote: “That’s what FSM vouchers in the summer effectively did ...” The deputy leader of Labour, Angela Rayner, said: A Conservative MP has said that free school meals are effectively a direct payment to brothels and drug dealers. Notwithstanding the fact that the vouchers in summer could only be used to purchase food, this stigmatisation of working class families is disgraceful and disgusting. MPs rejected a campaign, started by the Manchester United player Marcus Rashford, to offer free school meals for local children during half-term. A vote on the measures was backed by Labour and made its way to parliament this week but it was defeated by 322 votes to 261. Bradley said the context of his tweet “wasn’t as clear as I’d thought it was”. Needless to say, I haven’t said what I’m being accused of, nor would I ever. I’m sorry if others get dragged into the fire. If you want a proper debate you have to accept that sometimes you get it wrong. Proper debate is important. You learn from it, you move on. We’re all human. More than a million people in South Yorkshire are now living under the strictest coronavirus rules in England after the region moved into the tier 3 controls as health officials battle to stem the spread of the disease. The region joined Liverpool city region, greater Manchester and Lancashire on the highest alert level for England with the new rules kicking in on Saturday at 12.01am. Meanwhile, talks were continuing between the government and local leaders in Nottinghamshire, with parts of the county expected to enter tier 3 on Wednesday. And the council in Warrington in Cheshire – where many residents commute to Manchester and Liverpool – has confirmed that it will be moving to tier 3 on Thursday. It means households will be banned from mixing except in parks and other open spaces while pubs and bars will have to close unless they serve meals. Three more areas – Coventry, Stoke and Slough – have now also moved into tier 2, the second highest alert level. It came as Wales began a two-week national “firebreak” at 6pm on Friday evening with a return to the “stay at home” message of the initial lockdown in March. In Scotland, the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has set out a five-tier series of controls that will come into force on 2 November if they are approved next week by the Holyrood parliament. In England, ministers have said they hope the latest measures will suppress the virus sufficiently to enable families to spend Christmas together. Thailand reported one more locally transmitted case of the coronavirus on Saturday, after confirming five domestic infections last week. The new patient is a 57-year-old French woman in the southern province of Surat Thani who tested positive for the virus a few days after she had completed a 14-day quarantine, the country’s coronavirus taskforce said. The patient’s husband and child tested negative, health officials said. Earlier in the week five people in the town of Mae Sot, on the border with Myanmar, tested positive, and in September a prison inmate in the Bangkok area tested positive. Before these six cases, Thailand reported its first confirmed local transmission in more than 100 days on 3 September. In total, Thailand has reported 3,731 cases of the virus and 59 deaths. Victoria’s Department of Health and Human Services has put out its daily press release, which gives us a bit more clarity on exactly where those seven cases came from. Six of today’s seven new cases are linked to known outbreaks and cases. One is a close contact already identified as part of the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak and was already in quarantine and one is a staff member from Estia Keilor. One is a student from East Preston Islamic College, one is a student from Croxton Special School, also linked to East Preston Islamic College through family and two are parents from East Preston Islamic College. The remaining case is a previously positive case that is currently under investigation. Of today’s seven new cases, there are three cases in Darebin, and single cases in Banyule, Greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. In his daily press conference, the premier, Daniel Andrews, suggested that one remaining case is being investigated as a possible reinfection, but is more likely to be someone who has recovered from Covid-19 but is still shedding the virus. The AFP has provided this wrap of the current Covid-19 situation in Europe: The European Union’s disease control agency has joined frantic health workers to sound the alarm over a coronavirus surge across the continent, as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in infections. Even countries that avoided severe outbreaks during Europe’s first wave of contagion in the spring have watched their case numbers surge, with Germany’s death toll passing 10,000 on Saturday. Governments have reintroduced containment measures to slow the renewed spread of the virus in nations that only weeks earlier believed they had triumphed over the crisis. But populations weary of social isolation and economic hardship have pushed back against fresh restrictions, including overnight clashes in Italy’s hard-hit Naples between police and hundreds of protesters. After Spain became the first European country to officially record a million Covid-19 cases earlier in the week, the prime minister, Pedro Sanchez, said on Friday the real number of infections was likely more than triple that number. France followed Spain past the million-case milestone on Friday while Germany hit a fresh daily record of nearly 15,000 new cases, with health authorities urging the public to follow social distancing measures. Urgent new restrictions on daily life have come into effect in several nations, with France extending a curfew to cover 46 million people. Wales entered a full lockdown on Friday evening, a day after Ireland shut down, while Poland adopted a nationwide “red zone” lockdown mandating the partial closure of primary schools and restaurants. Only Sweden, which famously refused to lock down earlier this year, continued to stick to its guns despite a rise in cases. Belgium has seen one of Europe’s deadliest per capita outbreaks and has found itself suffering some of the highest second-wave infection rates in Europe. “We’re losing. We’re overwhelmed. We’re bitter,” said Benoit Misset, the head of the intensive care unit at the University hospital in the city of Liege, where several of his staff are having to work despite being positive – if asymptomatic – themselves. Queensland health officials are working to determine the strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Australian state’s Sunshine Coast. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland’s health department to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given [the cases] have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... [to] the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters. You can read the full story here: Hello, Matilda Boseley with you now to take you through the next few hours of Covid-related news. No new cases of Covid-19 in South Australia for today. A man who allegedly refused to comply with self-quarantine rules in Western Australia has been taken into custody and refused bail following a struggle with police, AAP reports. The 32-year-old New Zealander, who resides in Queensland, had been granted approval to enter WA to work and was issued a FIFO self-quarantine direction on 13 October when he arrived in Perth. He was required to remain in quarantine for 14 days at an East Perth apartment but police say that on Friday a compliance check found he was not there but in front of the complex. Police said it was further found he had been socialising with a 30-year-old man from the same company who was also quarantining in the complex. Both men were told they would be fined $1,000 for failing to comply with directions. But on leaving the complex police officers again found the 32-year-old man at the front of the property, WA police said in a statement on Saturday. The man was told he would be moved to a secure self-quarantine hotel for the remainder of his quarantine but he became “aggressive and hostile towards the officers”, refusing to comply with the direction, the statement said. “The man was arrested after a short struggle and was relocated to the Perth watch house.” He was charged with four counts of failing to comply with a direction and was refused bail to appear in the Perth magistrates court on Saturday. South Korea has reported 77 new cases of Covid-19, AP reports, mostly from the greater capital area where officials are scrambling to stem transmissions at hospitals and nursing homes. More location notifications from Victoria. I appreciate that they’re getting pretty speedy with getting these out now. Malaysia’s King Al-Sultan Abdullah will consult with other rulers to discuss proposals by the prime minister, Muhyiddin Yassin, the palace said on Saturday, after sources told Reuters the PM had asked the king to declare a state of emergency. Muhyiddin met with the king on Friday to present the emergency proposal that includes a suspension of parliament, sources said – a move the opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, denounced as an attempt by the PM to cling to power amid a power struggle. The proposal comes as Malaysia sees a resurgence in coronavirus cases and as Muhyiddin faces a leadership challenge from Anwar, who last month said he had majority support in parliament to oust the PM. The palace did not identify the recommendations made by Muhyiddin, and said the king would soon hold the consultation with other Malay rulers. “Al-Sultan Abdullah greatly understands the need for the country’s administration to continue to tackle the threat of Covid-19,” the palace said in a statement. The Council of Rulers, which groups the heads of Malaysia’s nine royal houses, has the power to withhold consent from any law and deliberate on questions of national policy. A source familiar with the matter said the rulers would meet on Sunday. Muhyiddin’s office has not commented on the emergency proposal. The government is scheduled to propose its 2021 budget on 6 November, and there have been questions over whether it can muster a majority in parliament for that. Defeat on the budget would count as a vote of no-confidence in Muhyiddin and could trigger an election. Emergency rule might mean the budget would not be put to a vote at that time. Western Australia has reported four new cases of Covid-19 overnight. The positive cases – all males aged between 30 and 57 – returned to Perth from overseas. They are all in hotel quarantine, and none are in hospital. This is probably a good time to summarise some of what we have learned so far today: The Australian state of Victoria has recorded seven new cases of Covid-19, and no new deaths. There are fewer than 100 active cases in the state for the first time since late June, as Victoria seeks to contain an outbreak in the northern suburbs of Melbourne before more restrictions ease. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country. Germany has reached 10,000 deaths from Covid-19. The country has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths.It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths. Authorities in Sri Lanka on Saturday closed at least two fishery harbours and many stalls after a surge of 609 cases linked to the country’s main fish market, AP reports. The government also widened the curfew in parts of Colombo. At least 11 villages were isolated in the densely populated Western province, which includes the capital. Health authorities on Wednesday temporarily closed the fish market on Colombo’s outskirts after 49 traders tested positive for the coronavirus. By Saturday, the number of cases went up to 609. Hundreds of traders and fishermen are being tested. Authorities say the outbreak is related to a cluster in a garment factory early this month, which has grown to 3,426 cases, almost half the country’s total of 6,287. It broke a two-month lull in infections. Several thousand people have been asked to quarantine at home. Schools and key public offices are closed, gatherings banned and restrictions imposed on public transport. Sri Lanka has had 14 deaths since March. Hundreds of protesters in Naples threw projectiles at police and set rubbish bins on fire late Friday during a demonstration against coronavirus restrictions in the southern Italian city, AP reports. Calls were issued on social media to challenge a curfew that took effect in the Campania region ahead of the weekend, enacted in response to a spiralling second wave of infections that saw nearly 20,000 new cases detected in the last 24 hours. A mostly young crowd marched through the streets of the regional capital and chanted as the curfew started at 11 pm, with some lighting smoke bombs. One carried a makeshift sign that read: “If you close, you pay.” Regional president Vincenzo de Luca had called for stricter confinement measures to contain the virus in Campania, which recorded 2,300 cases over the last day. “We are on the verge of tragedy, we need a national lockdown,” he said. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte has so far avoided reimposing the kind of restrictions that saw the entire nation confined to home quarantine for two months earlier this year and precipitated the country’s worst post-war recession. Italy was the first European country to be badly hit by the virus. It has now registered nearly 500,000 cases and 37,000 deaths, according to health ministry figures. Some new exposure site information for Victoria. AFP has more on the Germany numbers: 14,714 were diagnosed in the last 24 hours – a daily record. Robert Koch Institute president Lothar Wieler said Germany was facing a “very serious” situation and asked the population to adhere to social distancing measures. Germany was spared during the first wave of coronavirus infections that hit Europe in spring but is now suffering a sharp increase in cases along with the rest of the continent. Authorities have tightened measures against the pandemic including the adoption of a public assembly ban. Chancellor Angela Merkel last weekend asked the country to reduce their social contact and stay home as much as possible. “What winter will be, what our Christmas will be, will be decided in the days and weeks to come,” she had warned. Queensland health officials are working to determine the mystery strain of Covid-19 infecting the crew of a cargo ship anchored off the Sunshine Coast, AAP reports. The MV Sofrana Surville was blocked from docking in Brisbane after New Zealand warned it could be carrying a new mutated strain of the virus. Initial testing found two of the Sofrana’s 19 crew members were infected with Covid-19 and they were transferred to a mainland hospital on Friday. The deputy premier, Steven Miles, said the New Zealand government had asked Queensland Health to undertake genomic sequencing on the suspected new strain. “Given (the cases) have come off a ship that has been in other countries, it’s highly likely to be a different strain ... (to) the current strains within Australia,” he told reporters on Friday. He said the additional testing would take about a week. The Sofrana left New Zealand earlier in the month with fresh crew from the Philippines before stopping at Noumea in New Caledonia and then sailing for Brisbane. New Zealand requested Australian health officials perform the additional testing after an engineer who had previously worked on the ship tested positive in Auckland. Miles on Saturday said zero new cases of Covid-19 had been uncovered inside Queensland, meaning the state still had six active cases. It has been 44 days since the last locally acquired case in Queensland. Miles on Friday said it was likely an announcement would be made about Queensland’s border reopening to NSW late next week. Asked when Victorians would be free to travel to Queensland, Miles said it would be after health restrictions in that state were eased and several incubation periods had been completed. Earlier this week I reported former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott has been allowed to leave Australia not once but twice as part of his new trade envoy role for the Boris Johnson government in the United Kingdom. The former PM was allowed to leave on what was termed an “auto-exemption” because it was government business. I’d been trying to figure out how many people have been allowed to leave while Australia has had a travel ban in place during the pandemic. Australian Border Force refused to say how many auto-exemptions have been granted, but I just came across some data on how many exemptions in total. According to Border Force in documents tabled in the Senate, between April and September this year, a total of 73,848 Australians and permanent residents have been allowed to leave Australia. More are coming back, however. Border Force also reports 93,937 Australians and permanent residents have travelled to Australia in that time. It’s not clear how many have left and come back, or how many, if any apart from Abbott, have made multiple trips. Senate estimates heard Abbott would be expected to go into hotel quarantine for a second time when he returns. Meanwhile, our current prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said he will seek to get 26,000 stranded Australians back home before Christmas. Some extra capacity will be made available, with around 6,290 places in hotel quarantine available each week. Germany has reported 14,714 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, and an additional 49 deaths. It takes the country’s totals to 418,005 cases and 10,003 deaths The United States broke its daily record for new coronavirus infections on Friday as it reported at least 83,948 new cases due to outbreaks in virtually every part of the country, according to a Reuters tally. The spike in cases comes less than two weeks before the presidential election on 3 November and is hitting battleground states such as Ohio, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. On Thursday, the United States reported a near-record 76,195 new cases. The previous record was 77,299 new cases on 16 July. At the time, hospitalisations for Covid-19 patients hit 47,000 and two weeks later deaths rose to an average of 1,200 per day. Now, hospitalisations are over 41,000 and deaths average nearly 800 per day. Health experts have not pinpointed the reason for the rise but have long warned that colder temperatures driving people inside, fatigue with Covid-19 precautions and students returning to schools and colleges, could promote the spread of the virus. The United States has the most cases in the world at 8.5 million and the most fatalities with 224,000 lives lost. The United States has reported over the past week an average of 60,000 new cases per day, the highest seven-day average since early August. The Midwest has been the epicenter of the latest surge but infections are rising nationwide. The Northeast reported an 83% increase in cases in the past month. New cases have doubled in Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and New Jersey in the past four weeks as compared to the prior four weeks, according to a Reuters analysis. Western states including Montana, New Mexico and Wyoming have reported a 200% increase in cases in the past four weeks when compared with the previous four weeks. Mexico’s northern border state of Chihuahua returned to the highest level of alert and lockdown Friday after coronavirus cases jumped there and hospitals began to fill up. The Chihuahua state government declared the return to the “red” level of alert Friday, which closes down most non-essential services and encourages people to stay at home. The Health Department said the state’s hospital beds were now 69% occupied, and that only about 23% of intensive care beds were open. The department said steps were being taken to expand hospital facilities. The department also said that three other northern states — Durango, Coahuila and Nuevo Leon — were at risk of returning to maximum alert unless infections were brought under control. Nationwide, 19 of Mexico’s 32 states will be at high alert starting Monday, 11 will be at medium alert and one state was considered at moderate risk level. Mexico as a whole has seen 880,775 test-confirmed cases, up 6,604 from the previous day’s count, and 88,312 confirmed deaths, up by 418. Here is a bit more info on the Covid-19 situation in NSW today: It’s the second consecutive 24-hour period in which NSW recorded no new locally acquired virus cases, and comes as the state government from this weekend eases some restrictions. Up to 30 people are now allowed to gather outdoors, group bookings at hospitality venues have been extended from 10 to 30 people and up to 300 are allowed at places of worship. Protesters can also gather en masse, with up to 500 people allowed to convene outdoors. Staffing regulations at gyms across NSW have also been relaxed, with a safety marshal only required when more than 20 people are working out. Two drugmakers have announced the resumption of US testing of their Covid-19 vaccine candidates. Testing of AstraZeneca’s vaccine candidate had been halted since early September, while Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine study was paused at the beginning of last week. Each company had a study volunteer develop a serious health issue, requiring a review of safety data. The two coronavirus vaccines are among several candidates in final-stage testing, the last step before seeking regulatory approval. The drugmakers said they got the go-ahead on Friday from the Food and Drug Administration to restart tests in the US. Such temporary halts of drug and vaccine testing are relatively common. In research involving thousands of participants, some are likely to fall ill. Pausing a study allows researchers to investigate whether an illness is a side effect or a coincidence. You can read the full story below: Sutton was asked when the press conference will be held tomorrow, and he said “when it is called”. And that’s the end of that. Victorian chief health officer Prof Brett Sutton says he is “very confident” Victoria will get control of the cases associated with the northern Melbourne outbreak, but reiterates there is a need to find the links between the cases, and that will inform the easing of instructions. Sutton declines to comment on why he instructed lawyers acting for the health department not to include evidence where it showed he was included on emails on 27 March that mentions the use of private security guards well before he previously said he was made aware. Sutton says he is providing an affidavit to the inquiry and it is appropriate to wait for that to be provided to the inquiry. Andrews won’t cop criticism of the public health team who communicated with the family at the centre of the East Preston Islamic College outbreak. He said the family were advised what to do, but the message didn’t get through because one child went to school while infectious. Andrews disagrees with the suggestion it would be a miracle to have low case numbers tomorrow given all the tests waiting to be processed. I wouldn’t say that. We have done, haven’t got a weekly total, but we have had a very, very strong week in terms of test, right back to the weekend. And we have turned up a relatively low number of cases this week and the vast majority have been linked to other known cases. Andrews says the 25km radius limit and the Melbourne metro/regional border are on the table to be eased tomorrow, if that happens, but suggests both could remain in place to prevent potential spread of Covid-19 to popular tourism locations like Mornington Peninsula. Daniel Andrews says the school, community and faith leaders are calling people in the northern Melbourne area to get tested. The two schools involved are organising for everyone who hasn’t been tested to get tested. I had a conversation this morning, Jerome and I, with some of the school leadership. They have gone through and booked in family by family to come and be tested at the site that the testing station is on the school grounds. They will work through all those different appointments and that will give them a list of people who did not show and that is not a criticism, they may have gone somewhere else. Circumstances may have intervened. But then they will go back and do that for a second time, a third time. We are confident we will get all of those people to come and get tested and then we will get the results as fast as possible. Daniel Andrews says “it’ll be a very late night, and a very early morning” when it comes to making decisions around restrictions easing tomorrow. Earlier in the press conference he said the easing of restrictions tomorrow could not be “banked on”. We really do have to wait to see what those test results show us ... what we are hopeful of is connections and linkages to these cases and these cases do not speak to the virus being in the northern suburbs more than we had thought, so it is all about trying to find those linkages and that is why there is a very big team of people interviewing, re-interviewing, looking at things from every conceivable angle to try to find linkages. He says Victoria is still in a good position with low case numbers, and will proceed with easing of restrictions if possible. It’s just about getting those test results. I’m trying to be as frank as possible. A lot of people had banked tomorrow as the day where we would have absolute clarity about what the rest of October and November looks like. If we can do that, we will. But the appropriate thing to do if you have thousands of tests in the laboratory being processed, you have to wait for the results. Jeroen Weimar says the Victorian health department is focused on close and secondary contacts for the northern Melbourne outbreak, and says he doesn’t think schools opened up again too soon. “Some family members live in all sorts of housing, some in public housing, some in community housing, many in private accommodation. We are increasingly doing door-to-door testing for them so we are going to them to ensure that they get the care they need and support that they need but also to get tested,” he said. “If I look at the response of the school leadership of the schools that we are leading with, dealing with in this particular outbreak, they have taken prompt and swift action. We are talking about cases that happened on Monday this week.” The positive case at Croxton school is a student, they are part of a family of four, and all four of the family are positive, Jeroen Weimar said. One of the family’s other children attends the East Preston Islamic College, but it is not clear whether the cases are connected. The two children attended school while infected on one day. A total of 9,405 tests have been conducted for staff, students or close contacts at the East Preston Islamic College, Victoria’s head of contact tracing, Jeroen Weimar, says. There are 101 close contacts associated with the college isolating, and 307 secondary contacts isolating. There are 34 close contacts of the Croxton special school also isolating. The Victorian health department sent out 22,000 text messages and emails to taxi and Uber drivers in the northern Melbourne area, and Weimar has encouraged the drivers to come forward for testing. Daniel Andrews flags the long-awaited easing of restrictions announcement tomorrow should not be “banked on”. He says the announcements will still come tomorrow, but the actual easing will depend on the thousands of tests results waiting to come back as a result of the testing blitz in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. Now is not the time for us to start ignoring when we find significant virus ... whether it be in a given community or in a given geographical area ... We are still optimistic that we will be able to have positive things to say, but I’m just ... It’s a note of caution, with so much information yet to come to us, we need to be guided by that. That has always been the way. That is what has delivered these low numbers. On the northern Melbourne outbreak, Daniel Andrews says he met with the community leaders this morning. I had a meeting early this morning with a number of community and faith leaders from the inner northern suburbs and, indeed, the northern suburbs more broadly. I want to thank them for the very proactive and cooperative way – the partnership that we have with them. They’re reaching out to literally hundreds and thousands of people in their own networks, whether they be faith-based or community-based networks, setting up telephone trees, calling upon people to come forward and get tested, making sure that they’re reminding people that, if you’ve been asked to stay in your home – either pending a test result or because you’re a positive or a close contact – that that’s critically important to do and that everybody, regardless of your background, everybody is in this together. This virus does not, in any way, discriminate between different members of the Victorian community and neither does the government and its agencies when it comes to providing the most appropriate public health response. He says there are thousands of test results from people in the area still waiting to come back, and hundreds if not thousands of more people are likely to be tested today. He says it is a 35% increase in the normal amount of testing you would expect to see in that community. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews says Victoria has under 100 active cases of Covid-19 for the first time since 19 June. Of today’s seven cases, Andrews says six are linked to outbreaks or known cases, including East Preston Islamic College, Croxton special school Northcote, the Hoppers Crossing community outbreak, and Estia in Keilor. One of those seven cases is under investigation. There are three new cases in Darebin and single cases in Banule, greater Dandenong, Maribyrnong and Wyndham. There were 17,219 test results since yesterday, which Andrews says is “another very, very strong number.” Eight people are in hospital, and none in the ICU. There are seven active cases among healthcare workers. Mexico’s health ministry reported on Friday 6,604 additional cases of the novel coronavirus and 418 more deaths in the country, bringing the official number of cases to 880,775 and the death toll to 88,312. Health officials have said the real number of infected people is likely significantly higher than the confirmed cases. I am in Melbourne, the city with one of the, if not the, longest lockdowns in the world. Now we only have around 100 actives cases left, we are on the verge of opening up. We all crave a return to “Covid normal” as the politicians like to say, but there’s a fear it could return, and we might be forced to endure another lockdown. For the second day in a row, the Australian state of New South Wales has reported no new locally acquired Covid-19 cases. There were five cases reported in hotel quarantine. There were 12,890 tests reported to 8pm last night, compared with 13,686 in the previous 24 hours. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, will provide his daily update at 11.30am AEDT today. It’s the last update before tomorrow’s expected announcement of the further easing of restrictions in the state. Australia’s ABC has reported the principal of the East Preston Islamic College in Melbourne has said the family of the child who attended school while infectious with Covid-19 is considering leaving the area after being devastated that it has led to the virus spreading. The family had been isolating, but was told by the Victorian health department that two of the family’s children could return to school. English is not their first language, and it was interpreted that this meant all three children could go back to school, too. The child was meant to keep isolating, and tested positive on Wednesday. Now four new cases connected to the outbreak of 32 cases were reported on Saturday and around 800 people in the northern suburbs of Melbourne are currently isolating and being tested. A bright yellow helicopter rose into a blue sky on Friday carrying a Covid-19 patient from the Netherlands to a German intensive care unit, the first such international airlift since the pandemic first threatened to swamp Dutch hospitals in the spring, AP reports. The clatter of the helicopter’s rotors as it lifted off from a parking lot behind a hospital 30km east of Amsterdam was a noisy reminder of how the coronavirus is again gripping Europe and straining health care systems that struggled for equipment and staff during the pandemic’s first wave. Elsewhere on the continent, an absence of noise will underscore the virus’ resurgence. More than two-thirds of the people living in France were to be subject to a nightly curfew starting at midnight Friday, hours after health authorities announced that the country had joined Spain in surpassing 1 million confirmed cases since the start of the pandemic. “The epidemic is very strongly accelerating,” French President Emmanuel Macron said after visiting a hospital near Paris. France became the second country in Western Europe and the seventh world-wide to reach that number of known infections after reporting 42,032 new daily cases. Of the 445,000 confirmed cases the World Health Organization had recorded in the past 24 hours, nearly half were in Europe, Maria Van Kerkhove, WHO’s technical lead on COVID-19, said. I’m Josh Taylor and I will be seeing you through the rest of the morning and early afternoon of Saturday, Australian time. Here’s what we know so far today: Victoria has reported no new deaths and seven new cases of Covid-19 overnight, including four new cases linked to an outbreak at the East Preston Islamic College. About 800 people who are either close contacts or secondary contacts of those associated with the school are currently isolating and awaiting test results. All staff and students from the nearby Croxton School have also been told to get tested and self-isolate, even if they aren’t experiencing symptoms. AstraZeneca has resumed the US trial of its experimental Covid-19 vaccine after approval by US regulators, the company said. It was paused on 6 September after a report of a serious neurological illness, believed to be transverse myelitis, in a participant in the company’s UK trial. Dr Anthony Fauci, the US infectious disease expert, said the White House coronavirus task force’s meetings have become less frequent, even as infections rise in dozens of US states. The EU’s disease control agency joined health workers across Europe in sounding the alarm about the surge in coronavirus infections as the World Health Organization warned of an “exponential” rise in cases. Several countries in Europe are reporting infection rates higher than during the first wave of the pandemic in March and April, with Spain saying it has now more than 3 million cases. France’s second wave of coronavirus could be worse than the first, the boss of Paris public hospital group AP-HP said on Friday as the country registered a record number of daily cases. With pressure on hospitals rising fast, France has expanded a 9pm to 6am curfew to cover 46 million people, more than two-thirds of its population. Italy registered 19,143 new coronavirus infections, a jump of more than 3,000 within the last 24 hours. The northern Lombardy region, the worst hit region during the first wave of the pandemic, recorded almost 5,000 new cases while in Campania, in the south, there were 2,280. More than half a million people in the US could die from Covid-19 by the end of February next year, but about 130,000 of those lives could be saved if everybody were to wear masks, according to estimates from a modelling study.
0||Jürgen Klopp and Chris Wilder at odds over Anfield VAR callsJürgen Klopp claimed Liverpool were “disadvantaged” by VAR once again as his side overcame a controversial penalty award and a disallowed Mohamed Salah goal to beat Sheffield United 2-1 at Anfield. The Premier League champions moved level on points with Everton at the top of the table thanks to Roberto Firmino’s first goal of the season and Diogo Jota’s second‑half header, but had to come from behind when the VAR official, Andre Marriner, awarded Chris Wilder’s team a penalty for a tackle by Fabinho on Oli McBurnie. Mike Dean had awarded a free-kick outside the area before VAR upgraded the punishment to a penalty converted by Sander Berge. “There was no foul,” the Liverpool manager said. “It is now six games into the season and in three of them we have been on the wrong end of these kind of decisions. We are not asking for an advantage – we just don’t want to be disadvantaged. And that is the situation. The penalty gave Sheffield a proper boost. Until then they couldn’t get to us. “Then we lost a bit of patience but we scored a goal from our best attack of the first half, scored a second goal and I don’t know any more if it is offside or not. Then we did get the second goal and Mo had an incredible chance. They had their moments too but we defended with big hearts. It has been a tough week with a lot of minutes and tough opponents, so I am really pleased.” Chris Wilder disagreed about the spot-kick, saying: “I thought it was. I’ve been informed there might have been another couple as well. I thought their reaction to the challenge was quite telling.” Overall the Sheffield United manager was pleased with how his team had played. “The performance was good, it had to be to come here and get an opportunity to get a result and I thought we had opportunities to get a result. “There is lots of disappointment in our dressing room. We got on the bus believing we could get a result and we get back on the bus disappointed we haven’t got that.”
17||Sunak's £12bn scheme for self-employed was 'terribly targeted', says analysisRishi Sunak’s flagship scheme to help the self-employed through the pandemic has handed £1.3bn to workers who saw no loss of income while giving nothing to 500,000 people left without work, new analysis has revealed. In a sign of major flaws in the £12.7bn self-employment income support scheme (SEISS), more than 400,000 workers were able to claim support despite losing no income in the crisis. The analysis by the Resolution Foundation thinktank, to be published later this week, concluded that the scheme had been “terribly targeted”. The findings are part of its review of the labour market six months into the crisis. It finds that the self-employed have suffered “an even bigger labour market shock” than employees. Three in 10 self-employed workers stopped working altogether at the peak of the crisis. Many have returned to work but their recovery has been slow. Around one in six (17%) are still without work, rising to almost a quarter (24%) of 18- to 34-year-olds who were self-employed pre-crisis. The SEISS has been an expensive scheme to run for the Treasury and apparently more generous than the job retention scheme for employees. Some £2,518 was spent supporting each self-employed worker through the scheme, twice as much as the £1,128 spent per employee. However, the new analysis raises major doubts over how the money has been directed. While 78% of SEISS claimants lost income, in many cases that loss was smaller than the amount claimed. Meanwhile, 67% of self-employed workers who had not claimed under the scheme did lose income during the crisis. The thinktank blamed strict eligibility rules and weak assessment rules for the issues with the scheme. Applicants were not asked to prove they had been hit financially by the crisis. Hannah Slaughter, economist at the foundation, said: “The UK’s five million self-employed workers have been at the heart of its jobs crisis. A quarter of young self-employed workers are still without work today. This crisis is far from over for the UK’s self-employed workers. Future support should avoid excluding so many groups, while ensuring payments reflect genuine falls in income. And an immediate priority should be to strengthen universal credit for the many self-employed workers who will really need it in the months ahead.” It comes with the government under increasing pressure to increase its help for the self-employed further as Covid restrictions increase again. A slimmed-down version of the scheme is now in operation, though Sunak last week doubled the value of the grants the self-employed can access from 20% to 40% of average monthly profits. This is half the level available during the spring’s lockdown. Andy Chamberlain, director of policy at the Association of Independent Professionals and the Self-Employed, said: “Two-fifths of income simply will not be enough for many of the UK’s creative freelancers, who are the backbone of our vital cultural, entertainment and hospitality sectors. It’s also crucial to remember how many freelancers in these industries have been entirely excluded from claiming even 40% of their income – because they work through limited companies or are newly self-employed. “Government must take note and drive more and better targeted support to self-employed people in need – especially our forgotten freelancers and those working in badly struggling sectors.” The Treasury disputed the Resolution Foundation’s findings, arguing that there were safeguards designed to ensure the help only reached those who needed it. “As the report states, we were right to introduce the self-employment scheme – which has helped protect the livelihoods of 2.7 million people and is just one part of our £200bn package of unprecedented support.” “The scheme is targeted to help those most in need. All those who apply must confirm they have been adversely affected by the pandemic and the vast majority of those who do not qualify either earn more than half their income from another source or have trading profits of over £50,000.”
3||Ministers ‘still hiding’ full details of 2016 pandemic simulationThe government has been accused of withholding the full findings of a simulation exercise that warned ministers that the UK would not cope in the event of a pandemic. Campaigners have questioned what the government is hiding by choosing not to release all the documents relating to Exercise Cygnus, a three-day wargaming simulation that examined what would happen if there were an influenza pandemic in the UK. Last week, in response to pressure from the Information Commissioner’s Office, health secretary Matt Hancock announced that he had published the report into the exercise. However, it transpired the report was the same as that leaked to the press in May – but failed to include numerous other reports that are believed to make up the full filings. Now an NHS doctor and journalist who have been campaigning for the full disclosure of the documents relating to Cygnus have called on the government to release all the findings from the exercise. Dr Moosa Qureshi and Tommy Greene submitted a Freedom of Information request to see the full findings in April. They have lodged an application for judicial review into the government’s decision not to release the full report that is due to go to appeal on 19 November 2020. The pair have been told that the full findings of Exercise Cygnus are contained in numerous reports, not just the one released by Hancock. In their legal case they explain that it is their understanding that there is a “compendium” document containing all of the lessons and recommendations from Exercise Cygnus which does not resemble the report now published. They say that they are aware there are specific reports focusing on NHS population triage – the process for deciding how to treat patients – and what powers would have to be enacted legally to prepare for a pandemic. There are also individual reports assessing the performance of the different bodies and organisations that were involved in the three-day simulation. “This announcement by Matt Hancock to the House of Commons on Tuesday does not take us any further,” Greene said. “We already know what is in the version of the report he has ordered to be published. We want to see the full findings of the report that details in full the gaps in NHS provision that would have helped this country be better prepared when Covid hit and could still help us as we go into a the second wave of the pandemic.” The pair claim that further attempts by their lawyers, Leigh Day, to have the full findings published have been met throughout by “evasion” and “obstruction”. Recently, the Information Commissioner ordered Hancock to respond to Qureshi and Greene’s Freedom of Information request by Friday 23 October. Government lawyers said they required further time until 9 November to provide a substantive response. “We have been requesting Cygnus for many months now, and the government has repeatedly delayed disclosure, saying each time that it was ‘weighing the public interest’ while NHS frontline workers were struggling blindly, deprived of potentially life-saving data,” Qureshi said. “Now the government has published what the newspapers published months ago, and its document is preposterously bereft of the healthcare data expected from a national pandemic exercise, which begs the question, “What else is this government hiding?” Tessa Gregory, a partner at Leigh Day, said: “Our clients understand that there are other key documents which set out more fully the findings of Exercise Cygnus and the action which the government should have taken following the exercise. Our clients will continue to fight for transparency and seek the release of the full findings of Exercise Cygnus as the findings had and continue to have a bearing on the government’s response to the ongoing pandemic.” A government spokeswoman said it could not comment on a matter involving potential legal action. But she said: “Exercise Cygnus was a national exercise that looked at how well prepared the UK was to respond to a serious flu pandemic. “It was not designed to consider other potential pandemics, or to identify what action could be taken to prevent widespread transmission. “We have used the lessons learned from Exercise Cygnus to rapidly respond to this unprecedented global crisis.”
1||Obama campaigns for Biden in Florida as Trump heads to battleground Ohio – as it happenedIt’s been a lively day on the election trail. We’re closing this blog now but will be back with all the developments in US political news, as it happens, tomorrow. Here are the main events of the day: Alaska’s Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski has hopped off the fence and says she will confirm Amy Coney Barrett for the US supreme court in the vote expected on Monday. Barack Obama, speaking at a drive-in rally to support Joe Biden in the key swing state of Florida, laid into Donald Trump for his response to the coronavirus pandemic. Democratic vice-presidential nominee Kamala Harris, campainging in Ohio, also decried the Trump administration’s handling of Covid-19 and lamented that the crushed economy has led to a “hunger crisis” in America. Campaigning at two rallies in Pennsylvania today, Joe Biden said at each that he would not ban fracking - a very active industry in the swing state. Top infectious disease public health official Anthony Fauci supports the idea of a national face mask mandate if that’s the only way to get people to wear them and curb the spread of coronavirus. Both Donald Trump and his most controversial coronavirus adviser Scott Atlas have been spreading misleading info on Twitter about Covid-19. Democratic vice-presidential candidate Kamala Harris is calling for an administration that is frank about racist police brutality in America. “There isn’t a Black man I know, be it a relative or friend, who has not had some sort of experience with police that’s been about an unreasonable stop, some sort of profiling or excessive force,” she said. She said Donald Trump “says people who are protesting are looters and they are violent, and talking about law and order, not understanding that peaceful protest is part of how this nation was founded.” Harris said peaceful protest is what has allowed her to become only the second Black woman elected to the United States Senate (hat tip to groundbreaker Carol Moseley Braun). “But there is still a lot of work to be done” not just to speak out about police brutality but to do something about it.” She said she had spoken out about Breonna Taylor, shot dead by police in March during a botched raid on her Louisville, Kentucky, apartment, “but there are many Breonnas and Georges”, referring to George Floyd who was killed by police in Minneapolis this spring when an officer kneeled on his neck on the ground for almost nine minutes, reinvigorating the Black Lives Matter movement. “There needs to be ban on chokeholds and carotid holds, across the board. Let’s have a national registry of police officers who break the law.” She added that there needed to be “accountability and consequences” not just for individual police but for “the system”. The latest CNN opinion poll in Ohio has Democratic candidate Joe Biden and Republican candidate Donald Trump in a statistical dead heat, with 46% of those surveyed backing Biden for the White House in November, 47% favoring Trump. No Republican in modern history has lost Ohio but won the White House. The 2020 race continues. Donald Trump is on his way to begin another rally in Circleville, Ohio, about a 30-minute drive from Columbus, and Joe Biden is speaking now in Dallas, north-eastern Pennsylvania. This Dallas is not far from Scranton, Biden’s birthplace. The Democratic candidate for president just said “maybe it’s the Scranton in me” that gives him “a bit of a chip on my shoulder” about Trump’s flaunting of and focus on his own wealth. Biden is at his most fired up on the campaign trail right now, he doesn’t have the oratory skills of Obama, but he is impassioned. After so many months in the basement, campaigning online, it’s truly exciting to see Biden, as well as Harris and Obama out on the trail in person talking to motivated voters - not leaving it all to Trump. Biden just said once again that he won’t ban fracking. And he’s slamming Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. He’s using what has become one of his standard lines, bringing up the revelation from Bob Woodward’s book Rage that the president told him very early on in the outbreak that he knew exactly how dangerous Covid-19 was but downplayed it to the public because he didn’t want to spread panic (instead his stance just spread coronavirus). “The American people don’t panic,” Biden said. “Donald Trump panicked.” He called the president’s approach to controlling the outbreak “weak and chaotic”. Biden said he is determined to shut down the virus if he is president, without shutting down the economy, although it’s not entirely clear yet how he would thread that needle for the nation. Biden said Trump “hasn’t delivered on a damn thing”. Voters honking their car horns and cheering. Supreme Court nominee Amy Coney Barrett won crucial backing this afternoon when one of the last Republican holdouts announced her support for Donald Trump’s pick ahead of a confirmation vote expected Monday. Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska said during today’s Senate session that while she opposed her party’s decision to push ahead with the nomination process so close to the November 3 presidential election, she supported the federal judge, who is on track to lock in a conservative court majority for years to come, The Associated Press reports. Barrett already appeared to have enough votes for confirmation from Senate Republicans who hold the majority in the chamber and are racing to install her on the high court before Election Day. But Murkowski’s nod gives her a boost of support. Only one Republican, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, is now expected to oppose the conservative judge. “While I oppose the process that has led us to this point, I do not hold it against her,” Murkowski said. The Senate opened the rare weekend session despite Democratic efforts to stall Trump’s nominee. Democrats mounted more procedural hurdles during the day, but the party has no realistic chance of stopping Barrett’s advance. Barrett, a federal appeals court judge from Indiana, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. The fast-track confirmation process is like none other in US history so close to a presidential election. Democrats, notably the vice-presidential nominee and California Senator Kamala Harris, who sits on the judiciary committee, call it a “sham” and say the winner of the presidential election should name the nominee to fill the vacancy left by the recent death of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Senators planned to stay in session Saturday and Sunday. Read the Guardian’s latest report on the Amy Coney Barrett. Not only is her confirmation process controversial but she is a controversial judge and individual. Here’s our last report on Barack Obama’s rally in Florida on behalf of Joe Biden today. In his speech, which lasted almost an hour, he worked through several major election issues, such as the economy and the pandemic and touched on others as he continued to lash Trump. “Let me just see a show of hands, how many people here have a secret Chinese bank account?” Obama asked, referring to a story that emerged in the week that Trump had paid more than $200,000 in taxes in China, weeks after it emerged his federal income tax liability in the US was far less. “His first year in the White House he only paid $750 in federal income tax,” Obama said. “You’ve got secretaries, you’ve got construction workers, you got your health care workers, nurses, who pay a lot more in income taxes than that.” There was a staunch defense of Obamacare, his signature Affordable Care Act, which provided millions more Americans with affordable health insurance, that Republicans have tried numerous times to dismantle during the Trump administration. “When they’re asked about it they say, ‘Well look, we’re gonna have a great replacement. It’s coming. It’s gonna be there in two weeks.’ They’ve never had a replacement. Nothing. Nada. Zero. Zilch. “They’ve attacked the Affordable Care Act and every time they’ve driven up costs, they’re driving up the uninsured. Now they’re trying to get the Supreme Court to take away your health care as we speak, in the middle of a pandemic,” referring to the high court’s hearing into the constitutionality of the ACA on 10 November. Appealing to Florida’s sizeable Hispanic demographic, Obama had harsh words for Trump’s handling of the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, which devastated Puerto Rico in 2017, and efforts by some among Miami’s Cuban and Venezuelan communities to portray Biden as an extreme socialist. “Listening to the Republicans, you’d think Joe was more communist than the Castros. Don’t fall for that garbage,” Obama said. “Folks would know if he was a secret socialist by now. What is true is he’ll promote human rights in Cuba and around the world and he won’t coddle dictators the way our current president does.” The former prescient ended on an upbeat note. “I’m here to report that America is a good and decent place. We just see so much noise and nonsense,” he said. “Sometimes it’s hard for us to remember but I’ve been all across this country. There are a lot of good people here. There are a lot of folks who share the values of looking out for one another and doing right by one another.” Here we go again with Donald Trump’s antipathy to the wearing of face masks to help prevent the spread of coronavirus. Having just arrived in Columbus, Ohio, for his next campaign trail event, the president had a few words with reporters and is talking utter nonsense. First he said there are so many cases of coronavirus being reported in Wisconsin, where the disease is surging, at the moment because of all the testing. So if no testing, then no coronavirus? This is a highly misleading and wrongheaded argument that the president of the United States has tried numerous times over the months in order to downplay the coronavirus pandemic. And at a question from another reporter, Trump barked: “I can’t hear you with your mask on” and moved to the next reporter without waiting for the person to repeat the question. The Texas state supreme court this afternoon temporarily reinstated the governor’s ban on multiple drop-off sites for mail ballots, in a short-term victory for Donald Trump. The ban will remain in effect while the state supreme court fully reviews a Friday appeals court ruling that overturned the order by Governor Greg Abbott, a Republican like the president, who faces Democrat Joe Biden in a race for the White House on November 3, Reuters writes. The Texas 3rd court of appeals had unanimously agreed with a lower court that limiting the number of drop boxes would lengthen lines, increase the risk that voters could get infected with Covid-19, and infringe on their right to vote. Trump has repeatedly criticized mail-in ballots, claiming - without evidence - they would lead to widespread fraud. Abbott issued his order limiting mail-in ballot drop boxes to one per county on October 1, saying it was aimed at preventing fraud. The move, which closed more than a dozen satellite locations in at least two counties, drew condemnation from Democrats and voting rights advocates. Texas, which Trump won by nine percentage points in 2016, has not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate in more than four decades. But opinion polls have suggested it might be in reach for Biden, in part because of dissatisfaction over Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. The Guardian’s Erum Salam noted in this story from earlier in the month that large, populous counties such as Travis and Harris county will be disproportionately affected by Abbott’s order. These counties includes Texas’s most diverse cities: Austin and Houston, respectively. Nine per cent of Travis county’s population are black and 33% are Hispanic. In Harris county, 20% of the population are black and 43% Hispanic. Harris county is the third most populous county in the country with more than 4.7 million residents. As of 2018, it has nearly 2.4 million registered voters. After Abbott’s new order, the vast county has gone from having 12 ballot drop-off sites to just one, located at the NRG Stadium in central Houston. Full story here. Richard Luscombe writes that Barack Obama is delivering a sparky speech at a drive-in rally for Joe Biden in North Miami, Florida. His event continues with him highlighting the difference between Trump’s “empty promises” for a second term and Biden’s plans for his first. “Tweeting… doesn’t fix things. Inventing conspiracies doesn’t make people’s lives better,” he said. “You’ve got to have a plan. You’ve got to do the work. And along with the experience of getting things done, Joe Biden has concrete plans and policies that are going to turn our vision of a better, fairer, stronger country into reality.” Seeking to heap blame on Trump’s lack of response for a coronavirus pandemic that has killed almost 225,000 Americans and cost millions of jobs, Obama pointed out that his own administration had left plans. “We literally left this White House a pandemic playbook that showed them how to respond before a virus reached our shores,” Obama said. “It must be lost along with the Republican health care plan. We can’t find it, eight months into this pandemic.” Also squandered, Obama said, was the nation’s strong economy: “Unemployment was steadily going down during the Obama-Biden presidency. And then he gets elected and it keeps on going down and suddenly he says, ‘Look what I did there.’ “He did inherit the longest streak of job growth in American history that we got started but just like everything else he inherited he fumbled it. “The economic damage inflicted by [his] pandemic response means that Donald Trump will be the first president since Herbert Hoover that actually loses jobs.” Obama also teased Trump for ending his interview early for 60 Minutes, with journalist Lesley Stahl, early. The interview airs tomorrow night, ditto one with Biden. A quick reminder that Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which they accuse the senior White House advisers of showing “indifference” to Americans suffering and dying under Covid-19. Saying the billboards would stay up, the group called Kushner and Trump “entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people”. My colleague Martin Pengelly has just updated the story with the following: In an email to the Guardian on Saturday, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said: “It does seem unlikely that Ivanka and Jared would actually sue the Lincoln Project, especially before election day, while after that hopefully they won’t care, can return to New York and stop pretending to be public servants. “Her father has honed litigation abuse as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias added, but “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.” Read the full story here: And here’s the latest tweet from the project: Barack Obama is wasting no time in mocking Donald Trump during the former Democratic president’s appearance in North Miami, Florida this afternoon. “He’s had a tough week. Everybody has been very unfair to Donald Trump, this week,” the former president said to joyous honks of car horns at a drive-in rally. Referring to the final presidential debate between Trump and Joe Biden on Thursday, Obama said: “Trump was asked, ‘What is your plan for the new phase of Covid?’ which is a pretty good question considering that we just saw the highest number of cases spike up yesterday. “So you think he’d be ready for a response. Instead, he just said it wasn’t his fault, he didn’t have one. He said, ‘It’s now gone and a bunch of states.’ Just as states are reaching new record highs nationwide he doesn’t have a plan. He doesn’t even acknowledge the reality of what’s taking place all across the country.” As he did earlier in the week at a rally in Pennsylvania for Biden, his former vice-president, Obama kept the focus firmly on Trump. “It’s a good idea to have an answer to this question. It’s a good idea if you’re running for reelection to say, ‘Here’s what I want to accomplish.” What did Trump say? He got mad and walked out of the interview,” Obama said, referring to an ill-tempered 60 Minutes due to air on CBS Sunday night but already posted on Trump’s Facebook site. “He thought the questions were too tough. If he can’t answer a tough question like, ‘What would you like to do in your second term?’ then it’s our job to make sure he doesn’t get a second term.” Obama said he didn’t know Biden very well when he picked him to be his Veep. But he said he got to know his character as their administration proceeded, and that Biden “made me a better president”. Also campaigning today in Pennsylvania is Bernie Sanders. He’s out on the trail for Joe Biden, who defeated him in the primary process this spring to become the Democratic nominee for president. Here’s a post from the Sanders event from the Democratic councilwoman at large for Allegheny county, Bethany Hallam. Hallam has become a little bit famous of late for her unique campaign to persuade voters in Pennsylvania to be careful to enclose their mail-in ballots in the privacy envelope issued by the state, inside the outer envelope, if you follow me. Read all about it here. And in North Carolina, former Democratic presidential candidate and New Jersey Senator Cory Booker is campaigning today to help get Joe Biden elected next month. More from Edward Helmore… Facebook has demanded that New York University stop collecting data about its political ad targeting practices, arguing the engineering project violates its terms of service. The argument between the social media giant and NYU’s Ad Observatory project, which launched last month with more 6,500 volunteers assigned to collect data about political ads, flared up on Friday, according to the Wall Street Journal. In a letter to the engineering department, Facebook said “scraping tools, no matter how well-intentioned, are not a permissible means of collecting information from us”. Facebook went on to say that if the university does not cease harvesting the data and delete it, it “may be subject to additional enforcement action”. Last month, Facebook said it would stop political advertising for a month ahead the 3 November presidential election, seeking to prevent the spread of misinformation. After the 2016 election of Donald Trump, Facebook was accused of allowing Russian disinformation and political profiling to flow almost unchecked. NYU has said the Ad Observatory is designed to provide the public, journalists, researchers and policy makers with the ability to search political ads floated to specific audiences and to see how those ads are funded. Facebook’s demand that NYU cease the program met with criticism. “Facebook is making it harder for Americans to get information about online political ads,” Democratic senator Amy Klobuchar, a sponsor of a bill called the Honest Ads Act, said in a statement to the Journal. Social media platforms, she added, have pledged to make online advertising more transparent – but Facebook’s threatened action “is further evidence that voluntary standards are insufficient”. After the Journal’s article was published, Facebook partially retracted its threat, signaling the sensitivity of the issue. It said it would not take any action until after the election. The Democratic vice-presidential nominee, Kamala Harris, is offering a searing view of the Trump presidency in Cleveland, Ohio, right now. She decries, loudly and in a sharply scathing tone, Donald Trump’s having politicized mask-wearing in relation to the coronavirus pandemic, when the president indicates that if you don’t wear a mask you’re for Trump, if you wear one then you are against him. “Can you imagine?” she asks rhetorically. She’s talking as Barack Obama just took the stage at a drive-in rally in North Miami, Florida, where the former president just jogged in wearing a “VOTE” mask. Harris, in the swing state of Ohio, went on to describe Trump as the kind of vain man “who looks in the mirror rather than looking into the faces of the American people.” “And so we find ourselves in this crisis,” she said. With the pandemic decimating the public health and the economy, Harris said that in Ohio right now, one in 10 families are concerned that they don’t have enough food, one in six families are concerned that they won’t be able to pay the rent next month, and one in five businesses have closed “with no prospect of being able to reopen.” “We are in the middle of a hunger crisis in America,” the California Senator said. She called the Trump presidency the greatest failure of an administration in US history. New Yorkers are jamming polling places and standing in line for hours to cast ballots on the state’s first day of early voting today. They are rushing to record their choices 10 days ahead of the November 3 presidential election, Reuters reports. Lines formed before polls opened across New York City and neighboring Long Island, videos on social media showed, as New Yorkers joined a flood of more than 56 million Americans across the country who have cast early ballots at a record-setting pace. Saturday was the first time that voters in New York, a reliably Democratic state where Democrat Joe Biden has a wide lead in polls over the Republican president, Donald Trump, have been allowed to vote early in a presidential election. A majority of New York voters haven’t supported a Republican candidate for president since Ronald Reagan’s re-election in 1984. Early in-person voting will continue in the state until November 1. “Patiently waiting for Mommy to vote early!” the New York City Board of Elections tweeted, showing a photo of a young girl sitting in line with a drawing book. About 56.1 million Americans already have cast early ballots across the country either in person or by mail, a pace that could lead to the highest voter turnout rate in more than a century, according to data from the US Elections Project. The high level of early voting has led Michael McDonald, the University of Florida professor who administers the US Elections Project, to predict a record turnout of about 150 million, representing 65% of eligible voters, the highest participation rate since 1908. Donald Trump’s long-sought after tax records, obtained by the New York Times, appear to show he may have given far less to philanthropic causes than he has claimed. According to the documents, the Times reports, Trump has given at least $130m since 2005. But the majority of that total, $119.3m, came from simply agreeing not to move forward on land development projects. In three cases the agreements, known as conservation easements, came after Trump had abandoned the projects but was permitted under US law to keep title and receive a tax deduction equal to their appraised value. Trump’s tax records, the Times also reported, show that much of his charitable giving has come during periods of financial or public-image duress, including as he faced high tax bills from earnings related to his long-running reality TV series, The Apprentice. One land deal, currently being investigated by the New York attorney general, involves land donated for a state park. The investigation focuses on whether the appraisal used to secure a tax easement was improperly inflated. According to an earlier report at least four Trump properties – the Trump International Hotel and Tower in Chicago, a 212-acre Seven Springs estate in Westchester county, New York, the Trump National Golf Club in Los Angeles and a skyscraper at 40 Wall Street in Manhattan – are being reviewed by state and federal authorities for potential tax, debt or insurance irregularities. The latest reporting contributes to a perception that Trump’s claims to philanthropic largesse are inflated or misleading at best. His charitable foundation was shut down two years ago. Former New York attorney general Barbara Underwood said at the time the foundation functioned “as little more than a checkbook to serve Mr Trump’s business and political interests”, and had engaged in “a shocking pattern of illegality.” The current New York attorney general, Letitia James, is investigating whether the Trump Organization falsely reported property values to secure loans or tax benefits. Investigators with her office this month deposed Eric Trump, the organization’s executive vice president, in what is currently a civil matter. The president’s son described the investigation as “the highest level of prosecutorial misconduct”. In response to questions posed by the Times about public philanthropic promises that appear either to have been exaggerated or non-existent, Trump Organization spokeswoman Amanda Miller said: “President Trump gives money privately. It’s impossible to know how much he’s given over the years.” Everyone’s on the move. Donald Trump is en route from North Carolina to his next campaign event, in Ohio, and Joe Biden has another rally in Pennsylvania, this one featuring rock god Jon Bon Jovi, who 10 years ago described himself to the Observer (the Guardian’s sister Sunday newspaper) as “overweight, drinking too much and bored to tears”! And very soon, Barack Obama is speaking at a drive-in rally in support of Joe Biden in Florida. Obama began hitting the campaign trail in person a few days ago, giving a blistering critique of Donald Trump’s presidency at a raucous rally in Philadelphia. The timing appeared very strategic - don’t campaign too early as if your former vice-president needs rescuing, but skid in for the closing when Biden has a strong lead in the polls but some of those last few swing voters in key states are still deciding which way to go.... Here’s Lauren Gambino’s report on that event in Philly. Richard Luscombe will bring us some reporting from Obama’s event in North Miami in a few minutes. Joe Biden is repeating that he has no plans to ban hydraulic fracturing in Pennsylvania, a critical battleground state where many jobs depend on the industry. Speaking at a drive-in rally on the grounds of a community college in Bristol, near Philadelphia, earlier The Assocated Press reports that he said: “Let me be clear, I’m not banning fracking in Pennsylvania or anywhere else.” People in about 100 cars blared their horns. Still, Biden noted that climate change could lead to more catastrophic floods in places like along the nearby Delaware River. “We can do something about it,” he said. “But we’ve got to come together.” Donald Trump has repeatedly accused Biden of supporting a ban on fracking. Biden mistakenly suggested during a Democratic presidential primary debate that he did, but his campaign quickly corrected that. The former vice president has promised to end fracking on federal land. Biden also said during this week’s presidential debate with Trump that the country would have to “transition away from the oil industry” to combat climate change -- something he didn’t mention at his rally today. Biden has since clarified that the process would be gradual and not cost people who rely on the energy sector their jobs. The comment pleased environmentalists but drew criticism from Republicans and even some national Democratic politicians in close congressional races in oil country. Jill Biden wore a “vote” mask to the rally this morning - here’s a reminder of the great Guardian piece from a few weeks ago about “vote” fashion. The war of words on the campaign trail is heating up. Donald Trump is still talking in North Carolina, about an hour in, in 82F heat under sunny skies (according to the pool report - your blogger is in the cloudy, cool Big Apple) and the president is mocking Democratic rival Joe Biden’s drive-in rallies and the focus on the coronavirus pandemic. Trump said all he hears about is “Covid, Covid, Covid” asserting that on November 4, the day after the election, the topic will disappear from headlines and Biden’s utterances. That seems unlikely as the autumn surge in cases continues across the country, and dire warnings from experts that the death toll, which is currently 224,000 in the US, could more than double to 500,000 in the next four months. Those attending Trump’s rally lined up for hours and can be seen on the television failing to keep social distance or wear a mask, while also hugging each other and cheering loudly. Biden held one of his drive-in rallies in Pennsylvania earlier, where voters listen from their cars and cheer, clap and honk in appreciation while keeping away from each other in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. “People in cars. People in cars!” Trump said sarcastically of Biden’s methods, getting his crowd chuckling. Some Trump supporters in cars made a point of creating a hullabaloo close to Biden’s rally, interrupting the candidate, who called them “chumps”. Just 10 days to go, folks. Meanwhile, Barack Obama is getting ready to hold a drive-in rally for Biden in North Miami within the hour. Meanwhile, top infectious diseases expert and the leading public health official on the White House coronavirus task force, Anthony Fauci, has suggested in his latest interview that it could be time to mandate mask-wearing across American in order to curb the spread of coronavirus. With the pandemic still out of control and infections rising, Fauci expressed exasperation. “If people are not wearing masks, then maybe we should be mandating it,” Fauci told CNN later yesterday. The doctor has been reluctant to talk about a national mandate, hoping that information campaigns, local efforts and facts about the effectiveness of masks would sway the public. Now he appears to be running out of optimism that common sense will prevail. “There’s going to be a difficulty enforcing it, but if everyone agrees that this is something that’s important and they mandate it and everybody pulls together and says, you know, we’re going to mandate it but let’s just do it, I think that would be a great idea to have everybody do it uniformly,” he said last night. Unfortunately, Fauci has been undermined all along the way by Donald Trump and now by the president’s newest official adviser, Scott Atlas (see previous post), whom Fauci has acknowledged is being allowed to edge him out and capture the president’s ear. Fauci also said late Thursday that Trump hasn’t met with the whole task force for months and whereas the White House coronavirus task force met daily earlier in the pandemic they are now only being convened about once a week. While the US is surging towards record numbers of new coronavirus infections that could exceed the grim threshold of 100,000 cases a day, Donald Trump’s most controversial official White House coronavirus adviser, Scott Atlas, has put out a tweet, backing up misleading information from the president. CNN’s ace fact-checker Daniel Dale is not having any of it. The country set a record daily number of new coronavirus cases on Friday at more than 83,000, eclipsing the previous high set on 16 July by more than 6,000. Dozens of states have reported their own surge in numbers, with the governor of Utah, Gary Herbert, warning that health services are at breaking point. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. “If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” Good afternoon, Joanna Walters in New York now taking over the reins from my colleague Bryan Armen Graham. Trump just arrived in Lumberton, North Carolina, and has begun addressing a rally there. He’s out of the gate with an entirely unsubstantiated assertion (and a split infinitive) that: “We are going to quickly end this pandemic.” Trump also remarks to the crowd that the sun is hot and he might have to cut his speech short because: “I’m going to be a lobster”. The crowd is having a whale of a time. And then, Christmas greetings. Joe Biden told a rally crowd in the key battleground state of Pennsylvania that he misses up-close campaigning, but doesn’t want his supporters to become “superspreaders”. “I wish I could go car to car and meet you all,” the former vice-president said at the top of his 25min remarks. “I don’t like the idea of all this distance but it’s necessary. I appreciate you being safe. What we don’t want to do is become superspreaders.” Biden’s speech at a drive-in event at Bucks County Community College in the Philadelphia suburb of Bristol came as Donald Trump embarked on a three-state, three-rally jaunt in North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin as campaign season hurtles down the homestretch with early voting under way in all 50 states. A Rose Garden event in late September has been labeled a “superspreader” for the virus. More than two dozen people linked to the White House have contracted Covid-19 since the president’s reception on 26 September announcing Amy Coney Barrett as his nominee to the US supreme court. The US Senate has convened a rare weekend session to continue debate over the confirmation of federal appeals court judge Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court. Democrats have expressed outrage at the vacancy being filled so close to the election – in fact boycotting Thursday’s vote to advance her nomination to the full Senate – but the Republicans’ 53-37 majority in the upper chamber ensures they have the votes they need to approve her nomination and cement a 6-3 conservative majority on the high court for years to come. No supreme court nominee has ever been installed so close to a presidential election and, just four years ago, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and senator Lindsey Graham, who now chairs the judiciary committee, said that installing a nominee in an election year would be a shameful defiance of the will of voters. Barrett, 48, is expected to be confirmed Monday and quickly join the court. Barack Obama was promising to step up for his former vice-president with an appearance in Miami on Saturday afternoon. The problem is nobody seems to know exactly when or where. Democrats have posted only vague details about the event on social media, leaving in the dark hordes of supporters keen to hear the most recent president speak. Not even the hometown Miami Herald appeared to be in the picture, noting only that Obama “planned a drive-in rally Saturday in North Miami”. “Does anyone know where in Miami Obama is going to be at,” one woman asked on Twitter on Saturday lunchtime, echoing dozens of similar messages from baffled supporters. Others speculated there were no details because the event was invite only. The Florida Democratic Party, meanwhile, isn’t saying either way. Florida, a traditional battleground state which Obama carried in his successful 2008 and 2012 campaigns, is crucial to both candidates’ hopes of winning the White House. Donald Trump flipped the state back red in 2016 but trails Biden in latest polls, albeit by a percentage inside the margin of error. National Guard soldiers in the North Dakota capital of Bismarck have helped notify 800 people who tested positive for the coronavirus but initially weren’t told due to a backlog of cases, the AP reports. The backlog was due to a recent sharp increase in coronavirus cases. North Dakota leads the nation with more than 1,272 new cases per 100,000 people over the past two weeks, according to the COVID Tracking Project. This week, North Dakota National Guard soldiers began telling people they tested positive for the virus. They previously were informing people who had contact with someone positive and should monitor their health for signs and symptoms of the virus. North Dakota reported 886 new infections on Friday, down from a record 1,038 cases on Thursday. Health officials reported nine deaths Friday, increasing the statewide death toll to 440. A surge of coronavirus cases in Wisconsin and the Dakotas is forcing a scramble for hospital beds and raising political tensions, as the upper midwest has emerged as one of the nation’s most troubling hotspots. Johns Hopkins University has reported 79,963 new coronavirus cases in 24 hours, a record, although the number of daily deaths has remained broadly stable since the beginning of autumn at between 700 and 800. The World Health Organization (WHO) chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said “too many countries are seeing an exponential increase in Covid-19 cases and that is now leading to hospitals and intensive care units running close to or above capacity - and we’re still only in October.” The message was echoed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), whose director, Andrea Ammon, spoke of a “highly concerning epidemiological situation”. The Sars-CoV-2 coronavirus has killed at least 1,145,847 people since the outbreak emerged in China last December, according to a tally from official sources compiled by AFP. At least 42,262,290 cases have been registered, of which at least 28,754,900 are now considered recovered. The tallies, using data collected from national authorities and WHO, probably reflect only a fraction of the actual number of infections. Many countries are testing only symptomatic or the most serious cases. On Friday, 482,954 new cases and 6,366 new deaths and were recorded worldwide. Donald Trump has just cast his ballot in the 2020 presidential election at a library in West Palm Beach not far from his Mar-a-Lago resort. “It was a very secure vote, much more secure than when you send in a ballot, I can tell you that,” the US president says. “Everything was perfect. Very strict, by the rules. When you send in your ballot, it can never be like that. It could never be secure like that.” Early voting began in Florida on Monday. More than 52m Americans have already voted, according to the Election Project. Asked by a reporter which candidate he voted for, he smiles and says: “I voted for a guy named Trump.” A busy Saturday lies ahead with 10 days to do until election day: three rallies in three states (North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin). A fascinating and troubling read from Johnny Kaufmann in Georgia, part of our ongoing series The Fight to Vote: Tariq Baiyina has lobbied politicians, shaken hands with governors, set up a college program, and delivered dozens of sermons. Despite all this, the 42-year-old has never voted. And the reason is simple: since 2002, when he was convicted of a felony, he hasn’t been allowed. Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the group of anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which the White House advisers are accused of showing callous disregard for Americans suffering under the Covid-19 pandemic. On Friday, the Project posted to Twitter a letter from Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented Donald Trump. “I am writing concerning the false, malicious and defamatory ads that the Lincoln Project is displaying on billboards in Times Square,” Kasowitz wrote. “Those ads show Ms Trump smiling and gesturing toward a death count of Americans and New Yorkers, and attribute to Mr Kushner the statement that “[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem” … with body bags underneath. “Of course, Mr Kushner never made any such statement, Ms Trump never made any such gesture, and the Lincoln Project’s representation that they did are an outrageous and shameful libel.” The Lincoln Project’s response, posted by members including the former GOP strategist-turned-bestselling author Rick Wilson, was typically pugnacious. “The level of indignant outrage Jared Kushner, and Ivanka Trump have shown towards the Lincoln Project for exposing their indifference for the more than 223,000 people who have lost their lives due to the reckless mismanagement of Covid-19 is comical,” a statement said. “…The billboards will stay up. We consider it important that in Times Square, the crossroads of the world, people are continuously reminded of the cruelty or density and staggering lack of empathy the Trumps and the Kushners have displayed towards the American people.” On 22 October, almost three weeks before one of the most consequential presidential elections in recent history, more than 6 million Californians had already voted. The number was several times that of the same point in 2016. The pandemic, massive wildfires and the ongoing fight against police brutality have galvanized voters in America’s most populous state. “We knew the Covid-19 pandemic would pose significant challenges, but elections officials have prepared and voters have responded,” said Alex Padilla, the secretary of state. California has sent mail-in ballots to 22 million registered voters, and the flood of votes that have been returned so far make up about 25%. It’s still unclear whether voter turnout will be higher than in previous years. But the early turnout is “shattering prior election returns”, said Paul Mitchell of Political Data, a bipartisan voter data firm based in California. “We’ve been tracking this kind of stuff for over a decade, and there’s just nothing that compares to how quickly voters have been returning their ballots this election cycle.” Here’s some of the Associated Press report on yesterday’s worrying coronavirus milestone in the US, a record caseload of more than 83,000 in one day. States from Connecticut to the Rocky Mountain West are reeling under the surge. The US death toll has grown to 223,995, according to Johns Hopkins University. The total US caseload reported on the site Friday was 83,757, topping 77,362 cases reported on 16 July. The impact is being felt in every section of the country – a lockdown at the Oglala Sioux reservation in South Dakota, a plea by a Florida health official for a halt to children’s parties, dire warnings from Utah’s governor, an increasingly desperate situation at a hospital in northern Idaho, which is running out of space and considering airlifts to Seattle or Oregon. “We’ve essentially shut down an entire floor of our hospital. We’ve had to double rooms. We’ve bought more hospital beds,” said Dr Robert Scoggins, a pulmonologist at the Kootenai Health hospital in Coeur d’Alene. “Our hospital is not built for a pandemic.” Utah governor Gary Herbert proclaimed Friday “a record day for Utah – but not a good one” as cases reached an all-time high. “Up until now, our hospitals have been able to provide good care to all Covid and non-Covid patients who need it,” he said. “But today we stand on the brink. If Utahans do not take serious steps to limit group gatherings and wear masks, our healthcare providers will not have the ability to provide quality care for everyone who needs it.” By public health order, masks are required in 21 counties, said Herbert, urging Utah residents to wear one whenever they are around someone outside their immediate household. The seven-day rolling average for new daily cases in the US surpassed 61,140 on Thursday, compared with 44,647 two weeks ago. The record was reached on 22 July when the rolling average was 67,293. The head of the World Health Organization warned that countries in the northern hemisphere are at a “critical juncture”. “The next few months are going to be very tough and some countries are on a dangerous track,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. According to scientists at the University of Washington, things could be about to get much, much worse: Joe Biden’s remark in Thursday’s final debate that he would support a “transition” away from oil in the US, in favour of renewable energy, has given Trump an in – and he has tried to seize it. “That could be one of the biggest mistakes made in presidential debate history,” the president said on Friday at a rally at The Villages, a retirement community in central Florida where thousands of people gathered outdoors on a polo field – most not wearing masks. Later, in Pensacola, Trump recounted the moment with glee. “It looked like he made it, it looked like it was going to be OK. He got off the stage, going back to his basement, and then they hit him with the energy question. They hit him with a thing called oil.” Here’s what Oliver Milman, an environment reporter, wrote for us on Friday: Biden attempted to mend potential political damage after the debate when he told reporters he wanted to end subsidies for fossil fuels rather than the industry itself. But two vulnerable House Democrats in oil-producing states, Kendra Horn in Oklahoma and Xochitl Torres Small in New Mexico, quickly used Twitter to distance themselves from Biden’s remarks, perhaps mindful of the persistent attacks on Hillary Clinton in 2016 when she was portrayed as being happy to eliminate coalmining jobs. Climate activists have pointed out that a phase-out of the oil industry is simply a logical consequence of Biden’s climate action plan, which calls for 100% clean energy within 15 years and the negation of all planet-warming gases in the US by 2050. Even some major oil companies, such as BP, have embraced a similar goal of net zero by 2050. Scientists have warned that emissions must hit zero globally by mid-century to avoid the worst ravages of the climate crisis, including mass suffering and displacement of people due to heatwaves, flooding and wildfires. Biden’s comments on the oil industry “now count as the conventional wisdom”, said Bill McKibben, co-founder of the climate group 350.org. “That matters.” States such as Texas, which Democrats are trying to shift from being reliably Republican, have large numbers of workers in the oil and petrochemical industries. But the economic and political terrain is shifting – Texas is also the largest wind energy-producing state in the US while polls show that nearly eight in 10 Americans want the country to focus on boosting renewable energy rather than fossil fuels, including a clear majority of Republican voters. … and welcome to another day of coverage of the US presidential election, US politics in general and of course the coronavirus pandemic, ever a subject of political debate. There are 10 days to go until election day, and Donald Trump is trailing Joe Biden in most national and battleground polls, some deficits by more than 5%, suggesting that even polling inaccuracies of 2016 proportions might not see the president right the ship. This morning, Trump will vote in Florida, then travel to North Carolina. Here is a story about how one leading expert thinks turnout is heading to be the highest since 1908, early voting surging because of the pandemic – and perhaps because of Trump himself. More than 52m votes have been cast, with 100m or so more expected. It’s a three-rally day for Trump, with Ohio and Wisconsin after North Carolina. According to the fivethirtyeight.com averages, he’s a fraction ahead of Biden in Ohio, a fraction behind in North Carolina – and quite a long way behind in Wisconsin. Biden will be in Pennsylvania, where he also leads by more than 5%, for two drive-in rallies, one attended by … Jon Bon Jovi. “To continue our movementI am going to rely on you,” Trump told supporters in Florida on Friday. “Get out and vote. Vote early. Bring your friends, your family, your neighbors, your co-workers. Even grab your boss and say: ‘Come on, boss. You got to vote.’” Don’t, to put it efficiently, expect much evidence of Covid-19 mitigation measures at the Trump events today. Don’t expect much discussion of how case numbers have now hit record highs – and could reach terrifying levels, according to one new report. More to come, of course, from me and other Guardian writers. In the meantime, here’s something I helped Ed Pilkington write, about Trump’s dirty tricks …
3||Poll reveals steep rise in younger adults flouting UK's Covid restrictionsThe proportion of younger adults who admit to flouting Covid-19 restrictions has increased in the past fortnight to more than one in six, according to a poll. In a worrying sign for ministers, the latest Opinium poll for the Observer showed the proportion of 18 to 34-year-olds who admitted breaking the rules has increased from 10% to 17% in the last fortnight. The proportion of 35 to 44-year-olds increased even more sharply – from 10% to 18% over the same period. While the poll showed the overwhelming majority were complying with the regulations, the figures came as infections continue to rise ahead of a winter predicted to be very difficult for the NHS to manage. The survey also revealed that the public’s approval of the government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis has dropped to its lowest levels since polling began. Currently, 50% disapprove of the government’s handling of the crisis, while 29% approve, down from 31% two weeks ago. Labour has a two percentage point lead over the Tories. The Conservatives are down two points from a fortnight ago, while Labour is stable. The public is split on who would make the best prime minister. Keir Starmer leads by just one point, the same as a fortnight ago. While 31% thought the Labour leader would make the best prime minister, 30% opted for Boris Johnson. Following the battle between the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, and the government over funding, Burnham has a net approval rating of +23 points among those living in the Greater Manchester area. The prime minister has a national net approval rating of -14 points. The public is divided on the clarity of the new tiered system of Covid restrictions. Half (50%) said they thought the system was clear, 44% thought the opposite. Nearly two in five (38%) thought the new measures had not gone far enough, 32% thought the measures were about right and 18% thought they had gone too far. A third (34%) said they were not confident they know what the rules are in their area. Opinium polled 2,002 adults online from 22 to 23 October. • This article was amended on 25 October 2020 to correct the question over the first graphic; an earlier version said the poll results showed numbers of people abiding by the Covid-19 rules, rather than those who admitted breaking them.
2||Dustin Martin cements status as AFL great with another standout showingAs Richmond underlined their AFL dynasty with a third premiership in four years, the club’s talisman during its era of success, Dustin Martin, secured his status as one of the all-time greats of the game after adding a third Norm Smith medal to his collection. In a breathless finale on Saturday night to a season that will never be forgotten for its singular unpredictability, it was with a contrasting sense of inevitability that the Tigers star added to his individual wins of 2017 and 2019. Martin was the pre-grand final favourite to do what no other player has done before and win a third best-on-ground award in a premiership decider. And when it came to it, the man who seems to thrive on the biggest stage lived up to expectations. Having already kicked goals either side of half-time and with Richmond in the ascendancy as the full-time siren loomed, Martin iced back-to-back flags for the Tigers with a characteristic moment of magic, skidding a dribble kick through to open up a 22-point lead with just under eight minutes remaining. That was probably enough to hammer a nail into Geelong’s coffin – and to ensure he would go home with another Norm Smith medal around his neck. But Martin saved his best for last, snapping a fourth goal as time ran out, having won possession and fended off the attentions of Patrick Dangerfield. Added to his goal tally on a historic night under the lights in Brisbane, Martin had 21 disposals, 10 contested possessions, three tackles and four clearances in yet another outstanding grand final performance. There could have been no argument when the announcement was made on the Gabba stage. The vote was unanimous: each of the five judges put Martin top of their lists, giving him a maximum 15 points, well ahead of Jayden Short (six), Shane Edwards (four), Mitch Duncan (three) and Nathan Broad (two). The medal sees him move ahead of the already elite group of players to have won two Norm Smiths – Hawthorn pair Gary Ayres (in 1986 and 1988) and Luke Hodge (in 2008 and 2014), and Adelaide’s Andrew McLeod (in 1997 and 1998). Asked after the game in an interview with Channel Seven if the enormity of his feat had sunk in, Martin was as understated as ever. “It’s just surreal,” he said. “I can’t believe we’ve won three premierships and that’s just an added bonus. It’s pretty cool.” Tigers coach Damien Hardwick was more effusive. “He’s an incredible athlete isn’t he?” Hardwick told Channel Seven. “He’ll go down probably now as the best finals player of all time ... the way he just controls a game and knows where to be when to be, is incredibly important.” Martin had earlier played an important role in stemming the Geelong tide in the second quarter, breaking a run of five consecutive Cats goals with his first of the night to keep the Tigers in touch going into the major break. And an opportunistic snap from 50m with six minutes remaining in the third quarter gave the Tigers the lead and set them on the path to victory. Martin adds his record third Norm Smith to the Brownlow medal won in 2017 – and his three premiership rings. “It still doesn’t feel real,” he said. “I don’t know what to say. I’m just so grateful to be a part of such an unbelievable group. I’m lost for words to be honest. It’s been a tough road. I couldn’t be prouder of the way we faced a bit of adversity this year and the way we stuck at it. That’s why we’re a great club.”
1||Trump tells GOP donors that holding Senate will be 'tough' – reportShortly after Donald Trump insisted to reporters in Ohio he expected a “red wave” on election day, 3 November, it was reported on Saturday that he told Republican donors this week it would be “tough” for the party to hold on to the Senate. Trump trails Joe Biden in most national and battleground state polls. Democrats hold the House of Representatives and expect to keep it, while many forecasters think they have a good chance of re-taking the Senate, which Republicans hold 53-47, thereby achieving unified government. “I think the Senate is tough actually,” the Washington Post said Trump told donors in Nashville, Tennessee, on Thursday, before his last debate against Biden, according to an anonymous attendee. “The Senate is very tough.” The Post said Trump also insisted Republicans “are going to take back the House”. As Democrats hold that chamber by 232-197, few forecasters think there is much chance of that. Senate Republicans face defeat in Colorado, Maine, Arizona and perhaps North Carolina. Supposedly safer seats in Georgia, Iowa and Montana look far from secure. Trump reportedly told donors North Carolina would hold and Alabama would be taken back, but said there were “a couple” of senators he did not want to help. “There are a couple senators I can’t really get involved in,” the Post quoted him as saying. “I just can’t do it. You lose your soul if you do. I can’t help some of them. I don’t want to help some of them.” Trump has clashed with senators including Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who offered harsh criticism and predicted “a Republican bloodbath in the Senate”. Sasse is among conservatives eyeing post-Trump presidential runs. Others usually loyal but under pressure at the polls, such as John Cornyn in Texas and Martha McSally in Arizona, have mounted cautious bids to be seen as independent. Even Mitch McConnell, the ruthless architect of the Republicans’ push to install federal judges under Trump, has said he thinks his party has a “50-50” chance of keeping control. The majority leader, 78, set for re-election despite a tough fight in Kentucky, has rebuffed questions about his health after he appeared with severe bruising to his hands and face. Control of the Senate has allowed Republicans to rush through the nomination of Amy Coney Barrett to succeed Ruth Bader Ginsburg on the supreme court, thereby tipping it 6-3 in favour of conservatives. If the White House and Senate are lost, a reactionary court would be Republicans’ bulwark against a Biden legislative agenda that could include reform to the court and the Senate. The court is due to hear a challenge to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, on 10 November. Trump has said he wants the justices to bring the ACA down, thereby depriving millions of healthcare in a pandemic and kneecapping his own drive to defeat HIV. One senator who initially stood against the push for Barrett said during debate on Saturday she would vote to confirm. When the nomination comes to the floor on Monday, said Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, “I will be a yes. I have no doubt about her intellect … I have no doubt about her capability to do the job.” Generally a defender of abortion rights Democrats say Barrett will threaten, Murkowksi had said no new justice should be named before the election.
0||England's Keira Walsh relishes her new-found freedom after strugglesManchester City’s Keira Walsh is preparing to anchor England’s midfield against Germany on Tuesday with a new-found freedom. It has been a long time coming. Despite a domestic cup double and an almost unbeaten season having meant that the 23-year-old travelled to the 2019 World Cup full of confidence, the pressure of her first major tournament hit hard and the criticism that followed even more so. She told the Guardian in January: “There were times when I thought: ‘Is this actually for me? Do I want to play football any more?’” and conceded that she still struggled on England camps even then, six months after the tournament. Whether it is having had time to settle or a new crop of young players alleviating the pressure that comes with being one of the least experienced, Walsh is starting to thrive “in my own head and my own mentality”, she said after England’s internal friendly on Friday. “I was playing a bit reserved. Now that I’ve taken the reins off a little bit and am not afraid to make mistakes I’m definitely playing a lot better and feeling a lot better on the pitch.” For that match, she was part of a formidable midfield trio with the Arsenal defender Leah Williamson and her City teammate Georgia Stanway and ran rings round England stalwarts Jill Scott, Izzy Christiansen and Fran Kirby, who picked up an ankle injury and is returning to Chelsea. “I definitely feel more comfortable,” Walsh said. “It makes it easier when you’ve got great teammates and players around you. They’re always there to encourage you and make you feel better if you make a mistake. That’s something the staff have spoken about, that if you’re making positive mistakes then they are not too bothered. If you’re trying to play forward and make something happen then they’re happy with that. That’s something I’ve been trying to work on.” Now it is about taking the next step. “I need to be scoring more goals and getting more assists. I play a slightly different role at England and City, I sit a little bit deeper at City, but especially with England there is no reason I can’t be getting in the box and adding more goals to my game.” Playing alongside her close friend Williamson in midfield was special because Walsh has “not played with her since I was about 12, in midfield”. She added: “We’re such good friends and it definitely makes it easier. We knew what each other wanted on the pitch, especially with Georgia in there as well, we spend a lot of time together off the pitch so in terms of the relationship there today we were playing a lot of one-two touches and it just clicked.” Phil Neville said his management team were looking at combinations when asked about the fresh partnerships on show. “We put two teams together two weeks ago and we wanted to change the dynamics a little, play some of the younger ones with different personnel to see if they could handle different scenarios and different systems. “We’re always looking for partnerships across the pitch, where we can get them playing together and gelling together and making sure there’s that connection in different units.” The FA has struggled to find opponents in this run of international breaks. With the Lionesses having no competitive fixtures, having qualified for the Olympics through their World Cup finish and for the Euros as the host nation, it has been hard to get teams to commit given the constantly changing Covid restrictions. That situation places even more importance on the games they do have, the first against Germany, ranked No 2 in the world behind the USA, on Tuesday and then Norway on 1 December. One method has been to take a smaller squad to Germany than they have had at St George’s Park to force players to play for a place in the travelling party. “We’ve 28 in the squad but we’re not taking 28 to Germany so there’s a decision to be had over the next 24 hours,” said Neville. “Every single player has trained really well, knitted in and deserves to go but unfortunately some won’t.”
0||Liverpool 2-1 Sheffield United: Premier League – live reaction!Premier League: Andy Hunter was at Anfield to see Liverpool come from behind to win against much-improved Sheffield United. Here’s how our man on Merseyside saw the action unfold. “It was hard, as expected,” he tells Sky Sports. “Sheffield United are a good side, they worked hard and made it difficult. They were in the game for long periods but we’re delighted that we kept going and got the three points in the end, which was important for us. On Liverpool’s centre-back pairing: “They were brilliant. It’s always going to be difficult against McBurnie up top, who’s very good in the air. I thought they worked the game out well, especially in the second half. We created some good chances and probably should have killed the game off with another goal or two. Overall, we’ve got to be delighted with the three points.” Have Liverpool answered a few questions from people critical of some recent results? “I’m not really interested in that, to be honest. I’m only interested in what I see in the dressing-room and I see hunger and desire every day to improve and win games. We’ve shown resilience and character tonight, digging in when we’re not playing as well as we should be.” The table: Liverpool go second, level on points with Everton having played one game more. Sheffield United remain second from bottom with just one point from a possible 18 but can take a lot of positives from their performance against the champions tonight. View the Premier League table Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeep! It was intriguing without being especially entertaining and Mike Dean draws proceedings to a close and Liverpool take all three points. They went behind to a controversially awarded Sander Berge penalty, but fought back to win courtesy of goals from Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota. 90+3 min: One suspects that was the chance for United. Liverpool have the ball back and are in no hurry to give it away. 90+2 min: Oli McBurnie wins a flick-on and puts the ball into the path of Oliver Burke. He shoots high and wide when he should have at least hit the target. He puts his head in his hands and berates himself in the strongest possible terms. 90+1 min: Ben Osborn is crowded out as he tries to drill the ball across the Liverpool penalty area. 89 min:Time is running out for Sheffield United, who are struggling to get a touch of the ball at the moment. There’s a break in play as Jordan Henderson takes a breath after coming out second best from an accidental collision with Oli McBurnie. 87 min: Sadio Mane leans back as he shoots from distance and the ball sails high over the crossbar. 85 min: Diogo Jota takes his place in the stand and has a big bag of ice taped applied to his right calf, strapped in place by a physio with far more Cling Film than is necessary. Won’t somebody please think of the environment?!?!?! 84 min: Liverpool substitution: Takumi Minamino and James Milner on, Roberto Firmino and Diogo Jota off. 82 min: With his back to goal and the ball travelling towards him at speed, Mo Salah rolls John Egan and finds himself through on goal. He dinks the ball on to the upright and it bounces back into the grateful arms of Aaron Ramsdale. 79 min: Sheffield United remain in the game, with Ethan Ampadu playing a diagonal for Ben Osborn to chase. He gets in by the byline and looks up, but there’s nobody in a green shirt for him to pull the ball back towards. 76 min: Sheffield United substitution: David McGoldrick on for John Lundstram. The Republic of Ireland international almost has an instant impact, pouncing on a loose header from Fabinho and sending a half-volley wide of the upright. 75 min: Another header from Gomez, who puts the ball out for a throw-in as Sheffield United enjoy a spell of dominance. 74 min: John Egan plays a ball from deep down the touchline for George Baldock to chase. He picks out Sander Berge, who forces a smart save out of Alisson. 72 min: Ben Osborn sends in a half-decent cross from the left flank, which Joe Gomez thumps clear with a good header. 69 min: Going back to that disallowed Mo Salah goal - his two-touch finish was sublime, but the curtain-twitchers at Stockley Park got this decision right. He was marginally offside when he made his run to meet Alexander-Arnold’s cross. 68 min: As impressive as Sheffield United have been tonight, they’ll be ticked off that both Liverpool goals have come from preventable crosses sent in from the touchline. The first came from Jordan Henderson, the second from Sadio Mane. 67 min: Another corner for Liverpool as Sheffield United fail to clear properly. 66 min: Enda Stevens is booked for a foul on Jota and Liverpool have a free-kick wide on the right in a good position. Alexander-Arnold swings the ball in towards the near post and Firmino’s header is put out for a corner. Liverpool lead: Sadio Mane sends a cross to the far post from the left flank and Diogo Jota leaps to thump a header past Aaron Ramsdale. There was nothing wrong with that one! 63 min: Liverpool fans will love this - Salah’s goal has been ruled out for offside following a VAR intervention. Trent Alexander-Arnold picks out Salah with a cross from the right to the edge of the six-yard box. He controls it beautifully with his first touch, then turns and spanks it past Ramsdale with his second. 60 min: Past the hour mark we go and Sheffield United continue to play very well against the reigning champions. Oliver Burke takes on and beats Fabinho around his outside and scurries into the Liverpool penalty area. His shot from a narrow angle is blocked by Joe Gomez. 58 min: Jurgen Klopp effs and jeffs on the touchline, prompting Sky’s commentator to apologise for the Liverpool manager’s potty mouth. It’s after the watershed, there’s really no need. 55 min: Good play from Liverpool, as Jordan Henderson tries to play a low, curled pass from outside the area into the path of Sadio Mane, who was making a run to the far post. There’s a mite too much welly on it but Mane keeps it in play at the byline and pulls it back to Firmino. His shot from the edge of the penalty area is blocked. 54 min: Sheffield United substitution: Oliver Burke comes on for Rhian Brewster, who’s seen little of the ball and had a fairly quiet game. 51 min: Enda Stevens dives to head a Trent Alexander-Arnold cross out for a corner. From that set-piece, Liverpool win another. Alexander-Arnold’s inswinger is cleared by Oli McBurnie, but only as far as Mo Salah. He tries to arrow the ball into the top corner, but sends his effort high and wide. 50 min: Andy Robertson picks up a pass in space on the right flank but is quickly closed down by Ben Osbourn and forced to pass backwards. Liverpool are dominating but Sheffield United are doing a good job of keeping them at arm’s length. 48 min: Oli McBurnie has been making life very difficult for Joe Gomez and takes advantage of a poor touch from the central defender to win the ball in the Liverpool penalty area. It’s worked towards George Baldock, who tries his luck with a shot from distance. It’s a decent effort but fizzes wide of the left upright. 47 min: Liverpool begin on the front foot, dominating possession in the early stages of the second half, much like they did in the first. Diogo Jota dribbles across the face of the Sheffield United penalty area but has the ball nicked off his toe. 46 min: Play resumes, with Liverpool getting the ball rolling as they play into an empty Kop for this second half. There are no changes in personnel on either side. An email: “I assume that we will see those fine sportsmen from Liverpool vociferously protesting that the Blades should get a penalty for that trip,” writes Jonathan Leiper. “Given that they have invested so much emotional capital in Mane’s offside and all that.” Sheffield United have been excellent in that first half, with George Baldock standing out in a team full of players who are having good games. How on earth have they only got one point from their first five games? Peep! The sides traipse off with a goal apiece. Liverpool started in the ascendency but went behind after Sander Berge slotted home a penalty awarded when Fabinho was penalised for a fould on John Lundstram right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area. Bobby Firmino equalised for Liverpool shortly before the break, tapping into an empty goal after Sadio Mane had forced Aaron Ramsdale into a decent save. 45+3 min: ANother Baldock cross - the man is relentless on the right flank for Sheffield United - is cleared at the far post. 45 min: Another cross from Baldock is cleared by Fabinho, as Lundstram charges into the Liverpool penalty area with a late run. The ball drops for Basham, whose shot is blocked. 43 min: A tip of the hat to Jordan Henderson for his role in the build-up to that goal. His cross from the right touchline was a beauty and at the far post, Mane got a powerful header on the ball. Ramsdale kept it out but couldn’t hold on to it and Firmino’s task couldn’t have been simpler. The sides are level. Roberto Firmino taps in from a few yards out on the follow-up after Aaron Ramsdale could only parry a Sadio Mane header from point-blank range. 40 min: Yup, replays show that Jota tripped Berge but no spot-kick was awarded. Perhaps Andre Marriner and his VAR officials have gone for their half-time cuppa early. 38 min: Chris Basham intercepts a cross from Firmino from the left, with Mo Salah and Jordan Henderson lurking with intent behind him. Moments previously, Sander Berge was denied what looked a clear penalty for a trip on him by Diogo Jota inside the Liverpool penalty area. 37 min: Another George Baldock cross into the Liverpool penalty area is cleared by Jordan Henderson. 34 min: Trent Alexander-Arnold and Andy Robertson aren’t getting forward down the wings as much as usual this evening, with Sheffield United’s wing-backs keeping them pinned back as much as possible and forcing them to play the ball inside. As I type that, young Trent makes an eejit of me by getting forward and playing a raking pass into the Sheffield United penalty area, where Mo Salah tries to lift the ball over Aaron Ramsdale. Enda Stevens does well to distract him and the ball goes out for a corner from which nothing comes. 32 min: Joe Gomez plays a wonderful crossfield pass to Mo Salah on the right flank and the Egyptian jinks inside. He runs into traffic, turns and tees the ball up for Jordan Henderson, whose shot from just outside the penalty area is blocked by Enda Stevens. 30 min: Liverpool get the ball back to Alisson courtesy of headers from Fabinho and Robertson, while Rhian Brewster tracks both players waiting to pounce on any mistakes. 28 min: Nothing much to report as the game settles into something of a lull following periods of dominance from both sides. 24 min: Sheffield United have certainly found their groove now. A crossfield pass from George Baldock is caught on the volley by Ben Osborn. His ferocious rasper from about 12 yards is saved by Alisson. 23 min: Replays of that most recent Sheffield United penalty appeal show that George Baldock’s cross from the right definitely struck Andy Robertson’s arm. It wasn’t outstretched or in an “unnatural” position, which is probably why no spot-kick was awarded. 22 min: Alisson wins a free-kick as Sheffield United take a corner. He was being shoved as he tried to fist the ball clear. 20 min: Oli McBurnie squanders a glorious chance to put Sheffield United two up after beating the Liverpool offside trap, running on to a glorious cross-field pass, controlling with a wonderful first touch and then sidefooting wide of the far post from a narrow angle. 19 min: Another penalty shout from Sheffield United as a George Baldock cross from the right appears to hit an arm. The appeal goes unheeded. 17 min: Diogo Jota drifts into the centre from the right and picks out Salah with a pass before being fouled. Free-kick for Liverpool, in line with the right side of the United penalty area, a long way out. Trent Alexander-Arnold sends the ball into the penalty area, it finds its way to Gini Wijnaldum and he shoots high and wide. 14 min: Fabinho looks very aggrieved about that penalty decision that went against him. He stuck his foot in right on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area, getting a little bit of ball and a little bit of John Lundstram’s foot. Mike Dean didn’t consult his pitchside monitor, choosing to take his VAR official Andre Marriner’s word for that the Brazilian had committed the foul. Sheffield United lead! Alisson dives to his right, Sander Berge shoots down the middle. Mike Dean signals for a penalty following a consultation with his VAR official. 9 min: John Lundstram is tackled by Fabinho on the edge of the Liverpool penalty area and goes down. That might be a penalty. 8 min: Liverpool have settled into the game quickly and are bossing the game, while Sheffield United have yet to find anything resembling a groove. 6 min: The foul that led to that free-kick was a daft one by John Lundstram on Mo Salah, which earned the Sheffield United midfielder a yellow card and almost cost his team a goal. 3 min: Liverpool win a free-kick inside their own half and Trent Alexander-Armstrong spots Ramsdale off his line and shoots for goal. The Sheffield United is almost embarrassed but backpedals furously enough to stretch and tip the ball over his crossbar. That was a great effort from Alexander-Arnold. Nothing comes from the corner. 2 min: John Egan is forced to slide in and prevent the ball reaching Mo Salah in front of an empty net after Aaron Ramsdale charged off his line to chase a long ball from Andy Robertson. Sadio Mane got to it first and squared it, only for Egan to get back and intercept. 1 min: Sheffield United get the ball rolling, their players wearing green shirts, yellow shorts and yellow socks. Liverpool’s players wear their usual home kit of red shirts, shorts and socks. Not long now: The teams are out on the pitch, Sheffield United trouping out first, closely followed by Liverpool. Alisson points to the sky, getting a quick prayer in before lining up with his team-mates in a socially responsible fashion. It’s all about the optics - they’ll be getting up close and personal in just a minute or so. Jurgen Klopp speaks: “Having ALisson back is good news,” says Liverpool’s manager, upon being asked the alarmingly stupid question: is having Alisson back good news. “It was his decision and he’s old enough and experienced enough to make it.” Chris Wilder: “He’s a talented young player and we’re delighted we brought him to the football club,” says Sheffield United’s gaffer upon being asked about Rhian Brewster. “I’m looking forward to watching him play tonight. Elsewhere in the Premier league In torrential rain, Manchester United and Chelsea have just played out a very boring stalemate in a match both managers seemed more intent on not losing than winning. Manchester United were lucky to survive a first-half penalty shout, when Harry Maguire clearly grappled Cesar Azpilicueta at a corner. Those teams: Jurgen Klopp makes three changes to the side that drew with Everton last weekend, two of them enforced. Gini Wijnaldum comes into midfield in place of Fabinho, who drops to fill the Virgil van Dijk-shaped hole in Liverpool’s defence alongside Joe Gomez. Thiago Alcantara has not recovered sufficiently to make the matchday squad, which means Diogo Jota is in. Joel Matip is also out injured, but Alisson returns to the side. A liverpool player until recently, Rhian Brewster makes his full debut for Sheffield United. Max Lowe appears to have been stood down after suffering a blow to the head against Fulham last week, while Oliver Norwood drops to the bench. Ethan Ampadu and Ben Osborn come into the side. Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Gomez, Fabinho, Robertson, Henderson, Wijnaldum, Salah, Firmino, Jota, Mane. Subs: Adrian, Milner, Jones, Minamino, Shaqiri, Phillips, Williams. Sheffield United: Ramsdale, Baldock, Basham, Egan, Ampadu, Stevens, Berge, Lundstram, Osborn, McBurnie, Brewster. Subs: Verrips, Sharp, Burke, Jagielka, Norwood, McGoldrick, Robinson. Tonight’s match officials Referee: Mike Dean Assistants: Darren Cann and Mark Scholes Fourth official: Andy Madley VAR: Andre Marriner Early Sheffield United team news Having scored just twice in five Premier League thus far, Sheffield United are in dire need of goals and former Liverpool player Rhian Brewster could be the man to provide them if he is handed his full debut for the club following his recent move. Left-back Max Lowe got a bang on the head against Fulham last week and was due to be assessed before the blades boarded their bus to Merseyside. Early Liverpool team news It’s flown below the radar so you may have missed the news, but Liverpool are going to be without Virgil van Dijk for the foreseeable future after he tore his ACL during last weekend’s Merseyside derby. The victim of an ludicrous Jordan Pickford challenge that went unpunished and has prompted no end of Liverpool supporters to call for the Everton goalkeeper to be brought to the Hague and tried for crimes against humanity, Van Dijk could miss the rest of the season and we wish him well as begins his recovery. Also clattered in that game, Thiago Alcantara will be assessed before kick-off. Having been out with a shoulder injury, Alisson Becker is reported to be returning to full fitness and may return tonight. Midfielder Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and defender Konstantinos Tsimikas are both out, while Naby Keita and Joel Matip are major doubts. Sheffield United’s bad start to the season could be about to get a whole lot worse as they travel to Anfield to take on the reigning champions. A revelation last season following their promotion from the Championship, Chris Wilder’s side picked up their first point of the current campaign in a slightly fortuitous draw against fellow strugglers Fulham last weekend. They’ll have their work cut out to take anything home today, but will fancy their chances against a team that have been imperious at times, but occasionally bang average and – against Aston Villa – downright awful. Kick-off is at 8pm (BST), but stay tuned in the meantime for team news and build-up.
3||Welsh government to review ban on sales of non-essentialsThe Welsh government is to review how the ban on supermarkets selling non-essential items during the 17-day lockdown is working, Mark Drakeford has said. The move followed growing calls to reverse the ban in the nation, with a senior police figure saying it benefits only Amazon and more than 30,000 people signing a petition calling for a U-turn on the restriction, which had led some shops to seal off shelves housing children’s clothes and books with clingfilm. “We’ll be reviewing how the weekend has gone with the supermarkets and making sure that common sense is applied,” the first minister tweeted. “Supermarkets can sell anything that can be sold in any other type of shop that isn’t required to close. In the meantime, please only leave home if you need to.” His announcement on Saturday evening came after he said the ban was a “matter of fairness” as non-essential retailers have to close during the period, which began at 6pm on Friday. However, North Wales police and crime commissioner Arfon Jones said the move would only enrich online internet giants at the expense of high street retailers – concerns echoed by the Welsh Conservatives. “Personally I think the Welsh government decision to ban the sale of non-essential goods in shops that also sell essential goods is wrong and the only people that will benefit will be online sellers like Amazon,” he tweeted. “Bad move on this occasion by Mark Drakeford.” Guidance published by the Welsh government says certain sections of supermarkets must be “cordoned off or emptied, and closed to the public”, and it defended the ban on Saturday. These include areas selling electrical goods, telephones, clothes, toys and games, garden products and dedicated sections for homewares. “Supermarkets can keep selling items you can find in other essential shops – such as stationery/greeting cards,” it tweeted. “The purpose of selling essential items only during firebreak is to discourage spending more time than necessary in shops and to be fair to retailers who have to close. This is not for the sake of being difficult – we need to do everything we can to minimise the time we spend outside our homes. This will help save lives and protect the NHS.” A video posted on social media appeared to show a man ripping down plastic sheeting that was covering clothing aisles in a supermarket. “We do not agree that this is a prudent or rational measure, and will create more harm than good,” the petition stated. “We do not agree for example that parents should be barred from buying clothes for their children during lockdown while out shopping. “This is disproportionate and cruel, and we ask that the decision be reversed immediately.” On Saturday, Andrew Davies, the Welsh Conservatives’ shadow health minister, called for the ban to be “dropped immediately” and has written to the presiding officer of the Welsh parliament calling for members to be recalled to discuss the ban. “I have never witnessed such a fierce backlash against a decision from the Welsh Labour government,” he said. “This ludicrous ban has caused real anger across Wales and it’s not fair on those staff working in our supermarkets, and the general Welsh public who are already at their wit’s end with a difficult fortnight looming. “The Wales-wide lockdown is disproportionate, unnecessary and biting our economy hard. I’d rather see people being able to buy items in shops in their communities that provide employment to local people than see millions spent at online internet giants.”
0||Diogo Jota completes Liverpool's comeback win over Sheffield UnitedAnother Saturday, another dose of VAR torment for Liverpool; only this time Jürgen Klopp’s champions would not be denied victory by strange goings-on at Stockley Park. Diogo Jota’s header lifted Liverpool level on points with Everton at the top of the Premier League after VAR had awarded Sheffield United a dubious penalty and disallowed a sublime goal from Mohamed Salah. Despite the interventions that are driving Klopp to distraction his team extended their unbeaten run at Anfield to a remarkable 62 league games. The 9,999th goal in the club’s history means Liverpool can equal their record of 63 home league games unbeaten – set between 1978 and 1981 – when West Ham visit next Saturday. Klopp will be seeking improvement in his team’s performance, this was more hard-fought and dogged than slick and stylish, but their focus and resilience was faultless yet again. Jota’s winner, coming two minutes after Salah’s disallowed volley, was the hallmark of a single-minded side. The wait for a first league win of the campaign continues for Chris Wilder, although there was plenty to encourage the United manager here. Oli McBurnie and Oliver Burke, a second-half replacement for the former Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster, caused all manner of problems for the home defence but did not find the composure in front of goal to capitalise. Alisson, returning to the side after missing four games with a shoulder problem, was gainfully employed all evening as United created enough chances to claim a point. “They had more possession and control of the game but it wasn’t one-way traffic,” Wilder correctly stated. “We could have done better with the positions we got into in the final third. They did that and we didn’t. This league is ruthless and cruel and it is a cruel one to take tonight.” Jota brought even more quality and adventure to the Liverpool attack as Klopp made a rare formation switch to 4-2-3-1 with the Portugal international on the right and Salah leading the line. Jordan Henderson in particular relished the extra options ahead of him while Sadio Mané flourished as usual on the left. Mané almost put the champions ahead on 67 seconds when he latched on to Andy Robertson’s fine pass and beat Aaron Ramsdale as the United goalkeeper unnecessarily rushed from goal. The covering John Egan, one of several impressive defenders in the visiting ranks, cleared before Salah could tap into an empty net. Moments later Trent Alexander-Arnold almost scored with an audacious free-kick from inside his own half but the back-peddling Ramsdale tipped over to deny the defender one of the goals of the season. Liverpool were dominant from the start. United had not constructed an attack of note before they were awarded a penalty that altered the complexion of the first half. As with the finale at Goodison Park last week, when Henderson had a 92nd minute winner ruled out for a fractional offside against Mané, Klopp was left aghast at the intrusion of VAR. It looked a harsh decision to the naked eye when Mike Dean penalised Fabinho for a foul on McBurnie. The Brazilian appeared to win the ball just outside the area as he attempted to atone for a poor clearance. The VAR official, Andre Marriner, however, ruled that contact was made on the 18-yard line and upgraded Dean’s decision to a penalty. It was the first spot-kick awarded against Liverpool at Anfield for two years. Sander Berge sent Alisson the wrong way from the spot and United were emboldened by their lead. George Baldock’s crosses were a constant source of danger. McBurnie should have doubled United’s advantage from a superb crossfield ball by the wing-back but his shot lacked any conviction and sailed well wide. Another Baldock delivery teed up Ben Osborn for a volley that the Liverpool keeper pushed away and United had three more penalty appeals dismissed before the interval. Two – for a handball by Robertson and a push by Alexander-Arnold on McBurnie – were rightly ignored but Jota was fortunate VAR chose not to review his challenge on Berge when the midfielder darted into the box. Baldock and Osborn were effective in denying space to Liverpool’s marauding full-backs but Alexander-Arnold was involved in the hosts’ equaliser late in the first half. His lay-off was swept towards the far post by Henderson and Mané, somehow left unmarked, met the excellent cross with a powerful header. Ramsdale saved but the ball dropped kindly for Firmino to tap home his first goal of what by his elevated standards has been an underwhelming season so far. Salah thought he had edged Liverpool ahead with a stunning strike as pressure mounted on the visiting defence in the second half. The striker’s first touch to control Alexander-Arnold’s cross into the area was beautiful. His second was even better, volleying beyond Ramsdale in the same movement for his 101st goal in Liverpool colours. But no, it was back to 100 when VAR spotted he was just offside when the cross was played. Liverpool were not deflated by their latest slap from technology. Two minutes later the irrepressible Mané crossed from the left and Jota, left in too much space by Enda Stevens, steered an unstoppable header beyond Ramsdale. Salah could have given his team the comfort of a two-goal lead when he turned Egan inside the box but chipped against a post from close range.
3||'This song is the struggle': Vanuatu's treehouse troubadour on love, loss and languageVanuatu singer-songwriter Tio Bang Massing writes from a place that few still remember. He tries to live there too, with an almost Buddha-like simplicity, in a makeshift home tucked among the roots of a sprawling banyan tree. Massing has been performing most of his adult life, as a founding member of Vanuatu’s renowned fire dance troupe, and as one of the anchors of Dropvkal Groove, a roots music collective. But now he has emerged – from his first ever visit inside a recording studio – with a debut album, Sorousian, drawing inspiration from his volcanic home island of Ambrym, as well as his new arboreal place on Efate island. The album was produced by Wantok Records, a Brisbane-based label that specialises in fostering indigenous talent from Melanesia and Timor. Studio head David Bridie was one of Sorousian’s producers. Massing, he says, “is an effortless artist, in the way he sings and plays guitar ... he comes up with these very textured vocal layers, adds in overdubs of shakers and tam tam and percussion”. Black Butterfly, Massing’s first single, is about, ostensibly, a black butterfly. But the metaphor runs deeper, invoking the fleeting evanescence of the creature’s existence when he sings: “I’m still living, so I must sing, for the voices that can’t be heard any more.” Is Massing the black butterfly? “Maybe I am one of the black butterflies, one of the people who dream to live free with the land,” he tells the Guardian. “But you know it doesn’t really work today. It’s a dream … everyone loves it, they’re talking about it, but I’m not living it. Something we all claim to love, something we all say we want. Something we don’t have the courage and the frailty to be,” Massing says. “That’s the life I named black butterfly.” Living in Vanuatu, the country ranked the most vulnerable on earth to natural disasters and the impacts of climate change, the environment, its decay and its fragility, are recurrent themes. “I have to do something for this earth, as well as for the next generation: for my kids and their kids, you know?”, Massing says. He finds music – or rather music finds him – everywhere. “What is happening around inspires me to share my world through music. And I’m representing communities of other people as well,” he says, such as in Morning Star Bae Kam, a paean to Melanesian neighbour West Papua’s struggle for independence, where he urges a continued resilience: “This song is the struggle/The struggle is this song.” On the outskirts of Port Vila, Massing has built himself a single tiny room out of bamboo and cast-off timbers tucked into the roots of a towering banyan tree, known in Vanuatu as a nambanga. It’s an unhurried existence in his treehouse, an atmosphere that informs his songwriting. Massing’s songs shift from line to line between Vanuatu pidgin Bislama, Ambrymese, and English. Is he worried that his magpie lyrics will leave people behind? “It’s what I believe in, what I’m seeing.” But will people understand? “Maybe, or maybe not… like, if I get one person out of the crowd, then that’s alright, you know? If someone is trying to think of what I’m trying to see, then that’s all right. And if it’s no one, that’s all right.” He smiles broadly, “This album is kind of like an experiment of the local music of Vanuatu.” In polyglot Vanuatu, language is a potent bearer of history, and custom, and place. Mumbwe, Massing’s second single, is derived from from the custom of his home island of Ambrym. The bare bones melody is a reworking of a song used in the Rom customary dance Massing used to watch as a child. The language used in the song is lost from everyday use, but preserved in song. “That,” Massing says quietly, “is the kind of experimenting I’ve been doing.” Recording Sorousian was Massing’s first ever time in a studio, and there is quaint juxtaposition to the album that time has produced. The album, now, lives everywhere, on streaming services to every corner of the globe: Massing remains at home, under the banyan tree, just living.
2||British & Irish Lions could tour Japan in wake of sides meeting at MurrayfieldThe British &amp; Irish Lions have opened the door for a future tour of Japan after announcing only the third “home” match in their illustrious history against the Brave Blossoms next summer. Warren Gatland’s side will face Japan at Murrayfield on 26 June – the same day as the Premiership final – and while they will do so without any England players, the fixture will serve as a key part of the Lions’ preparations before facing the world champions. The trip to South Africa will be the first since the San Francisco agreement in 2017, when it was decided by the game’s powerbrokers that tours would be cut to eight matches. That meeting was controversial because the Lions were not properly represented and while the Murrayfield match increases the number of fixtures to nine, the Premiership clubs’ refusal to make any of their players available demonstrates further how the Lions are becoming increasingly marginalised. Their place on the international schedule is at least guaranteed up to 2032, according to the San Francisco agreement, but the global calendar is up for debate with a number of unions eager to move the existing summer window to October. Should that happen, a tour of Japan – which cemented itself as rugby’s biggest new broadcast market during last year’s World Cup – could move closer to becoming reality. The Lions’ managing director, Ben Calveley, said: “We’re developing a relationship here with Japan, this is the first time that the Lions has played against Japan and it will be a historic Test. My view is that the Lions can offer an awful lot to the growth of the global game and we should consider how best it can do that. “I will absolutely continue to represent the Lions as best I can within those global negotiations when they take place, whereas the Lions may not have been directly represented in the room previously, we are now directly represented and I make all the points that I need to make as any of those global season negotiations take place.” Calveley also revealed that Gatland, who has spent the past month attending a host of club matches, will delay naming his assistant coaches until the new year but confirmed discussions had opened with the home unions. Four years ago, Gatland wanted Gregor Townsend, who had just been appointed Scotland’s head coach, to be part of his backroom staff but he could not secure his release. Calveley, though, is optimistic no such problems will happen this time. The Ireland head coach, Andy Farrell, has been part of the coaching team for the past two tours and while he recently said he has not been approached by Gatland he did not rule out a third Lions trip. Calveley also said club coaches will also be considered, raising the prospect of the Crusaders’ Scott Robertson, who has expressed an interest, Stuart Lancaster from Leinster or Exeter’s Rob Baxter being involved. Calveley said: “What Warren and I have been doing is getting round the head coaches and the chief executives from each of the four unions and I can confirm they’re all incredibly supportive, as you would expect them to be because they absolutely understand the value of the Lions. “I don’t think there’s any assumption the coaches have to come from within the union constructs, they could come from a club environment. “We’re very open we’re interested in appointing coaches that can help us win in South Africa and that’s the main criteria. Anyone that can help us win these Test matches would be interesting to Warren and ultimately it’s his call.”
2||Henry Slade the rock as unstoppable Exeter roll on to cherished doubleNo scorching May heat or packed stands, just damp autumn leaves on a windblown concourse and a soaking, empty colosseum. On the face of it this was as far removed from grand theatre as a small flapping tent on a sodden campsite but Exeter are increasingly a team for all seasons and stages, whatever the opposition or the weather throw at them. It was properly Hitchcock shower-scene wet by the end but, when it absolutely counted, the Chiefs’ grip on a cherished double proved impossible to shake. They are in excellent company with only Leicester (twice), Wasps and Saracens (twice) having previously won the European Cup and Premiership in the same season. None of those fine sides had to contend with the unique challenges of this prolonged campaign, nor were they playing in the second tier of English rugby just a decade previously. It is not just what Exeter are achieving that sets them apart but where they have come from. Once again, though, they kept their absent supporters on edge, only a crucial late lineout steal by Jonny Gray and a concluding penalty by Joe Simmonds, his 33rd consecutive successful kick dating back to the end of August, finally relieving the suffocating pressure. Not for the first time in recent times, an English club clad all in black simply refused to be denied. Wasps also deserve massive credit, especially considering the Covid-disrupted buildup that cost them the services of four of their first-choice 23. At times Jacob Umaga played as if it were a midsummer night in the tropics, which was some feat, while Jimmy Gopperth played the angles beautifully alongside him. Until the Chiefs scrum finally began to ratchet up the pressure in the second half, it was anybody’s game. Did the conditions play into the hands of Exeter’s big forwards? Maybe to an extent but at times it was virtually impossible for anyone to do anything beyond the absolute basics. There is a reason why union administrators prefer their finales to be played in late spring or early summer, on hard, fast tracks rather than inside the equivalent of a dishwasher halfway through its cycle. The elements, though, could not stop Henry Slade displaying the class that makes him an increasingly sharp attacking threat. Ball in two hands, he was swift to spot a mismatch with two rather less mobile Wasps forwards and a little step took him over for another important big-game contribution. It is reaching the point where England need to think about building their starting midfield around Slade rather than endlessly agonising about where he might fit in. Over the next few weeks, however, Eddie Jones will have to do without Jack Nowell, who was on the field here despite having severed ligaments beneath his big toe. The injury will rule him of autumn international consideration but there was no way he was going to miss out on a second major final in eight days. Even on one tattooed foot, the winger is still guaranteed to give everything and, one day, he will enjoy the prolonged run of injury‑free rugby his Cornish fan club is yearning for. There will be no more active outings, though, for Exeter’s other backline totem, Gareth Steenson, for whom this was the final game before retirement. Along with Phil Dollman and others he helped set the tone for what has followed back in the Championship days, not least an instinctive ability to rise to the biggest occasions. This time there was no need for the extra-time penalty winner that sunk Wasps in the 2017 Premiership final but, had there been, the Ulsterman would not have flinched. Perhaps the only unanswered question is this: what would have unfolded had Saracens’ salary cap misadventures not removed them from this season’s equation? None of us will ever know but this is now a more confident, wiser Exeter team than the one overtaken in the closing quarter of last year’s Premiership final. Where Saracens faltered at the death in their European semi-final against Racing 92, too, the Chiefs have now twice held firm when it really mattered. This has been a season like no other and yet still, 12 months on, they remain tougher to shift than a superglued barnacle. Their key men all have plenty more mileage in them, Devon is suddenly a magnet for any ambitious player and they will be even harder to beat when their besotted fans are finally allowed back in Sandy Park. Assuming they can find a way to celebrate over the next few days without joining the Barbarians on the naughty step, it would appear the West Country feelgood factor will endure for a while yet. Exeter have just won a double and still have a good deal of improvement in them. If that is not the definition of club rugby heaven, nothing is.
22||Strictly Come Dancing 2020: week one – as it happenedAnd that’s IT for Week One of Strictly! So great to be back on the dancefloor. I’m predicting Jacquie and Anton to go next week, and a four-way final featuring Clara, Maisie, Nicola and HRVY. Feel free to make your predictions in the comment box, I’m hoping it will stay open a little longer than last week. Thank you for joining in and being hilarious as always - there’s no Halloween Spooktacular next week as it’s a bit early in the season for a theme week, but don’t let that stop you putting on fishnets and bat wings if that’s your thing. It all kicks off at 7.15pm on Saturday; in the meantime you can find me on Twitter @heidistephens, so please come and say hello. Have a great week, and I’ll see you then! Hx Bruno is on Zoom! DRINK. He’s been to the same hairdresser as Jamie, Karen and Gorka. It Takes Two is back throughout the week, maybe this will be the year I FINALLY get an invite. Summary of this VT: there is a great deal of Strictly content available if you’re so inclined. Scores: 8,8,9 - a total of 25 for HRVY and JNTT. Craig though it was spectacular, and Shirley thought it was fierce, fast and furious and HRVY is definitely one to watch. Motsi thought it was the best first dance she’s ever seen, and asks where we go from here. Well, quite. HRVY is humping a microphone, which just made me shout ‘EW NO’ like an absolute mum. His toes are very turned in but he’s definitely got some moves. Great timing and energy, that’s a pretty good outing for Week One. Good work, consonant boy. And finally it’s HRVY and JNTT! Their first dance is the Jive to ‘Faith’ by Stevie Wonder feat. Ariana Grande. Getting your Jive out on Week One is either genius or insanity, what happened to the days when everybody did a Cha Cha or a Waltz and eased themselves in gently? Next week in the bingo: ‘this is the favourite song of *insert relative here*’. Scores: 3,6,6 - a total of 15 for Bill and Oti. THREE, Craig? That’s just RUDE. ‘You two are a whole mood, guys,’ said Motsi. Great commitment but the technique needs work. Craig thought Bill created a whole new dance genre, like dancing on hot coals after a dozen double espressos. Shirley thought it was inspiring for every man watching, but his posture needs work. Everything about this is amazing. Oti is a goddess, Bill has amazing rhythm and some pretty decent footwork, despite it all looking a bit clunky in places. I don’t care, it’s pure joy and I want to watch it again. MORE PLEASE. Next up it’s BILL AND OTI! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Pata Pata’ by Miriam Makeba. Bill looked very promising in the group dance last week, and I suspect he’s going to throw himself into this Cha Cha with both barrels. Wouldn’t you if you got the chance to dance with Oti? You’d have to tie me down. Only two couples left! Hooray, but also boo. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Nicola and Katya. Shirley thought it was a partnership she’s really going to enjoy watching, and Motsi wasn’t disappointed either - Nicola needs to work on getting her upper body more stable, however. Craig though it was absolute dynamite, a fantastic partnership. Already this is incredibly cool, and Nicola and Katya look great together. Some nice footwork too, although a bit tentative from Nicola in places and the transitions need work. Nice timing though - another couple with bags of potential, can’t wait to see what they bring to the dancefloor in the coming weeks. It’s time for NICOLA AND KATYA! Their first dance is the Quickstep to ‘Get Happy’ by Ella Fitzgerald. I can’t wait to see these two dance together for the first time, it feels like such an exciting step for Strictly and I’m really intrigued to see what Katya is going to do. That said, a Quickstep in Week One feels…bonkers. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 21 for Ranvir and Giovanni. How do we feel about Gio’s hair? I can’t decide. It’s a bit One Direction. Part of me wants to brush it lovingly out of his eyes, the other part wants to take a pair of kitchen scissors to it. Craig thought Ranvir used her dress like a diva drag queen, it was a great first dance. Shirley thought Ranvir’s hands were exquisite, and she was a superstar. Motsi thought Ranvir has really improved since the launch show, she adored it. Ranvir looks absolutely FIERCE in her red Paso dress, I love it. Some nice skirt work to open, and some good footwork in hold. Giovanni is prancing about trying to steal the limelight, but Ranvir is giving it both barrels. I thought that was a really nice job for a Week One Paso. Next up it’s RANVIR AND GIOVANNI! Their first dance is the Paso Doble to ‘End of Time’ by Beyoncé. I love this song, and I love a Paso, and I have high hopes for this pairing. This show seems very long considering there are three fewer couples than usual. Is everyone still with me? Maybe I’m just out of practice. Scores: 4,6,6 - a total of 16 for Jason and Luba. Jason is quite...enthusiastic, isn’t he? Motsi loved the joy that Jason brought to the dancefloor, but Craig wasn’t fond of the Jackson 5 thing going into the Foxtrot. Shirley thought Jason gave 100% and didn’t hold back, and his footwork was fantastic - lots of potential. AGREE. Jason has some lovely performance skills for a sportsman, and this has bags of charm - his footwork and posture definitely need work but he’s another one that could go on a journey this year. It’s time for JASON AND LUBA! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘My Girl’ by The Temptations. It’s quite early for cutesy faux-romance that makes your teeth hurt, but I’ll let it go just this once because maybe cheesy love stories are what the world needs right now. Scores: 8,8,8, - a total of 24 for Maisie and Gorka. Rein it in Maisie, go on a journey. It’s the only way to win. Shirley thought Maisie was an absolute firecracker and Motsi loved the authenticity of it. Craig thought it was a-may-zing. Maisie’s dress is some kind of flamingo/peacock hybrid, and Maisie is shaking those tail feathers like she’s got ants in her knickers. It’s a proper full-on Samba and I love everything about it; it’s my favourite kind of chaotic party Latin. Maisie is clearly a great dancer, which means she’ll make the final but won’t win. Such is the way of Strictly. It’s time for MAISIE AND GORKA! Their first dance is the Samba to ‘Samba (Conga)’ by Gloria Estefan. Last year Kelvin and Oti did a Samba in Week One that was really quite special, I feel like that set quite a high bar. That said, Maisie strikes me as the kind of woman who would drink Woo Woos out of a fishbowl then shake everything she has on the dancefloor, so why the hell not. Scores: 6, 6, 7 - a total of 19 for JJ and Amy. Families on Zoom! DRINK. Craig thought there was gapping and it needed more drive, but had some nice rise and fall. Shirley agrees with Craig about the drive but it was simple, beautiful and lovely. Motsi got a bit emotional, it had lovely atmosphere and great chemistry. I’ve just realised what Motsi’s dress reminds me of. She looks like she’s got a full body plastercast, like they were supposed to fix her arm but somehow did the rest of her body instead. This is a lovely Waltz and it’s impossible not to find JJ a bit dreamy, although he’s got a few posture issues. But there’s a nice connection between these two and I’m looking forward to seeing his dancing journey. Liked that very much. Next up it’s JJ AND AMY. Their first dance is the Waltz to ‘What A Wonderful World’ by Louis Armstrong. This is next level 2020 denial and I can’t even be annoyed about it. Scores: 3 (drink),5,5 - a total of 13 for Jacquie and Anton. Motsi thought Jacquie looked comfortable on the floor, but needs to express herself more. Craig thought it lacked musicality and looked a bit lumpy, but on the bright side it was ten times better than Theresa May. Shirley was pleasantly surprised, it was a huge improvement compared to the launch show. This has a random election theme that means the first 30 seconds are spent faffing about with a ballot box. It’s a very odd song for an American Smooth, but Jacquie’s doing her absolute best despite hats and canes and superfluous props. No killer moves, but also not the worst partner Anton’s ever had by a country mile. It’s time for JACQUI AND ANTON! Their first dance is the Foxtrot to ‘Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life’ by Monty Python. Does anyone else feel like Anton has resigned himself to the early bus home next Sunday? Last week’s group dance would suggest Jacquie isn’t the world’s most natural dancer, although it would be kind of amazing if that was the biggest ruse of all time and she’s actually got killer moves. Scores: 5,6,7 - a total of 18 for Clara and Aljaz. Bit mean, Craig. I didn’t think that was stompy at all. Shirley loved the rhythm and the chemistry between Clara and Aljaz and Motsi loved the determination and the energy. Craig thought it was stompy and needed straighter legs, although he loved the disco elements. Clara looks incredible in electric blue fringing and has legs to die for. This is a great Cha Cha with lovely energyfrom Clara and some really nice footwork. She has loads of attitude and I think these two are going to be real contenders. LOVED that. Next up it’s CLARA AND ALJAZ! Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Don’t Start Now’ by Dua Lipa. Am very glad to see they’ve binned off Week One ‘let’s do a song about your job’, because all the songs about DJs are rubbish. Apart from ‘God Is A DJ’ by Faithless, which I’m not sure quite works as a Cha Cha. Scores: 6,5,6 - a total of 17 for Max and Dianne. Am getting the feeling that the music brief this week was DO SOMETHING UPLIFTING EVERYTHING IS AWFUL. Not that I’m complaining, I’m very much here for happy happy joy joy on my telly every weekend. I think we can all agree that nobody ever needs to hear the Dave Arch version of Roxanne by The Police again. Craig didn’t like the free arm placement and Max needed to lead the dance more, but he’s very watchable and left Craig wanting more. Shirley thought Max has great chemistry and potential, but she wanted a traditional Tango without sections out of hold. Motsi thought Max had a beautiful neck and a good frame but Max was overthinking it and it inhibited Max’s energy. What’s the obsession with Max’s neck? It’s just a neck. We’ve all got one. So this is definitely a Tango, but lacking drive and thrust from Max. He’s got some half-decent timing, but his top line is all over the shop. Great effort for Week One though, feels like he could improve a lot over the coming weeks. It’s time for MAX AND DIANNE! Their first dance is the Tango to ‘Best Fake Smile’ by James Bay. My best fake smile wore out some time in April. Now it’s just a grimace. Some days I wake up looking like the Joker from Batman. Scores: 7,7,7 - a total of 31 for Caroline and Johannes. Motsi didn’t see a dancer, she saw a dancing queen. Caroline had lovely attention to detail. Caroline is WEEPING, and it’s only Week 1. Craig thought her feet were a bit turned out but Caroline’s musicality was sensational. Shirley thought it was graceful, charming and elegant, albeit her lower half needed some work. Honestly, I think that might be one of Tess’s worst outfits ever. Those wet look flares are just horrible, what was she thinking? I LOVE Caroline’s yellow dress, and she has lovely musicality and performance. A few balance issues in hold but some good solo sections. All rather charming and entirely joyous, enjoyed that very much. Next up it’s CAROLINE AND JOHANNES! Their first dance is the American Smooth to ‘9-5 (Morning Train)’ by Sheena Easton. What a song, and what a coupling; definitely one of my favourites this year. Becks has also worked with her a few times and confirms she is LOVELY. The emotion in training is all a bit overwhelming, I want to give her a hug. Scores: 4 (drink), 5,5 - a total of 14. Anyone else (whisper it), not really missing Bruno? Shirley thought it was a nice performance and full of enthusiasm. It needs work, but Jamie has potential. Motsi, who appears to be wearing a towel, thought it needed better technique. Craig thought it was stiff and flat-footed, and agreed that it was restricted due to the tightness of the trousers. But he loved the energy and commitment. Poor Tess, forced to socially distanced so she can’t manhandle the couples. What will she do with her hands? OK this is the campest thing I’ve ever seen, and Jamie is joyously terrible. Although I have no idea how he’s supposed to perform any kind hip action in white jeans that tight. This is not a great Cha Cha Cha by any standards, but I love Jamie’s enthusiasm and effort levels. Good work. First up tonight it’s JAMIE AND KAREN. Their first dance is the Cha Cha Cha to ‘Think About Things’ by Daði og Gagnamagnið. This was the Icelandic song that would have won Eurovision had it not been cancelled this year, and I can’t tell you how thrilled I am to see it on Strictly. It’s like my two liveblog worlds have collided, and honestly it feels like Christmas. Out come the stars! Nobody seems to have upset Wardrobe yet, but it’s early days. Bubble DRINK! Also many fake tans, so keep drinking. Out come the judges! Shirley has got tangled in some tights. Send help. TESS AND CLAUDIA DRESS WATCH: Tess has been dipped in tar, and Claudia is in a spotty prom dress. One of these outfits is quite nice. And we’re off! Time for a slow-mo intro VT with some washed out filters. Everyone is scared but excited, and can’t wait to get on the dancefloor. Ah, it’s good to hear that theme tune again. Ooh, pro dance! We don’t normally get one of those on a Saturday night. It’s a hectic latin hot mess with some truly hideous outfits, but it features Shakira and that’s never a bad thing. And Lionel Richie! Love a bit of Lionel. This week’s Strictly Come Bingo – a swig of something medicinal for any occurrence of the following: Zoom-based relatives Fake tans Craig giving a 4 or lower Mentions of tallness The word ‘bubble’ Also I’ve got HOUSEGUESTS this weekend, which is very exciting. My friend Becks is staying; she’s a huge Strictly fan and lovely to have company while I tap away madly. We’re also making room for a dog and a cat between us, so it’s quite busy on my liveblog sofa. Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing liveblog! After last week’s launch it’s time for our couples to take to the floor for the first time, so we can make wild predictions about who’s going to make the final and who will be leaving the Strictly bubble next Sunday. There’s no elimination or Sunday results show this week, so let’s just enjoy a joyous evening of dancefloor fun. I’ll be analysing every flailing arm and pigeon toe from up here, so please feel free to join in in the comment bubble below, but only if you’ve quarantined for two weeks, had two Covid tests and are adhering to all government guidelines. Kick off is at 7.25pm, so join me then!
0||Frank Lampard makes case for the defence as forwards take back seatSplurge on the attack. Make yourself the envy of the world by signing Hakim Ziyech, Timo Werner and Kai Havertz in one wild summer. Make the journey to Old Trafford, where Manchester United were last seen losing 6-1 to Tottenham, and pick a back-five. Take Werner and Havertz off with 20 minutes left. Give Ziyech 10 minutes at the end. Settle for a second consecutive goalless draw. Flip the narrative on its head. By the end of a grim match it was clear Frank Lampard had no interest in another defensive aberration from his leaky Chelsea side. He will not apologise for setting out to contain United. Attacking cohesion can wait: for a manager accused of failing to focus on shape and resilience during his time at Chelsea, a shutout inspired by Thiago Silva’s serenity in central defence represented another step forward. Both sides played as though they were spooked by visions of a defensive calamity on a slick, treacherous surface. The handbrake was on, as Arsène Wenger would say. Chelsea wanted to suffocate, United wanted errors and wonky defending from the visitors. The result was a stalemate for 45 minutes, notable mainly for loose touches, misplaced passes and a host of gifted attackers waiting in vain for a defensive midfielder to give them the ball. It seemed fitting the half ended with Havertz picking up a booking after a frustrated tug of a red shirt. Perhaps he just wanted to get involved, to make his presence felt, to remind the world he does exist. Otherwise the opening period passed him by, although at least he could console himself with the knowledge the same was true for United’s creators, with Bruno Fernandes searching in vain for space. Nobody wanted to break the structure. Chelsea set the tone with their system, bringing to mind José Mourinho’s jibe that they always go to a back-five when results are indifferent. With Mason Mount dropping to the bench, César Azpilicueta came in to provide an extra defensive bolt, sweeping behind Reece James on the right, leaving Marcus Rashford so deprived of service for long spells that the United forward probably had time to log into his Twitter account to embarrass a Tory MP. Had Lampard channelled his inner José? Conscious no Chelsea manager in the history of the Premier League has conceded at a higher rate than him, had he set out to kill the spectacle? Maybe – or perhaps he knew United, back to 4-2-3-1 after defeating Paris Saint-Germain with a back three, like teams who attack them. The risk for Lampard was that ceding the initiative risked negating the effectiveness of his attack. Chelsea controlled the ball but lacked menace. United bided their time, waiting for the errors. Édouard Mendy almost obliged, screwing a pass just wide of his own goal as Lampard congratulated himself on including Petr Cech in his Premier League squad to provide emergency goalkeeping cover – you know, just in case. Mendy redeemed himself with a couple of fine saves before the interval. The second came from a curling effort from Juan Mata, the first after United had managed to catch Chelsea cold. It came from a sudden spurt of pressing from United, exposing slackness from Jorginho and Thiago Silva, resulting in a loss of possession that would have led to Rashford scoring but for Mendy saving with his feet. At the other end Werner waited in vain for a chance to stretch his legs and run beyond Harry Maguire. Bar a few surges from Havertz in the second half, Chelsea were pallid in the final third. Yet they were happier with the draw. United made the attacking changes, introducing Paul Pogba and Edinson Cavani, but there was no change of shape from Lampard when he brought Tammy Abraham and Mount on. His priorities were clear.
6||Children’s doctors attack Tories over free school mealsThousands of Britain’s child-health specialists have joined forces to condemn the government for its refusal to fund free meals for disadvantaged children in England over the school holidays, amid a spreading grassroots campaign on the issue led by England and Manchester United footballer Marcus Rashford. With a growing number of councils and businesses this weekend offering to provide free meals, more than 2,000 paediatricians across the UK have signed a letter expressing their shock at the decision. They state that ensuring children have enough to eat is one of the “most basic human responsibilities”. The letter, co-ordinated by the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health and seen by the Observer, says: “Every day, we see the impact of hunger and malnutrition in our work as paediatricians. It is not unusual for us to care for children who don’t have enough to eat or who don’t have access to a substantial meal outside of what is provided in school. “We call on the UK government to match the pledges of the Welsh and Scottish governments and the Northern Ireland Executive, to continue to provide children from low-income backgrounds with free meals over the coming weeks and to then extend this at least until the Easter school holiday.” The letter praises Rashford as a “source of inspiration” for his campaign, which continued to attract a groundswell of support last night. Hundreds more businesses have signed up to help provide meals this weekend and scores of councils, including prominent Tory-led authorities, have agreed to fund local programmes. An online petition set up by Rashford now has more than 700,000 signatures, while Labour is planning to embarrass the government by holding another Commons vote on the issue. Russell Viner, president of the Royal College, told the Observer that he had “rarely seen such anger among our members”. He added: “We care for children who don’t have enough to eat. We see far too many of them. It is heartbreaking that it has become a normal part of our jobs and hunger is all too common for millions of families in the UK. There is an opportunity to put this right. It is pointless to talk about levelling up the country, an ambition which we support, while refusing to offer temporary relief to children and families.” The intervention comes amid frustration among many Conservative MPs, who want the decision to be reversed before the Christmas holidays. One senior figure said ministers were making a “massive mistake” by refusing to back Rashford’s campaign. Rashford’s successful campaign to provide food vouchers during the summer holidays is estimated to have cost £126m. However, other Tory MPs caused anger by criticising the free meals drive. Ben Bradley, the Mansfield MP, was accused of linking free meals with “crack dens” and “brothels” in social media comments. He said his remarks had been taken out of context. North Devon MP Selaine Saxby apologised after appearing to criticise businesses giving away free food. Philip Davies, the MP for Shipley, also faced a backlash for a withering response to a 16-year-old constituent who had questioned his opposition to extending free school meals. Ministers are also facing criticism after it emerged that schools in some of the most deprived areas of the country were told they will not now receive the laptops to help pupils learn remotely. Allocations of laptops for disadvantaged pupils have been slashed by around 80%. A Department for Education spokesperson said allocations of laptops were being “more effectively” targeted to the children, schools and areas of the country that have “greatest need”. The Scottish and Welsh governments have already extended free meals during school holidays until next Easter. In Northern Ireland, children will be given meals over this month’s half-term break. Official figures from earlier this year suggested 1.4 million disadvantaged children were eligible for free school meals in England, but that is thought to have increased during the pandemic. The concern among child health experts heaps further pressure on ministers. Dr Max Davie, officer for health improvement at the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said: “We’re a rich country. We shouldn’t have to fight for food vouchers when we’re in the middle of a pandemic.” Dr Liz Whittaker, consultant paediatrician at St Mary’s Hospital, London said: “Missing meals isn’t just about going hungry on an individual day, it has a lasting impact on a young person’s life. It is impossible to justify any argument that this saves the state money.” Meanwhile, Covid cases continue to mount. A further 23,012 positive tests were announced on Saturday, along with 174 more deaths. A further 1,139 were admitted to hospital. Robert Halfon, the Tory chair of the education select committee, called on the government to rethink and overhaul food provision for poor children. “The government has got to sort this,” he said. “They need to sit down with people like Marcus Rashford and his taskforce, which has got some of the biggest food companies involved. They need to set out a long-term plan to combat child food hunger, not only looking at rolling out free school meal vouchers at Christmas temporarily during the coronavirus pandemic, but also rolling out breakfast clubs, introducing a holiday activities programme, and examining [the level of support in] universal credit.” Late on Saturday, former children’s minister Tim Loughton became the latest Tory to call on the government to change course. “I will now lobby ministers to reverse this decision for the Christmas break,” he said. However, ministers insisted that there was a “better way” to deal with the issue of child hunger. Baroness Barran, the civil society minister, told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: “The government has made over £200bn available to protect people’s incomes and people’s livelihoods. We have worked very closely with charities who operate food banks across the country. There are different approaches to how we do this but we have used all the levers possible to try to make sure that people are safe and well as we go forward. “We have provided more money through universal credit, we have provided more money to local authorities and we believe that is a better way of approaching this problem.”
1||Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump threaten to sue Lincoln ProjectJared Kushner and Ivanka Trump have threatened to sue the Lincoln Project, if the anti-Trump Republicans do not remove two huge billboards from Times Square in New York City, in which they accuse the senior White House advisers of showing “indifference” to Americans suffering and dying under Covid-19. Saying the billboards would stay up, the group called Kushner and Trump “entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people”. More than 8.4m cases of Covid-19 have been confirmed in the US, according to Johns Hopkins University, with a record high of 83,757 on Friday. As the virus surges, with the presidential election only 10 days away, the death toll has passed 223,000. Last month, the virus reached the White House, infecting Donald Trump, his wife Melania Trump, their son Barron and senior members of staff. The president spent time in hospital. Kushner and Ivanka Trump did not announce positive tests. The Lincoln Project is staffed by Republican operatives supporting Joe Biden, the Democratic nominee. It announced itself in February at Cooper Union in New York, where Abraham Lincoln gave a famous speech in 1860. Then, group member Rick Wilson cited “the great political philosopher Liam Neeson” when he said his team had “a particular set of skills, skills that make us a nightmare for people like Donald Trump”. In August, Sarah Lenti, the executive director of the Lincoln Project, told the Guardian a key aim was simply to distract the president. “Some of these ads have an audience of one,” she said. “That’s always been part of the strategy. Because every time he gets off message, spewing grievances, he’s not campaigning. The idea is to get him off message again and again and again.” Trump is currently staging rallies at which coronavirus mitigation measures are not observed, and claiming the US is “rounding the turn” in containing the surging pandemic. But with its billboards in Times Square, a stone’s throw from Trump Tower, it seems the Lincoln Project may have succeeded in distracting the president’s daughter and son-in-law. On Friday, the Project posted to Twitter a letter from Marc Kasowitz, an attorney who has represented Donald Trump in cases involving allegations of fraud and sexual assault, in which he spelled out the billboards’ message. “I am writing concerning the false, malicious and defamatory ads that the Lincoln Project is displaying on billboards in Times Square,” Kasowitz wrote. “Those ads show Ms Trump smiling and gesturing toward a death count of Americans and New Yorkers, and attribute to Mr Kushner the statement that ‘[New Yorkers] are going to suffer and that’s their problem’ … with body bags underneath.” In September, Vanity Fair reported that at a meeting on 20 March, as the pandemic accelerated, Kushner railed against Governor Andrew Cuomo and said: “His people are going to suffer and that’s their problem.” Ivanka Trump’s gesture on the billboard is taken from a controversial picture, tweeted in July, in which she promoted Goya black beans. Kasowitz wrote: “Of course, Mr Kushner never made any such statement, Ms Trump never made any such gesture, and the Lincoln Project’s representation that they did are an outrageous and shameful libel. If these billboard ads are not immediately removed, we will sue you for what will doubtless be enormous compensatory and punitive damages.” The Lincoln Project’s response was typically pugnacious. “The level of indignant outrage Jared Kushner, and Ivanka Trump have shown towards the Lincoln Project for exposing their indifference for the more than 223,000 people who have lost their lives due to the reckless mismanagement of Covid-19 is comical,” a statement said. “While we truly enjoy living rent-free in their heads, their empty threats will not be taken any more seriously than we take Ivanka and Jared. It is unsurprising that an administration that has never had any regard or understanding of our constitution would try to trample on our first amendment rights. But we fully intend on making this civics lesson as painful as possible. “Jared and Ivanka have always been entitled, out-of-touch bullies, who have never given the slightest indication they have any regard for the American people. We plan on showing them the same level of respect. The billboards will stay up. We consider it important that in Times Square, the crossroads of the world, people are continuously reminded of the cruelty or density and staggering lack of empathy the Trumps and the Kushners have displayed towards the American people.” In an email to the Guardian on Saturday, Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond in Virginia, said: “It does seem unlikely that Ivanka and Jared would actually sue the Lincoln Project, especially before election day, while after that hopefully they won’t care, can return to New York and stop pretending to be public servants. “Her father has honed litigation abuse as a business person and president, to an art form,” Tobias added, but “if they did sue, the litigation might take years to resolve, be expensive and lead to embarrassing revelations … suits like this by people who have thrust themselves into the public eye are notoriously difficult to win. “In short, this appears to be the usual Trump family bluster.”
